6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 1/387
PREFACE
This Village Code of the Village of Broadview, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to and including ordinance 2018-10, passed April 16,
2018. Ordinances of the Village adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this Village Code to the extent that they are in conflict or
inconsistent therewith. Consult the Village office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the Code has been amended,
superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 00-17
AN ORDINANCE GOVERNING THE COMPILATION OF THE VILLAGE CODE OF THE VILLAGE OF BROADVIEW
WHEREAS, the Village of Broadview has compiled and updated its Village Code; and
WHEREAS, the Village of Broadview wishes to continually supplement the Village Code Book as needed in order to keep the Village Code Book current.
NOW, THEREFORE BE IT ORDAINED by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Broadview, Cook County, Illinois, as follows:
Section 1.From and after the date of passage of this ordinance, the Village Code of the Village of Broadview, Illinois being prepared by Sterling Codifiers, Inc.,
containing the compilation of all ordinances of a general nature together with the changes made of said ordinances, under the direction of the governing body of
the Village, shall be accepted in all courts without question as the official code and law of the Village as enacted by the President and Board of Trustees.
Section 2.There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification, the loose-leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplement service,
provided by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding or deleting provisions
of the official Village Code is identified by the proper catchline and is inserted in the proper place in each of the official copies, one copy of which shall be
maintained in the office of the Village Clerk, certified as to correctness and available for inspection at any and all times that said office is regularly open.
Section 3.All ordinances of a general nature included in this official Village Code shall be considered as a continuation of said ordinance provision and the fact
that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the governing body shall not serve to cause any interruption in the continuous effectiveness of
ordinances included in said official Village Code. All ordinances of a special nature, such as tax levy ordinances for specific properties, and annexation
ordinances shall continue in full force and effect unless specifically repealed or amended by a provision of the Village Code. Such ordinances are not intended to
be included in the official Village Code.
Section 4.It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such Code, or to insert or
delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code, in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Village to be misrepresented
thereby.
Section 5.All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
Section 6.This ordinance and the Code adopted by the same shall be recorded and shall be in force and effect from and after its passage, approval and
publication in pamphlet form as provided by law.
ADOPTED by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Broadview, Cook County, Illinois on December 18, 2000, by the following roll call vote as
follows:
YES NO ABSENT PRESENT
D'Anza .
Gaines .
Johnson .
Miller .
Payne .
Tyl .
(President Vicenik) -
TOTAL 6
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 2/387
APPROVED by the Village President on December 18, 2000.
Title 1
ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 1
OFFICIAL VILLAGE CODE
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon adoption by the Board of Trustees, this Village Code is hereby declared to be and shall hereafter constitute the Official Village Code of
Broadview. This Village Code of ordinances shall be known and cited as the BROADVIEW VILLAGE CODE, and it is hereby published by
authority of the Board of Trustees and shall be kept up-to-date as provided in Section 1-1-3 of this Chapter under the direction of the Village
Attorney, acting for said Village Board of Trustees. Any reference to the number of any section contained herein shall be understood to refer to
the position of the same number, its appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause relating thereto, as well as to the
section itself, when reference is made to this Village Code by title in any legal document. (1987 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received without further proof in all courts and in all administrative tribunals of
this State as the ordinances of the Village of general and permanent effect, except the excluded ordinances enumerated in Section 1-2-1 of this
Title. (1987 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this Code shall set forth the title, chapter and section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute a sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this Code.
All such amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the codifiers and the said ordinance material shall be prepared
for insertion in its proper place in each copy of this Code. Each such replacement page shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each
individual copy of this Code. (1987 Code)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface in any way any section or any page of this Code in such a manner
that the meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may be inserted according to the official instructions
when so authorized by the Village Board. The Clerk shall see that the replacement pages are properly inserted in the official copies maintained in
the office of the Clerk. Any person having in his custody an official copy of this Code shall make every effort to maintain this Code in an up-to-date
and efficient manner. He shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are delivered to him or made available to
him through the office of the Village Clerk. Said Code books, while in actual possession of officials and other interested persons, shall be and
remain the property of the Village and shall be returned to the office of the Clerk when directed so to do by order of the Village Board. (1987
Code)
Chapter 2
SAVING CLAUSE
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the Village passed prior to the adoption of this Code are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this Code or
are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the
following ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and
annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances
authorizing the execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys
or other public places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; industrial development bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections;
ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the Village; and all special ordinances. (1987 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 3/387
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroads or railroad crossings with streets and other public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of
public utilities shall be replaced by virtue of the preceding Section, excepting as this Code may contain provisions for such matters, in which case
this Code shall be considered as amending such ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (1987 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance, whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any
offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or
claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty,
forfeiture or punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes effect, save only that proceedings
thereafter shall conform to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be
mitigated by any provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by the consent of the party affected, applied to any judgment announced
after the new ordinance takes effect.
This Section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions
upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the Village
herein repealed and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this Code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new
enactment of the same provision; nor shall this Chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to
accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the Village under any ordinance or provision
thereof in force at the time of the adoption of this Code.
When any ordinance repealing any former ordinance, clause or provision shall be itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed so as to
revive such former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it shall be therein so expressly provided. (1987 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the
remaining portions of this Code, or any part thereof. The Village Board of Trustees hereby declares that it would have passed each section,
subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections,
subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (1987 Code)
Chapter 3
DEFINITIONS
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
Whenever any word in any section of this Code importing the plural number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons,
any single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although distributive words may not have been used. When any subject matter,
party or person is referred to in this Code by words importing the singular number only, or the masculine gender, several matters, parties or
persons and females as well as males and bodies corporate shall be applied to any section of this Code which contains any express provision
excluding such construction or where the subject matter or content may be repugnant thereto.
The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the Village has been changed in the content of this Code to "title", "chapter", "section" and/or
"subsection" or words of like import for organizational and clarification purposes only. Such change to the Village's ordinances is not meant to
amend the passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (1987 Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this Code, they shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes
such meaning repugnant thereto:
ACTION: Shall include suits, prosecutions and all judicial proceedings.
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another.
BOARD OR THE BOARD: The President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Broadview, Illinois.
CODE: The Municipal Code of Broadview, Illinois, and amendments thereto.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 4/387
COMPUTATION OF TIME: The time within which any act provided by law is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including
the last, unless the last day is Sunday or a legal holiday, and then it shall also be excluded. If the day succeeding such Sunday or holiday is also
a holiday or a Sunday, then such succeeding day shall also be excluded.
COUNTY OR THE COUNTY: Cook County in the State of Illinois.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a Village employee by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the
words, "of the Village of Broadview".
FEE: A sum of money charged by the Village for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.
FISCAL YEAR: The fiscal year of the Village shall commence on May 1 and terminate on April 30 in each and every year.
IN THE VILLAGE OR WITHIN THE VILLAGE: Mean and include all territory over which the Village now has or shall hereafter acquire jurisdiction
for the exercise of its police powers or other regulatory powers.
JOINT AUTHORITY: Words purporting to give a joint authority to three (3) or more public officers or other persons shall be construed as giving
such authority to a majority of such officers or persons.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.
MAYOR: See definition of Village President.
MISDEMEANOR: Any offense for which a sentence to a term of imprisonment in other than a penitentiary for less than one year may be imposed.
MONTH: A calendar month.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the inhabitants of the Village; or any act or thing repugnant to, or
creating a hazard to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of another person or to the community.
OATH: Shall be deemed to include an affirmation and the word "sworn" shall be construed to include the word "affirmed".
OCCUPANT OR TENANT: As applied to a building or land, these terms mean any person who holds a written or an oral lease of or actually
occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this Code or the omission of any act required by the provisions of this Code.
OFFICER: Whenever the title of any Village officer is used, it shall be construed as if the words "of the Village of Broadview" followed it.
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OR, AND: "Or" may be read "and" and "and" may be read "or", if the sense requires it.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, this term shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant
of the whole or part, or the holder of any beneficial interest, of such building or land.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, corporation, joint stock association or any city or state or any subdivision thereof; and, includes any trustee,
receiver, assignee or personal representative thereof.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Includes every species of property, except "real property" as defined by this Section.
PRECEDING, FOLLOWING: Next before and next after, respectively.
PROPERTY: This term shall include real and personal property.
REAL PROPERTY: This term shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments and shall embrace all chattels real.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, this term shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in
small quantities direct to the consumer.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines, intended for the use
of pedestrians.
STATE OR THE STATE: The State of Illinois.
STREET: The entire width between property lines of every way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the public,
as a matter of right for purposes of vehicular traffic. This term shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public squares, public places and
sidewalks.
TENANT: As applied to a building or land, this term shall include any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land, whether
alone or with others.
VILLAGE OR THE VILLAGE: The Village of Broadview in Cook County, State of Illinois, except as otherwise provided.
VILLAGE PRESIDENT: May be referred to as Mayor of the Village. The term "Village President" as used in this Code or motion or other action of
the corporate authorities shall be construed as meaning the Mayor; and the term "Mayor" wherever so used shall be construed to mean the
Village President.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 5/387
The title "Mayor" as used in the minutes of the meetings of the corporate authorities or any other official document shall be construed as meaning
"Village President".
WHOLESALER AND WHOLESALE DEALER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, such terms shall be understood to relate to the sale of
goods, merchandise, articles or things in quantity to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters, but when the written signature of any person
is required by law to any official or public writing or bond required by law, it shall be in the proper handwriting of such person, or in case he is
unable to write, by his proper mark.
YEAR: The word "year" means a calendar year unless otherwise expressed. (1987 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be
deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the
provisions of any division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the
catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (1987 Code)
Chapter 4
GENERAL PENALTY
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the Village or any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant thereto, any act is prohibited or is made
or declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any ordinance shall
be punished by a fine not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). A violation of any provision of this
Code, or any ordinance, shall constitute a separate offense for each day such violation continues1.
In addition to, or as an alternative to the fines and penalties enumerated above, the court, in its discretion, may impose court supervision upon the
defendant for a period not to exceed six (6) months upon such terms and conditions as said court shall deem proper. The supervision and
conditions therefor shall be as provided by State law2. (1987 Code)
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of this Code, the prosecuting officer may
elect under which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense; provided, that the
revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced. (1987 Code)
1-4-3: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this Code designating the duties of any officer or employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for
any fine or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of the Board of Trustees to impose such fine or penalty on such
officer or employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (1987 Code)
Chapter 5
VILLAGE PRESIDENT
1-5-1: ELECTION, COMMENCEMENT OF TERM, TERM OF OFFICE:
The Village President shall be elected for a term of four (4) years and shall be President of the Board of Trustees as is provided by statute. The
term of the Village President shall commence at the first regular or special meeting in the month of June following the election. (Ord. 2015-17, 4-
20-2015)
1-5-2: BOND:
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the President shall make general requirement for bond. (1987 Code)
1-5-3: SALARIES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 6/387
A. Village President, Full Time: The salary of the duly elected full time Village President shall be twenty six thousand dollars ($26,000.00) per
year. Said salary shall be effective as of May 2, 2017. The Village President shall also be reimbursed for expenses. A "full time Village
President" shall be defined as one who devotes a minimum of forty (40) hours per week to the position during the regular office hours of the
Village (exclusive of evening meetings), and who has no other full time regular employment.
B. Village President, Part Time: The salary of the duly elected part time Village President shall be twelve thousand dollars ($12,000.00) per year.
Said salary shall be effective as of May 2, 2017. The Village President shall also be reimbursed for expenses. A "part time Village President"
shall be defined as one who devotes less than forty (40) hours per week to the position (exclusive of evening meetings).
C. Local Liquor Control Commissioner1: Pursuant to State law, the salary of the Local Liquor Control Commissioner/Village President shall be
three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per year.
D. Effect Of Salary: The salary for the Local Liquor Control Commissioner provided for herein shall be effective as of May 1, 1981, and shall
commence for the Village President elected in the 1981 election. (Ord. 2015-17, 4-20-2015)
1-5-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
A. Generally: The President shall be the Chief Executive Officer of the Village and shall perform all such duties as may be required of him by
statute, by this Code or by ordinance. The President shall have supervision over all of the executive officers, appointed officers or persons
otherwise employed or appointed or retained by the Village and shall have the power and authority to inspect all books and records kept by
any officer of the Village at any reasonable time, keep or cause to be kept all necessary records to show the administrative activities under the
President's supervision, and shall have control over and custody of all Village property not assigned by law or ordinance to some other Village
officer or employee. The President shall have the right to assign and delegate the supervisory powers set forth above. (Ord. 2017-102, 5-1-
2017)
B. Assign Duties, Settle Disputes: The Village President shall have the power to assign to any officer any duty which is not assigned by this Code
or by ordinance to some other specific officer, and he shall determine disputes or questions relating to the respective powers or duties of
officers.
C. President Pro Tem; Temporary Chairman: See the provisions set forth in section 1-6-4, "Presiding Officer, Voting Powers; President Pro Tem;
Temporary Chairman", of this title. (Ord. 13-35, 5-20-2013)
Chapter 6
VILLAGE BOARD OF TRUSTEES
1-6-1: ELECTION, FUNCTIONS:
The Board of Trustees, consisting of six (6) members, shall be elected to office as provided by statute1. This Board shall be the Legislative
Department of the Village government, and shall perform such duties and have such powers as may be authorized by statute2. (1987 Code)
1-6-2: COMMENCEMENT OF TERMS, OATH, SALARY, EXPENSES:
Members of the Board of Trustees shall take and subscribe to such oath as may be prescribed by statute. The terms of members of the Board of
Trustees shall commence at the first regular or special meeting in the month of June following the election. Compensation for each duly elected
Village Trustee is established at four thousand eight hundred dollars ($4,800.00) annually, to be paid monthly. Said compensation shall take effect
as of May 2, 2017. Each Trustee shall also be reimbursed for expenses. (Ord. 2015-17, 4-20-2015)
1-6-3: MEETINGS:
A. Regular Meetings: The regular meetings of the Board of Trustees shall be held on the first and third Mondays in each calendar month of each
year, at the hour of seven thirty o'clock (7:30) P.M. The second meeting of the month shall be attended by all department heads who are
expected to present their monthly written and verbal reports to the Village Board. Items to be included on the agenda for each regular meeting
shall be determined by the Clerk, except that any item(s) may be included by written order of the President or any three (3) members of the
Board of Trustees.
B. Committee Meetings: Other committee meetings are to be scheduled as needed by the committee Chairs or at such other times as the
committee's business requires, pursuant to the provisions of the Open Meetings Act.
C. Special Meetings: Special meetings may be called by any three (3) Trustees, or by the President, upon proper written notice with the proposed
agenda, within the time period prescribed by the Open Meetings Act.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 7/387
D. Open Meetings Act: All meetings of the President and Board of Trustees, and of all committees, boards and commissions, to discuss public
business, and at which a majority of a quorum are to be present, shall conform in all respects to the provisions of the Open Meetings Act and
any amendments thereto.
E. Meeting Place: All meetings shall be held in the boardroom of the Municipal building unless otherwise specifically provided in the notice and
proposed agenda for that meeting. (Ord. 2015-72, 6-8-2015)
F. Legal Holidays: Any meeting falling on a legal holiday (as defined by the State of Illinois) shall be held on the day following the holiday, except
regular meetings of the Board of Trustees which may be held on the holiday unless the Board of Trustees otherwise provides. (Ord. 95-4, 8-
21-1995, eff. 9-1-1995; amd. Ord. 2005-21, 8-1-2005)
1-6-4: PRESIDING OFFICER, VOTING POWERS; PRESIDENT PRO TEM; TEMPORARY CHAIRMAN:
A. Presiding Officer: The President shall preside at all meetings of the Board of Trustees, unless he or she is absent in which case the President
Pro Tem or temporary Chairman shall preside at the meeting of the Board of Trustees.
B. Voting Powers: Although the President does not ordinarily vote, he is required to vote: 1) where the vote of the Trustees has resulted in a tie; or
2) where one-half (1/2) of the Trustees have voted in favor of an ordinance, resolution or motion even though there is no tie vote; or 3) where a
vote greater than a majority of the Corporate Authorities is required by law.
The President may veto, in whole or in part, any ordinances, resolutions or motions that create any type of liability against the Village, by
returning the ordinance(s), resolution(s) or motion(s) to the Village Board with the President's written objections, at the next regular meeting of
the Village Board occurring not less than five (5) days after their passage. The Village Board must act to override the veto at the next regular
meeting following the regular meeting at which the Village Board received the President's written objections. The Village Board can override
said veto by two-thirds (2/3) vote of all the Trustees then holding office.
C. President Pro Tem; Temporary Chairman:
1. If the President is temporarily absent because of an incapacity to perform official duties, but the incapacity does not create a vacancy in the
office, for the time period commencing May 6, 2013, and ending April 30, 2015, the Chairman of the Finance Committee shall serve as the
President Pro Tem. If the Chairman of the Finance Committee is not available to serve as the President Pro Tem for any reason, then the
Corporate Authorities shall elect one of their remaining members to act as President Pro Tem until the President returns to office. The
President Pro Tem, during this absence or disability, shall perform the duties and possess all the rights and powers of the President but shall
not be entitled to vote both as President Pro Tem and as Trustee.
2. In the absence of the President or the President Pro Tem, the Corporate Authorities may elect one of their remaining members to act as a
temporary Chairman. The temporary Chairman shall have only the powers of a presiding officer and a right to vote only in the capacity as a
Trustee on any ordinance, resolution, or motion. (Ord. 13-35, 5-20-2013)
1-6-5: RULES OF ORDER:
A. Order Of Business: The order of business at meetings of the Board of Trustees shall be substantially in the following order:
1. Call to order: Roll call, Pledge of Allegiance, moment of silence/reflection.
2. Presentations (if necessary).
3. Public comment.
4. Communications.
5. Consideration to approve the following minutes.
6. Consideration to approve expenditure(s).
7. Committee reports (1st meeting of the month).
8. Village officer reports (2nd meeting of the month).
9. Old business.
10. New business.
11. Application(s) for the authority to expend funds.
12. Village Clerk's report.
13. Village President's report.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 8/387
14. Closed session (when necessary).
15. Adjournment.
Public comments will be limited to three (3) minutes per resident person unless they are granted additional time by the consent of the
majority of the Board of Trustees present.
B. Conduct At Meetings:
1. No resident(s) shall act in a disruptive manner during the meeting, and if the Village President believes a resident's actions are disrupting
the Village Board meeting, the Village President will warn the resident(s) to refrain from disrupting the Village Board meeting. If the
resident(s) continues to disrupt the meeting, the Village President will request members of the Police Department to escort those resident(s)
out of the Board hearing room.
2. Any resident or member of the audience who desires to videotape or audiotape a public meeting must set up all recording devices in the
back of the Board hearing room to avoid disrupting the Board meeting and/or obstructing the view of other persons in the audience.
C. Quorum: A majority of the Trustees shall constitute a quorum to do business, but no ordinance shall be passed except on the favorable vote of
a majority of the members of the Board of Trustees.
D. Ordinances And Resolutions: Any ordinance or resolution submitted to the Board of Trustees shall be reduced to writing before being voted on,
upon the request of the President or any three (3) members of the Board of Trustees. Such ordinances and resolutions may be composed by
the Village Clerk, President, or any Trustee, with the advice of counsel if so required.
E. Addressing Meetings: No person other than the President or a member of the Board of Trustees shall address the Board at any special or
regular meeting except upon the consent of a majority of the members present.
F. Suspension Of Rules: The rules of order, other than those prescribed by statute, may be suspended at any time by the consent of a majority of
the members present at any meeting.
G. Robert's Rules Of Order: "Robert's Rules of Order" shall govern the deliberations of the Board of Trustees except when in conflict with any of
the foregoing rules. (Ord. 2018-05, 3-19-2018)
H. Parliamentarian: The Parliamentarian of the Board shall be the Clerk or the Clerk's designee. The Parliamentarian shall have the powers as
provided by Robert's Rules of Order and this Code.
I. Debate: Each Trustee shall be limited to three (3) minutes of debate on each item listed on the agenda or any matter otherwise before the
Board. The Mayor or the Parliamentarian shall call for a vote when all time for debate has been exhausted or if it appears that there is no
further debate. Any Trustee who violates this subsection is subject to censure by the Corporate Authorities. (Ord. 2017-109, 5-15-2017)
1-6-6: ARREST POWERS3:
The Village President, members of the Board of Trustees, as well as every member of the Police Department, are hereby declared to be
conservators of the peace with such powers to make arrests as are given to conservators of the peace by statute4. (1987 Code)
1-6-7: ELECTRONIC ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS:
A. Rules Statement: Any member of the Village of Broadview may attend any open or closed meeting of the Village of Broadview via electronic
means (such as by telephone, video or internet connection) provided that such attendance is in compliance with these rules and any
applicable laws.
B. Prerequisites: A member of the Village of Broadview may attend a meeting electronically if the member meets the following conditions:
1. The member should notify the Clerk at least twenty four (24) hours before the meeting, unless impractical, so that necessary
communications equipment can be arranged. Inability to make the necessary technical arrangements will result in denial of a request for
remote attendance.
2. The member must assert one of the following reasons why he or she is unable to physically attend the meeting:
a. The member cannot attend because of personal illness or disability; or
b. The member cannot attend because of employment purposes or the business of the Village of Broadview; or
c. The member cannot attend because of a family or other emergency.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 9/387
C. Authorization To Participate:
1. The Clerk, after receiving the electronic attendance request, shall inform the Corporate Authority of the request for electronic attendance.
2. After establishing that there is a quorum physically present at a meeting where a member of the Village of Broadview desires to attend
electronically, the presiding officer shall state that: a) a notice was received by a member of the Village of Broadview in accordance with
these rules, and b) the member will be deemed authorized to attend the meeting electronically unless a motion objecting to the member's
electronic attendance is made, seconded, and approved by two-thirds (2/3) of the members of the Village of Broadview physically present at
the meeting. If no such motion is made and seconded or if any such motion fails to achieve the required vote by the members of the Village
of Broadview physically present at the meeting, then the request by the member to attend the meeting electronically shall be deemed
approved by the Village of Broadview and the presiding officer shall declare the requesting member present. After such declaration by the
presiding officer, the question of a member's electronic attendance may not be reconsidered.
D. Adequate Equipment Required: The member participating electronically and other members of the Village of Broadview must be able to
communicate effectively, and members of the audience must be able to hear all communications at the meeting site. Before allowing
electronic attendance at any meeting, the Village of Broadview shall provide equipment adequate to accomplish this objective at the meeting
site.
E. Minutes: Any member attending electronically shall be considered an off site attendee and counted as present electronically for that meeting if
the member is allowed to attend. The meeting minutes shall also reflect and state specifically whether each member is physically present or
present by electronic means.
F. Rights Of Remote Member: A member permitted to attend electronically will be able to express his or her comments during the meeting and
participate in the same capacity as those members physically present, subject to all general meeting guidelines and procedures previously
adopted and adhered to. The member attending electronically shall be heard, considered, and counted as to any vote taken. Accordingly, the
name of any member attending electronically shall be called during any vote taken, and his or her vote counted and recorded by the Clerk and
placed in the minutes for the corresponding meeting. A member attending electronically may leave a meeting and return as in the case of any
member, provided the member attending electronically shall announce his or her leaving and returning.
G. Presiding Officer: If the Village President is attending a meeting electronically, another member of the Board physically present at the Village
meeting site shall be appointed the presiding officer for that meeting via motion and approval by the Board.
H. Committees, Boards And Commissions: These rules shall apply to all committees, boards and commissions established by authority of the
Village of Broadview. (Ord. 2006-30, 12-18-2006)
1-6-8: LEGISLATIVE COUNSEL:
When, from time to time, it is found to be in the best interests of the Village of Broadview for the Trustees to retain independent legislative
counsel, the Board of Trustees may choose to do so by ordinance. Said legislative counsel would advise the Trustees on matters relating to their
legislative duties, which may include, but are not limited to, the drafting of ordinances, contract documents, opinions on the powers of the
legislative branch, analysis of the validity of actions taken by the Village, review of litigation issues and providing other advice on matters within
the purview of the legislative branch of Municipal government. The Trustees shall by motion, select one or two (2) Trustees who shall be allowed
to direct the legislative counsel to provide services, research and opinion. Trustees may seek legal counsel regarding any matters within the
range of items specified above. The independent legislative counsel will indicate on their invoices the Trustee who initiated the contact with them
and will also provide a general description of the services provided. The independent legislative counsel shall be retained as independent
contractors at a rate authorized by the Village Board. No department or office of independent legislative counsel is hereby created. The legislative
counsel shall not replace or usurp the powers of the Village Attorney. (Ord. 2015-54, 6-4-2015)
Chapter 7
VILLAGE CLERK
1-7-1: ELECTION, TERM OF OFFICE:
The Village Clerk shall be elected for a term of four (4) years and until his successor is elected and qualified as is provided by statute. (1987
Code)
1-7-2: BOND:
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the Village Clerk shall provide general requirement for bond. (1987 Code)
1-7-3: SALARIES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 10/387
A. Village Clerk, Full-Time: The salary of the duly elected full-time Village Clerk shall be twenty three thousand dollars ($23,000.00) per year. A
"full-time Village Clerk" shall be defined as one who devotes a minimum of forty (40) hours per week to the position (exclusive of evening
meetings) and who has no other full-time regular employment.
B. Village Clerk, Part-Time: The salary of the duly elected part-time Village Clerk shall be twelve thousand dollars ($12,000.00) per year. A "parttime
Village Clerk" shall be defined as one who devotes less than forty (40) hours per week to the position (exclusive of evening meetings).
C. Effect Of Salary: The salary of the Village Clerk provided for herein shall be effective as of May 1, 1997, and shall commence for the Village
Clerk elected in the 1997 consolidated election. (Ord. 96-8, 10-7-1996)
1-7-4: DUTIES:
A. Seal: The Village Clerk shall be the custodian of the Village Seal and shall affix its impression on documents whenever required.
B. Records: The Clerk shall keep a record showing all of the officers and regular employees of the Village, and such other records as may be
required by the Board of Trustees.
C. Indexes: The Clerk shall keep and maintain a proper index to all documents belonging to the Village and to all records kept by him, so that
ready access thereto and use thereof may be had.
D. Contracts: The Village Clerk shall seal and attest all contracts of the Village and all other documents as shall require this formality.
E. Documents: The Clerk shall be the custodian of all documents belonging to the Village which are not assigned to the custody of some other
officer by the Village President or the Board of Trustees.
F. Record Book Of Meetings: The Village Clerk shall keep a record book of all proceedings which take place in regular or special meetings of the
Board. (1987 Code)
G. Supervision Of Deputy Clerk: In addition to the duties set forth herein, the Clerk shall supervise the Deputy Clerk. (Ord. 2017-102, 5-1-2017)
H. Additional Duties: The Village Clerk shall further perform any other duties and functions that may be assigned to him by statute, this Code or
by ordinance. (1987 Code)
1-7-5: DEPUTY CLERK:
A. Office Created: There hereby is created the Office of Deputy Clerk.
B. Salary: The compensation of the Deputy Clerk shall be governed by the President and Board of Trustees. (1987 Code)
C. Duties: The duties of the Deputy Clerk shall be prescribed by the Village Clerk unless the Corporate Authorities have determined by resolution
that the Village Clerk is temporarily or permanently incapacitated in which case the duties of the Deputy Clerk would then be prescribed by the
President and Board of Trustees for the duration of the Village Clerk's incapacitation or until the Village Clerk's replacement is chosen and
qualified. (Ord. 2016-23, 6-6-2016)
ARTICLE A. VILLAGE COLLECTOR
1-7A-1: OFFICE CREATED:
There is hereby created the office of Village Collector, to be appointed by the President with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees. The
Village Clerk may be appointed to the office of Village Collector. (1987 Code)
1-7A-2: BOND:
The Village Collector shall give bond conditioned upon the faithful performance of his duties in such amount as may be prescribed by the Board of
Trustees. (1987 Code)
1-7A-3: SALARY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 11/387
The annual salary for the Village Collector shall be as determined by the President and Board of Trustees. (1987 Code)
1-7A-4: DUTIES:
A. Collect Special Assessments And Taxes: It shall be the duty of the Village Collector to collect and receive all money due on special
assessments and special taxes that are not paid directly to the Village Treasurer, and to keep such records pertaining to such collections as
may be required by statute or by the Board of Trustees.
B. Issue Licenses, Collect Fees, License Register Required: The Village Collector shall issue all licenses and permits applied for and issued
under this Code or other Village ordinances for which a fee is charged after the issuance of same has been approved by the President and
Board of Trustees, and shall receive and collect all fees due therefor where no provision to the contrary is made. He shall keep a license
register showing the licenses issued, the date of expiration, the purpose thereof and the amount of fees received, and he shall keep a similar
record of permits issued. Such records shall be so arranged and indexed as to be intelligible.
C. Disposition Of Funds: The Village Collector shall turn over to the Village Treasurer all money received by him on behalf of the Village at such
times as the President and Board of Trustees may direct, together with all interest accrued and paid thereon.
D. Reports: The Village Collector shall make such reports regarding delinquent special assessments as are required by statute, and shall make a
monthly report to the Board of Trustees showing what money has been received and the source thereof. The Village Collector shall also make
an annual report to the Board of Trustees showing the activities of his office. (1987 Code)
1-7A-5: ASSISTANT COLLECTOR/OFFICE MANAGER:
A. Office Created: There is hereby created the office of assistant Collector/Office Manager.
B. Duties: The duties of the assistant Collector/Office Manager shall be prescribed by the President and Board of Trustees.
C. Salary: The compensation of the assistant Collector/Office Manager shall be governed by the President and Board of Trustees. (1987 Code)
Chapter 8
VILLAGE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
1-8-1: APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply alike to all officers of the Village, regardless of the time of the creation of the office or of the time of the
appointment of the officer. (1987 Code)
1-8-2: APPOINTMENTS, TERMS OF OFFICE, VACANCIES, REMOVALS FROM OFFICE:
The Village President and Board of Trustees shall make appointments to fill all appointive offices and every appointive officer of the Village shall
hold office for the term of one year or until his successor is appointed and qualified unless it is otherwise provided. In case of a vacancy in any
such office, the President and Board of Trustees shall appoint a new officer. All appointive officers of the Village may be removed from office by
the Village President as is provided by and subject to the provisions of State law1. (1987 Code)
1-8-3: OATHS, BONDS REQUIRED:
Before entering upon his duties, every officer of the Village shall take the oath prescribed by State law2 and before entering upon the duties of his
office, shall give bond with sureties to be approved by the Board of Trustees in such amount as may be fixed by statute or at the discretion of the
Board of Trustees. (1987 Code)
1-8-4: SALARIES:
All officers of the Village shall receive such salaries as may be provided from time to time by ordinance, except where such officers' compensation
is set forth elsewhere in this Code or otherwise established by ordinance. (Ord. 2017-111, 5-15-2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 12/387
1-8-5: DISPOSITION OF BOOKS AND RECORDS:
Every officer of the Village, upon termination of his office for any cause whatsoever shall deliver to his successor all property, books and records
which may be property of the Village, and if no successor has been appointed within one week after the termination of office, such property shall
be delivered either to the Clerk or to the Treasurer. (1987 Code)
1-8-6: RECORDS:
All records kept by any officer of the Village shall be open to inspection by the President or any member of the Board of Trustees, whether or not
such records are required to be kept by statute or otherwise. However, members of the Board of Trustees shall not have keys to access secured
record rooms. Such access shall be obtained by scheduling an appointment for such access with the Village Clerk, who shall manage access to
all secured records rooms in the Village. (Ord. 2017-114, 5-1-2017)
1-8-7: MONIES RECEIVED:
Every officer of the Village shall, as often as directed by the President or any member of the Board of Trustees, turn all money received by him in
his official capacity to the Treasurer with a statement showing the source from which the same was received. (1987 Code)
1-8-8: EMPLOYEE BENEFITS:
A. Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund: The Village elects to participate in the Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund, effective January 1, 1963.
B. Social Security: The eligible employees shall be entitled, as of January 1, 1955, to participate in the benefits of the Federal old age and
survivors insurance system as authorized by the Federal Social security act and amendments thereto. The village president shall take such
action as may be required by applicable state and federal laws or regulations to effectuate this subsection.
1. Agreement With State: The village president is directed to execute an agreement with the state employees' retirement system of the state
(social security unit) to secure coverage of eligible employees as provided in this subsection.
2. Withholdings Authorized: Withholdings from salaries or wages of employees for the purpose provided in this subsection, are hereby
authorized to be made in the amounts and at such times as may be required by applicable state and federal laws or regulations, and shall
be paid over to the state agency in such amounts and at such times as are designated by state laws or regulations.
3. Employer Contributions: Employer contributions and administrative expense shall be paid to the state agency in accordance with applicable
state and federal laws and regulations from amounts appropriated for such purposes.
4. Records: The village clerk shall maintain such records and submit such reports as may be required by applicable state and federal laws or
regulations. (1987 Code)
1-8-9: DRUG AND ALCOHOL ABUSE POLICY:
The drug and alcohol abuse policy on file in the office of the city clerk and made a part hereof is hereby adopted in full and is applicable to all
village employees who require a commercial driver's license to perform the scope of their duties with the village, and who are not otherwise
exempt under the terms of the applicable federal law3. (Ord. 96-3, 4-29-1996)
1-8-10: ETHICAL CONDUCT:
A. Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following terms shall be given these definitions:
CAMPAIGN FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE: Any activity in furtherance of an effort to influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of
any individual to any federal, state or local public office in a political organization, or the selection, nomination, or election of presidential or
vice presidential electors, but does not include activities: 1) relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or administrative
action, 2) relating to collective bargaining, or 3) that are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties.
CANDIDATE: A person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for nomination or election to an elected office, or who has been appointed
to fill a vacancy in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the ballot at a regular election, as defined in section 1-3 of the
election code4.
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in section 3 of the Illinois public labor relations act5.
COMPENSATED TIME: With respect to an employee, any time worked by or credited to the employee that counts toward any minimum work
time requirement imposed as a condition of his or her employment, but for purposes of this section, does not include any designated holidays,
vacation periods, personal time, compensatory time off or any period when the employee is on a leave of absence. With respect to officers or
employees whose hours are not fixed, "compensated time" includes any period of time when the officer is on premises under the control of the
employer and any other time when the officer or employee is executing his or her official duties, regardless of location.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 13/387
COMPENSATORY TIME OFF: Authorized time off earned by or awarded to an employee to compensate in whole or in part for time worked in
excess of the minimum work time required of that employee as a condition of his or her employment.
CONTRIBUTION: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in section 9-1.4 of the election code6.
EMPLOYEE: A person employed by the village of Broadview, whether on a full time or part time basis or pursuant to a contract, whose duties
are subject to the direction and control of an employer with regard to the material details of how the work is to be performed, but does not
include an independent contractor.
EMPLOYER: The village of Broadview.
GIFT: Any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan, forbearance, or other tangible or intangible item having monetary value including,
but not limited to, cash, food and drink, and honoraria for speaking engagements related to or attributable to government employment or the
official position of an officer or employee.
LEAVE OF ABSENCE: Any period during which an employee does not receive: 1) compensation for employment, 2) service credit towards
pension benefits, and 3) health insurance benefits paid for by the employer.
OFFICER: A person who holds, by election or appointment, an office created by statute or ordinance, regardless of whether the officer is
compensated for service in his or her official capacity.
POLITICAL ACTIVITY: Any activity in support of or in connection with any campaign for elective office or any political organization, but does
not include activities: 1) relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or administrative action, 2) relating to collective
bargaining, or 3) that are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties.
POLITICAL ORGANIZATION: A party, committee, association, fund, or other organization (whether or not incorporated) that is required to file
a statement of organization with the state board of elections or a county clerk under section 9-3 of the election code7, but only with regard to
those activities that require filing with the state board of elections or a county clerk.
PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITY: 1. Preparing for, organizing, or participating in any political meeting, political rally, political
demonstration, or other political event.
2. Soliciting contributions, including, but not limited to, the purchase of, selling, distributing, or receiving payment for tickets for any political
fundraiser, political meeting or other political event.
3. Soliciting, planning the solicitation of, or preparing any document or report regarding anything of value intended as a campaign contribution.
4. Planning, conducting, or participating in a public opinion poll in connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political
organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question.
5. Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual voters in an election to determine probable voter outcome in connection with a
campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question.
6. Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any political organization or candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
7. Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or a political organization or for or against any referendum question or helping in
an effort to get voters to the polls.
8. Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing, or filing any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective office or for or against any
referendum question.
9. Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective office in that capacity or in connection with a campaign for elective office.
10. Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires.
11. Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing campaign literature, campaign signs, or other campaign material on behalf of any
candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question.
12. Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any referendum question.
13. Managing or working on a campaign for elective office or for or against any referendum question.
14. Serving as a delegate, alternate, or proxy to a political party convention.
15. Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any election.
PROHIBITED SOURCE: Any person or entity who:
1. Is seeking official action: a) by an officer or b) by an employee, or by the officer or another employee directing that employee;
2. Does business or seeks to do business: a) with the officer or b) with an employee, or with the officer or another employee directing that
employee;
3. Conducts activities regulated: a) by the officer or b) by an employee, or by the officer or another employee directing that employee; or
4. Has interests that may be substantially affected by the performance or nonperformance of the official duties of the officer or employee.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 14/387
B. Prohibited Political Activities:
1. No officer or employee shall intentionally perform any prohibited political activity during any "compensated time", as defined herein. No
officer or employee shall intentionally use any property or resources of the village of Broadview in connection with any prohibited political
activity.
2. At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally require any other officer or employee to perform any prohibited political activity: a) as
part of that officer's or employee's duties, b) as a condition of employment, or c) during any compensated time off (such as holidays,
vacation or personal time off).
3. No officer or employee shall be required at any time to participate in any prohibited political activity in consideration for that officer or
employee being awarded additional compensation or any benefit, whether in the form of a salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off,
continued employment or otherwise, nor shall any officer or employee be awarded additional compensation or any benefit in consideration
for his or her participation in any prohibited political activity.
4. Nothing in this subsection prohibits activities that are permissible for an officer or employee to engage in as part of his or her official duties,
or activities that are undertaken by an officer or employee on a voluntary basis which are not prohibited by this section.
5. No person either: a) in a position that is subject to recognized merit principles of public employment or b) in a position the salary for which is
paid in whole or in part by federal funds and that is subject to the federal standards for a merit system of personnel administration applicable
to grant in aid programs, shall be denied or deprived of employment or tenure solely because he or she is a member or an officer of a
political committee, of a political party, or of a political organization or club.
C. Gift Ban:
1. Except as permitted by this subsection C, no officer or employee, and no spouse of or immediate family member living with any officer or
employee (collectively referred to herein as "recipients"), shall intentionally solicit or accept any gift from any "prohibited source", as defined
herein, or which is otherwise prohibited by law or ordinance. No prohibited source shall intentionally offer to make a gift that violates this
subsection.
2. This subsection C is not applicable to the following:
a. Opportunities, benefits, and services that are available on the same conditions as for the general public.
b. Anything for which the officer or employee, or his or her spouse or immediate family member, pays the fair market value.
c. Any: 1) contribution that is lawfully made under the election code or 2) activities associated with a fundraising event in support of a
political organization or candidate.
d. Educational materials and missions.
e. Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss business.
f. A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to the individual as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt, great
aunt, great uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife, grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, motherin-
law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather, stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half
brother, half sister, and including the father, mother, grandfather, or grandmother of the individual's spouse and the individual's fiance or
fiancee.
g. Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal friendship unless the recipient has reason to believe that, under the
circumstances, the gift was provided because of the official position or employment of the recipient or his or her spouse or immediate
family member and not because of the personal friendship. In determining whether a gift is provided on the basis of personal friendship,
the recipient shall consider the circumstances under which the gift was offered, such as: 1) the history of the relationship between the
individual giving the gift and the recipient of the gift, including any previous exchange of gifts between those individuals; 2) whether to the
actual knowledge of the recipient the individual who gave the gift personally paid for the gift or sought a tax deduction or business
reimbursement for the gift; and 3) whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the individual who gave the gift also at the same time
gave the same or similar gifts to other officers or employees or their spouses or immediate family members.
h. Food or refreshments not exceeding seventy five dollars ($75.00) per person in value on a single calendar day; provided that the food or
refreshments are: 1) consumed on the premises from which they were purchased or prepared or 2) catered. For the purposes of this
subsection, "catered" means food or refreshments that are purchased ready to consume which are delivered by any means.
i. Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation and other benefits resulting from outside business or employment activities (or outside
activities that are not connected to the official duties of an officer or employee), if the benefits have not been offered or enhanced because
of the official position or employment of the officer or employee, and are customarily provided to others in similar circumstances.
j. Intragovernmental and intergovernmental gifts. For the purpose of this subsection, "intergovernmental gift" means any gift given to an
officer or employee from another officer or employee, and "intragovernmental" means any gift given to an officer or employee by an officer
or employee of another governmental entity.
k. Bequests, inheritances, and other transfers at death.
l. Any item or items from any one prohibited source during any calendar year having a cumulative total value of less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00).
Each of the exceptions listed in this subsection is mutually exclusive and independent of every other.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 15/387
3. An officer or employee, his or her spouse or an immediate family member living with the officer or employee, does not violate this
subsection C if the recipient promptly takes reasonable action to return a gift from a prohibited source to its source or gives the gift or an
amount equal to its value to an appropriate charity that is exempt from income taxation under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue
Code of 1986, as now or hereafter amended, renumbered, or succeeded.
D. Penalties:
1. A person who intentionally violates any provision of subsection B of this section may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal
institution other than a penitentiary for a period of not more than three hundred sixty four (364) days, and may be fined in an amount not to
exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
2. A person who intentionally violates any provision of subsection C of this section is subject to a fine in an amount of not less than one
thousand one dollars ($1,001.00) and not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00).
3. Any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a violation of any provision of this section to the local enforcement authorities,
the State's Attorney or any other law enforcement official may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal institution other than a
penitentiary for a period of not more than three hundred sixty four (364) days, and may be fined in an amount not to exceed two thousand
five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
4. A violation of subsection B of this section shall be prosecuted as a criminal offense by an attorney for the Village of Broadview by filing in
the Circuit Court an information, or sworn complaint, charging such offense. The prosecution shall be under and conform to the rules of
criminal procedure. Conviction shall require the establishment of the guilt of the defendant beyond a reasonable doubt.
5. A violation of subsection C of this section may be prosecuted as a quasi-criminal offense by an attorney for the Village of Broadview.
6. In addition to any other penalty that may be applicable, whether criminal or civil, an officer or employee who intentionally violates any
provision of subsection B or C of this section is subject to discipline or discharge. (Ord. 2004-07, 5-3-2004)
1-8-11: RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS:
A. All Employees: All employees of the Village shall be required to live within a ten (10) mile radius of the intersection of 17th Avenue and
Roosevelt Road in the Village.
B. Department Heads:
1. Definition: For purposes of this subsection an "appointive Municipal officer" is defined as a department head.
2. Residency: The residency requirements currently in effect for the union employees of the Village of Broadview will apply to the department
heads under the provisions of this subsection. This will allow department heads to live within the ten (10) mile radius already established by
the Village or in any municipality touching the ten (10) mile radius except the city of Chicago. The ten (10) mile radius currently in effect
which includes parts of the city of Chicago will remain as is. Notwithstanding any provision of this Code to the contrary, the residency
requirements currently in effect for the union employees of the Village of Broadview shall not apply to any department heads appointed
pursuant to the Illinois Municipal Code who require technical training or knowledge, including, but not limited to, the Village Attorney and the
Village Engineer. (Ord. 2017-111, 5-15-2017)
1-8-12: ELECTRONIC ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS:
The rules established for electronic attendance at meetings in section 1-6-7 of this title shall apply to all committees, boards and commissions
established by authority of the Village of Broadview. (Ord. 2006-30, 12-18-2006)
1-8-13: INDEMNIFICATION OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES:
A. Defense And Indemnification: To the fullest extent permitted by the Constitution of the State of Illinois and applicable law including the Illinois
Compiled Statutes, each of the following officers and employees of the Village: the Village President; each Village Trustee; the Village Clerk
and Deputy Village Clerk; the Village Treasurer; the Village Collector; the Village Attorney; Village Administrative Adjudicator, Village
Prosecutor and special counsel for the Village; the Director of each department of the Village; the Chief of Police; the Fire Chief, and each
member of any board or commission of the Village established pursuant to applicable law or by ordinance of the Village, shall be indemnified,
defended and held harmless by the Village from and against all liabilities for compensatory damages, expenses of investigation, judgments
and amounts paid in settlement which may be imposed upon or reasonably incurred or paid by such officer or employee in connection with or
resulting from any claim made against him, or any action, suit, proceeding or investigation in which he may be involved, by reason of his being
or having been such officer or such employee of the Village and acting within the scope of his employment or officer duties, whether or not he
continues to be such officer or employee at the time of such claim, action, suit, proceeding or investigation; provided, however, that the
foregoing indemnity shall not extend to any of the following:
1. Any liability or cost when an officer or employee could be found to be guilty of bad faith, or actual malice, or willful and wanton misconduct
in the performance of his duties as such officer or employee;
2. Any proceeding where the Village is prosecuting the action against the employee or officer;
3. Where the Village offers or otherwise indicates its willingness to provide a legal defense with respect to such claim, action, suit, proceeding
or investigation and the officer or employee refuses to accept the legal defense. In such a case, the employee or officer shall not be entitled
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 16/387
to indemnification for attorney fees. In addition, the Village Board will determine by a majority vote of the Board whether the officer or
employee will be entitled to indemnification for any judgments entered against said officer or employee. (Ord. 2017-112, 5-15-2017)
B. Reservation Of Rights: The Village may elect to defend the employee or officer under a reservation of rights agreement. If the Village so elects
and if the employee or officer enters into a reservation of rights agreement, the Village shall pay the judgment, compromise or settlement only
if it is established that the injury arose out of an act or omission relating to the employee or officer's duties within the scope of the employee or
officer's employment and was not wilful and wanton.
C. Effect Of Other Proceedings: The termination of any action, suit, or proceeding by judgment or settlement, conviction, or in a plea of nolo
contendere, or its equivalent, shall not, of itself, create a presumption that the act giving rise to the claim did not arise out of actions or
omissions of such employee relating to his/her duties as an employee of the Village.
D. Good Faith: In all cases the employee or officer shall cooperate in good faith to determine whether the conduct or inaction which gave rise to
the claim or cause of action: 1) was or was not wilful or wanton misconduct, and 2) was or was not intended to serve or benefit the interests of
the Village.
E. Reimbursement: If the Village determines that a claim against an employee or officer comes within the provisions of this section, and if a court
of competent jurisdiction later finds that such claim does not come within the provisions of this section, the Village may seek reimbursement
for any payments made by the Village or on its behalf for part or all of any judgment and costs or fees incurred by or on behalf of the
employee's or officer's defense as well as for that part or all of the costs or expenses incurred in obtaining the determination that such claim is
not covered by this section.
F. Other Rights: The foregoing rights of indemnification shall be in addition to any other rights to which such officer or employee may otherwise be
entitled as a matter of law.
G. Police Officers: Indemnification shall be provided by the Village to police officers as provided by applicable law and any applicable collective
bargaining agreements. (Ord. 10-09, 2-16-2010)
1-8-14: TRAVEL, MEAL AND LODGING EXPENSES:
A. Definitions:
ENTERTAINMENT: Includes, but is not limited to, shows, amusements, theaters, circuses, sporting events, or any other place of public or
private entertainment or amusement, unless ancillary to the purpose of the program or event.
PUBLIC BUSINESS: Means expenses incurred in the performance of a public purpose which is required or useful for the benefit of the Village
to carry out the responsibilities of Village business.
TRAVEL: Means any expenditure directly incident to official travel by employees and officers of the Village or by wards or charges of the
Village involving reimbursement to travelers or direct payment to private agencies providing transportation or related services.
B. Maximum Allowable Reimbursement For Expenses: The maximum allowable reimbursement for an employee or officer of the Village shall be
those rates set by the Federal Travel Regulation and maintained by the United States General Services Administration for travel per diem,
meals, and incidental expenses in effect at the time the expenses was incurred. Alcohol is specifically excluded from reimbursement.
C. Documentation Of Expenses: No reimbursement of travel, meal or lodging expenses incurred by a Village employee or officer shall be
authorized unless the "Travel, Meal, and Lodging Expense Reimbursement Request Form", as exhibit A on file in the Village, has been
submitted and approved. All documents and information submitted with the form shall be subject to disclosure under the Freedom of
Information Act8.
D. Reimbursement And Emergency Expenses: Expenses for travel, meals, and lodging of: 1) any officer or employee that exceeds the maximum
reimbursement allowed under the regulations adopted under subsection B of this section or 2) any member of the Corporate Authorities of the
Village may only be approved by roll call vote at an open meeting of the Corporate Authorities of the Village. However, in the event of an
emergency or other extraordinary circumstance, the Corporate Authorities may approve more than the maximum allowable expenses set forth
above.
E. Entertainment Expenses: The Village shall not reimburse any elected official, employee, or officer for any activities which would be considered
entertainment. Activities which would otherwise be considered entertainment, but which are excluded from the prohibition on reimbursement
due to being ancillary to the purpose of the program or event, may be reimbursed in accordance with the provisions of this section or other
Village policies, regulations, or procedures. (Ord. 2018-09, 4-16-2018)
ARTICLE A. VILLAGE TREASURER
1-8A-1: OFFICE CREATED, APPOINTMENT, TERM:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 17/387
There is hereby created the office of Village Treasurer. The Treasurer shall be appointed by the President and Board of Trustees and shall hold
office for a period of one year, and until his successor is appointed and qualified. (1987 Code)
1-8A-2: BOND:
The Treasurer shall give bond in such sum as may be required by the Board of Trustees, but the bond shall not be less than the amount of the
estimated revenues and special assessments of the Village for the current year, with sureties to be approved by the Board of Trustees. The bond
shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance by the Treasurer of his duties as such Treasurer, and shall be conditioned to indemnify the
Village for any loss occasioned by neglect of duty or wrongful act on the part of the Treasurer. (1987 Code)
1-8A-3: DUTIES:
A. General Duties: The Treasurer shall perform such duties as may be prescribed for him by statute, this Code, ordinance or resolution. He shall
receive all money paid into the Village Treasury, either directly from the person paying the money or from the hands of such other officer as
may receive it, and he shall pay out money only on vouchers or orders properly signed by the Village Clerk and by the Village President.
B. Register Of Warrants: The Treasurer shall keep a register of all warrants, bonds or orders filed with him or paid by him, and all vouchers as is
required by statute.
C. Records: The Treasurer shall keep the records showing all money received by him, showing the source from which it is received and the
purpose for which it is paid, and he shall keep records at all times showing the financial status of the Village.
D. Reports:
1. Monthly Reports: The Treasurer shall make monthly reports to the Board showing the state of the finances of the Village and the amounts
received and spent during the month, which reports shall be filed.
2. Annual Reports: The Treasurer shall make an annual report between May 1 and May 10 in each year with total amount of all receipts and
disbursements of the Village and his transactions as Treasurer during the preceding fiscal year.
E. Books And Accounts: The Treasurer shall keep such books and accounts as may be required by the Board of Trustees and shall keep them in
a manner required by the Board. (1987 Code)
1-8A-4: DEPOSITS OF FUNDS, FUNDS TO BE KEPT SEPARATE:
The Village Treasurer shall deposit the Village funds in such depositories as are designated from time to time by the President and Board of
Trustees. He shall keep the deposit of Village money separate and distinct from his own money, shall not intermingle his own money with Village
money and shall not make private or personal use of any Village money. (1987 Code)
ARTICLE B. VILLAGE ATTORNEYS
1-8B-1: VILLAGE ATTORNEY:
1-8B-1-1: OFFICE CREATED, APPOINTMENT:
There is hereby created the Office of Village Attorney, an executive office of the Village. The attorney shall be appointed by the President and
Board of Trustees. (1987 Code)
1-8B-1-2: SALARY:
The Village Attorney shall receive such compensation as may be fixed by an ordinance approved by the Corporate Authorities. (Ord. 2017-111, 5-
15-2017)
1-8B-1-3: DUTIES:
A. Suits: It shall be the duty of the Village Attorney to prosecute all suits for the recovery of fines, forfeitures and penalties which may be brought
before any court of competent jurisdiction, justice or any other court, and also to institute and defend all suits which may be brought in any
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 18/387
court by or against the Village or any of its officers on account of their official acts. He shall give his personal attention at any court, where any
suit in which the Village is interested may be pending, when called upon by the President or Chief of Police for such purpose.
B. Attend Meetings: The Village Attorney shall attend the meetings of the Board of Trustees and shall, when called upon, draft all ordinances,
bonds, contracts, leases, conveyances and other instruments of writing, including abstracts of title, required for the business of the Village.
C. Tax And Assessment Rolls: He shall examine and inspect tax and assessment rolls and all proceedings in reference to the assessment and
collection of taxes and assessments and perform such other professional services incident to his office as may in any case be required by the
Board of Trustees or any of its committees. (Ord. 2015-72, 6-8-2015)
1-8B-2: PROSECUTING ATTORNEY:
1-8B-2-1: OFFICE CREATED, APPOINTMENT, COMPENSATION, BOND:
There is hereby created the Office of Prosecuting Attorney to be appointed by the President and Board of Trustees. The compensation of the
Prosecuting Attorney shall be fixed at the time of such appointment and he shall perform such services to the Village as may be prescribed by the
Village Board. The bond of the Prosecuting Attorney shall be fixed by the Board at the time of his appointment. (1987 Code)
1-8B-2-2: DUTIES:
A. Prosecuting Duties, Legal Services: The Prosecuting Attorney shall prosecute all ordinance or Code violations and appeals thereof to which
the Village may be a party or in which it may be interested. All appeals shall be under the direction and supervision of the Village Attorney. He
shall also perform such other and further legal services as the Village Board may direct or that the Village Attorney may request.
B. Reports: The President and Board of Trustees may request monthly reports or interim reports on work done by the Office of Prosecuting
Attorney. (1987 Code)
ARTICLE C. BUDGET OFFICER
1-8C-1: OFFICE CREATED, APPOINTMENT, TERM:
There is hereby created the office of budget officer. The budget officer shall be appointed by the president with the advice and consent of the
board of trustees and shall hold the office for a period of one year, and until his successor is appointed and qualified. (Ord. 2003-01, 1-21-2003)
1-8C-2: DUTIES:
The budget officer shall perform such duties as may be prescribed for him by statute, this code, ordinance or resolution. The budget officer shall:
A. Permit, encourage and establish the use of efficient planning, budgeting, auditing, reporting, accounting, and other fiscal management
procedures in all municipal departments, commissions, and boards;
B. Compile an annual budget in accordance with state statutes;
C. Examine all books and records of all municipal departments, commissions, and boards which relate to monies received by the municipality,
municipal departments, commissions, and boards, and paid out by the municipality, municipal departments, commissions, and boards, debts
and accounts receivable, amounts owed by or to the municipality, municipal departments, commissions, and boards;
D. Obtain such additional information from the municipality, municipal departments, commissions, and boards as may be useful to the budget
officer for purposes of compiling a municipal budget, such information to be furnished by the municipality, municipal departments,
commissions, and boards in the form required by the budget officer;
E. Establish and maintain such procedures as shall ensure that no expenditures are made by the municipality, municipal departments,
commissions, or boards except as authorized by the budget. (Ord. 2003-01, 1-21-2003)
ARTICLE D. VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR
1-8D-1: OFFICE CREATED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 19/387
There is hereby created the Office of Village Administrator to be appointed by the President with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees.
The Village Administrator shall serve as the Ex Officio Collector for the Village. (Ord. 2017-101, 5-1-2017)
1-8D-2: SALARY:
The annual salary of the Village Administrator shall be determined by the President and Board of Trustees. (Ord. 2017-101, 5-1-2017)
1-8D-3: DUTIES:
A. The Village Administrator shall, in all cases, be subject to the authority and direction of the President and Board of Trustees and must comply
with applicable Federal and State Statutes, Municipal ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations, policies and procedures. The Village
Administrator shall have the powers and duties as follows:
1. Formulate, determine and execute labor relations policies and the administration and negotiation of collective bargaining agreements;
2. Coordinate economic development, intergovernmental and other agreements with developers and vendors, civic activities and public
relations;
3. Manage all human resource matters for the Village, including compensation and benefits administration;
4. Evaluate all liability risks to the Village and serve as the Village Risk Manager;
5. Devote all reasonable time to the discharge of his or her official duties;
6. Act so as not to create any conflict of interest between his or her personal activities and his or her official duties and act so as not to have
any financial or personal interest in any contract or undertaking in any way involving the Village;
7. Perform such duties as the Ex Officio Collector for the Village and other duties as may be prescribed by the Village Board and President,
not inconsistent with ordinances, resolutions, regulations, policies, procedures or laws;
8. Carry out such other specific duties and responsibilities as are required by Village ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation, procedure or policy
or as may be assigned by the President from time to time including, without limitation, such specific duties and responsibilities as are set
forth in a job description for the Office of Village Administrator. (Ord. 2017-101, 5-1-2017)
Chapter 9
MUNICIPAL FINANCES
1-9-1: WARRANTS:
No warrant of the village shall be recognized or paid unless it is signed by both the president and the village clerk. (1987 Code)
1-9-2: CHARGE FOR RETURNED CHECKS:
Any person (including sole proprietorships, partnerships or corporations) who issues a check payable to the village that is not honored because of
insufficient funds, closed account, or insufficient credit shall be liable to the village in the amount of twenty five dollars ($25.00), and shall be liable
for interest upon the amount of the check at the rate provided for in subsection 1, section 4 of the interest rate act1. (Ord. 92-13, 5-18-1992)
1-9-3: POLICE PROTECTION TAX:
A tax is hereby imposed for the purpose of police protection in this village at the rate of 0.05% of the value, as equalized or assessed by the
department of revenue, of all the taxable property therein for the first year in which this tax is levied, and at a rate of 0.075% of the value, as
equalized or assessed by the department of revenue, for all taxable property therein, in all succeeding years, all in accordance with state law2.
(1987 Code)
1-9-4: FIRE PROTECTION TAX:
A tax is hereby imposed for the purpose of fire protection in this village at the rate of 0.30% of the value, as equalized or assessed by the
department of revenue, of all the taxable property therein in accordance with state law3. (1987 Code)
1-9-5: THIRD PARTY REIMBURSEMENT; RENDERING AID, EMERGENCY RELIEF:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 20/387
A. Reimbursement: The recipients or benefactors, or the administrators, personal representatives, executors, successors, heirs or assigns
thereof, all as determined by the head of the village's department rendering aid or emergency relief, shall be, and are, obligated to reimburse
the village in the actual amount of payments made by said village to third parties for service rendered in providing aid or emergency relief and
for payments to replenish necessary supplies and equipment used while providing aid or emergency services. The head of the village's
department incurring such third party costs shall notify the village collector's office of the circumstances and provide a copy of the invoice or
billing statement from the third party that specifies the nature of the expenditure and the amount to be, or in fact, paid. The collector shall
cause an invoice to issue to the recipient or benefactor for the amount certified by the department head as to each such circumstance
reported.
B. Third Party Defined: As used herein, the term "third party" means and includes any person, company or business entity, but not if such person
is an employee or an officer of the village, a person directly or indirectly sharing an interest in such services with an employee or officer of the
village, nor a company any portion of which is owned by an employee or officer of the village.
C. Payment, Complaints Or Objections: The village collector shall allow for a reasonable time for the payment of the reimbursement amount and
shall hear any complaints or objections on the type and amount of expense. The village collector may adjust the amounts invoiced based upon
demonstrated hardship but is not required to so adjust. In the event that no payment or response to request for reimbursement has been
received within thirty (30) days from the date of invoice, the village collector is authorized to undertake such action as provided by law for the
recovery of money due the village. (Ord. 89-14, 9-5-1989)
1-9-6: ROOSEVELT ROAD TAX:
A. Tax Increment Financing Adopted: Tax increment allocation financing is hereby adopted to pay redevelopment project costs as defined in the
act4 and as set forth in the plan and project within the area as described in exhibit A attached to ordinance 2000-02 on file in the village office
and incorporated herein as if set out in full by this reference. The street location (as near as practicable) for the area is described in exhibit B
attached to ordinance 2000-02 on file in the village office and incorporated herein as if set out in full by this reference. The map of the area is
depicted on exhibit C attached to ordinance 2000-02 on file in the village office and incorporated herein as if set out in full by this reference.
B. Allocation Of Ad Valorem Taxes: Pursuant to the act, the ad valorem taxes, if any, arising from the levies upon taxable real property in the area
by taxing districts and tax rates determined in the manner provided in section 11-74.4-9(c) of the act each year after the effective date hereof
until the project costs and obligations issued in respect thereto have been paid shall be divided as follows:
1. That portion of taxes levied upon each taxable lot, block, tract or parcel of real property which is attributable to the lower of the current
equalized assessed value or the initial equalized assessed value of each such taxable lot, block, tract or parcel of real property in the area
shall be allocated to and when collected shall be paid by the county collector to the respective affected taxing districts in the manner
required by law in the absence of the adoption of tax increment allocation financing.
2. That portion, if any, of such taxes which is attributable to the increase in the current equalized assessed valuation of each lot, block, tract or
parcel of real property in the area over and above the initial equalized assessed value of each property in the area shall be allocated to and
when collected shall be paid to the village treasurer who shall deposit said taxes into a special fund, hereby created, and designated the
"Roosevelt Road special tax allocation fund" of the village, and such taxes be used for the purpose of paying project costs and obligations
incurred in the payment thereof as set forth in the plan and project, in accordance with the provisions of the act. (Ord. 2000-02, 2-14-2000)
1-9-7: BUDGET SYSTEM; FISCAL YEAR:
A. The village hereby adopts the budget system procedure pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-2-9.1 through 5/8-2-9.10 beginning with
the fiscal year commencing May 1, 2003, until which time the current appropriation ordinance shall remain in full force and effect.
B. The village's fiscal year shall commence on May 1 of each year and shall expire on April 30 of the following year. (Ord. 2003-01, 1-21-2003)
Chapter 10
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
1-10-1: MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS:
Elections for village officers shall be held as is provided by statute, and at the time prescribed by statute1. (1987 Code)
1-10-2: CORPORATE SEAL:
The corporate seal of the village shall be circular in form. In the outer margin shall be the words "Village of Broadview, Cook Co., IL" and in the
center the words "Corporate Seal". (1987 Code)
1-10-3: ORDINANCES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 21/387
A. Recordation, Indexing: All ordinances passed by the president and board of trustees of the village shall be deposited in the office of the village
clerk, and shall be duly recorded by such clerk in the record book of ordinances and appropriately indexed by their titles and subjects.
B. Publication, Time Of Taking Effect: All ordinances of the village imposing any fine, penalty, imprisonment or forfeiture, or making any
appropriation, shall:
1. Be printed in book or pamphlet form, published by authority of the president and board of trustees; or
2. Be published at least once within ten (10) days after passage, in one or more newspapers published in the village, or if no newspaper is
published therein, then in one or more newspapers with a general circulation within the village. No such ordinance shall take effect until ten
(10) days after it is so published, except that an ordinance imposing a municipal retailers' occupation tax adopted under 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/8-11-1 or effecting a change in the rate thereof shall take effect on the first day of the month next following the expiration of the
ten (10) day publication period. However, ordinances establishing rules and regulations for the construction of buildings or any part thereof,
or for the development or operation of camps accommodating persons in house trailers, house cars, cabins or tents where such rules and
regulations have been previously printed in book or pamphlet form, may, by their terms, provide for the adoption of such rules and
regulations or portions thereof by reference thereto without further printing or publication, if not less than three (3) copies of such rules and
regulations in book or pamphlet form have been filed in the office of the village clerk for use and examination by the public at least thirty (30)
days prior to the adoption thereof. All other ordinances, resolutions and motions shall take effect upon their passage unless they otherwise
provide.
C. Filing And Preservation Of Originals: The village clerk shall file and carefully preserve the originals of all ordinances deposited in his office.
(1987 Code)
1-10-4: OFFICIAL TIME:
Central Standard Time shall be the official time within the village for the transaction of all village business, except that from two o'clock (2:00) A.M.
of the last Sunday in April of each year to two o'clock (2:00) A.M. of the last Sunday in October of each year, the official time for the village shall
be one hour in advance of Central Standard Time.
When reference is made to any time without qualification in any motion, resolution or ordinance heretofore passed or which may be passed
hereafter by the president and board of trustees, or in any official notice, advertisement or document of the village or in any contract to which the
village is a party, it shall be understood to refer to the official time of the village as herein prescribed. When the words "daylight saving time" are
used, the reference shall be to the advanced time herein prescribed as the official time from the last Sunday in April until the last Sunday in
October.
In all motions, resolutions or ordinances of the president and board of trustees, in all official notices, advertisements or documents of the village
and in all contracts to which the village is a party relating to the time of performance of any act by any officer or department of the village, or
relating to the time within which any rights shall accrue or determine, or within which any act shall or shall not be performed by any person, it shall
be understood and intended that the time shall be the official time of the village as herein prescribed. (1987 Code)
1-10-5: WHISTLEBLOWER REWARD AND PROTECTION ACT:
The provisions of the whistleblower reward and protection act, 740 Illinois Compiled Statutes 175/1 et seq., are hereby adopted by reference.
(Ord. 2006-08, 4-17-2006)
1-10-6: FEES FOR REPRODUCTION AND CERTIFICATION OF DOCUMENTS:
A fee of twenty five cents ($0.25) per page shall be charged for the reproduction of any document requested from the village. For a large
reproduction request, the village may require a deposit for the estimated cost of reproduction prior to complying with the request. If the village
overestimated the final actual cost, any overage shall be returned to the individual who made the request. The village may also elect to send a
reproduction request to an outside third party vendor, in which case the individual making such request shall be charged for the actual cost
charged by the vendor as well as any delivery or shipping fees incurred by the village in complying with such a request. (Ord. 2006-20, 8-21-
2006)
Chapter 11
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITY
1-11-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as, and may be cited as, the LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITY
ORDINANCE. (Ord. 2000-16, 12-18-2000)
1-11-2: SCOPE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 22/387
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the Village's procedures in connection with all of the Village's locally imposed and administered taxes.
(Ord. 2000-16, 12-18-2000)
1-11-3: DEFINITIONS:
Certain words or terms herein shall have the meanings ascribed to them as follows:
ACT: The "Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act".
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The Village's President and Board of Trustees.
LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR: The Village Treasurer or his/her designee is charged with the administration and collection of the locally imposed
and administered taxes, including staff, employees or agents to the extent they are authorized by the Local Tax Administrator to act in the Local
Tax Administrator's stead. The Local Tax Administrator shall have the authority to implement the terms of this chapter to give full effect to this
chapter. The exercise of such authority by the Local Tax Administrator shall not be inconsistent with this chapter and the Act.
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX OR TAX: Each tax imposed by the Village that is collected or administered by the Village not an
agency or department of the State. It does not include any taxes imposed upon real property under the Property Tax Code or fees collected by the
Village other than infrastructure maintenance fees.
NOTICE: Each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice or communication in connection with each of the Village's locally imposed and
administered taxes.
TAX ORDINANCE: Each ordinance adopted by the Village that imposes any locally imposed and administered tax.
TAXPAYER: Any person required to pay any locally imposed and administered tax and generally includes the person upon whom the legal
incidence of such tax is placed and with respect to Consumer Taxes includes the business or entity required to collect and pay the locally
imposed and administered tax to the village.
VILLAGE: The village of Broadview, Illinois. (Ord. 2000-16, 12-18-2000)
1-11-4: NOTICES:
Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given, the notice is to be in writing mailed not less than seven (7) calendar days
prior to the day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other scheduled act of the local tax administrator. The notice shall be sent by the local
tax administrator as follows:
A. First-class or express mail, or overnight mail, addressed to the persons concerned at the persons' last known address; or
B. Personal service or delivery. (Ord. 2000-16, 12-18-2000)
1-11-5: LATE PAYMENT:
Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to the village pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it
is: a) physically received by the village on or before the due date, or b) received in an envelope or other container displaying a valid, readable
U.S. postmark dated on or before the due date, properly addressed to the village, with adequate postage prepaid. (Ord. 2000-16, 12-18-2000)
1-11-6: PAYMENT:
Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in the following order: a) first to the tax due for the applicable period; b)
second to the interest due for the applicable period; and c) third to the penalty for the applicable period. (Ord. 2000-16, 12-18-2000)
1-11-7: CERTAIN CREDITS AND REFUNDS:
A. The village shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid without written protest at the time of payment in the event that a locally imposed
and administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer shall not be
deemed to have paid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts upon which to protest the taxes at the time of payment or
if the taxpayer paid the taxes under duress.
B. The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund shall be two (2) or less years after the end of the calendar year in which payment in
error was made. The village shall not grant a credit or refund of locally imposed and administered taxes, interest, or penalties to a person who
has not paid the amounts directly to the village.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 23/387
C. The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as follows:
1. The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator in writing a claim for credit or refund together with a statement specifying:
a. The name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to the claim;
b. The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax subject to the claim;
c. The date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the canceled check or receipt for the payment;
d. The taxpayer's recalculation, accompanied by an amended or revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and
e. A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and penalties overpaid,
and, as applicable, related interest on the amount overpaid; provided, however, that there shall be no refund and only a credit given in the
event the taxpayer owes any monies to the village.
2. Within thirty (30) days of the receipt by the local tax administrator of any claim for a refund or credit, the local tax administrator shall either:
a. Grant the claim; or
b. Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement as to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial; or
c. Provide a written notice that the local tax administrator cannot make a determination within the initial thirty (30) day period in which event
a decision shall be made within sixty (60) days of the receipt of the claim.
3. In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or credit
shall bear interest at the rate of three percent (3%) per annum, based on a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days and the number of
days elapsed, from the date of the overpayment to the date of mailing of a refund check or the grant of a credit. (Ord. 2000-16, 12-18-2000)
1-11-8: AUDIT PROCEDURE:
Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any local administered tax shall comply with the notice requirements of this chapter.
A. Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:
1. The tax;
2. The time period of the audit; and
3. A brief description of the books and records to be made available for the auditor.
B. Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and if the date and time selected by the local tax administrator is not agreeable to
the taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer within thirty (30) days after the originally designated audit and during
normal business hours.
C. The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit conducted. The audit shall be conducted not less than seven (7) days nor
more than thirty (30) days from the date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer and the local tax administrator agreed to some other
convenient time.
D. Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the taxpayer's business or activities, including original source documents and books
of entry denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have given rise to any tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be
kept in the English language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by the village.
E. It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make available its books and records for inspection by the village. If the taxpayer fails to
provide the documents necessary for audit within the time provided, the local tax administrator may issue a tax determination and assessment
based on the tax administrator's determination of the best estimate of the taxpayer's tax liability.
F. If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice of the
amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within sixty (60) days of the village's determination of the amount of overpayment.
G. In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect local governmental entity, the local tax administrator shall notify the local
governmental entity imposing such tax. (Ord. 2000-16, 12-18-2000)
1-11-9: APPEAL:
A. The local tax administrator shall send written notice to a taxpayer upon the local tax administrator's issuance of a protestable notice of tax due,
a bill, a claim denial, or a notice of claim reduction regarding any tax. The notice shall include the following information:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 24/387
1. The reason for the assessment;
2. The amount of the tax liability proposed;
3. The procedure for appealing the assessment; and
4. The obligations of the village during the audit, appeal, refund and collection process.
B. A taxpayer who receives written notice from the local tax administrator of a determination of tax due or assessment may file with the local tax
administrator a written protest and petition for hearing, setting forth the basis of the taxpayer's request for a hearing. The written protest and
petition for hearing must be filed with the local tax administrator within forty five (45) days of receipt of the written notice of the tax
determination and assessment.
C. If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed, the local tax administrator shall fix the time and place for hearing and shall give written
notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled for a date within thirty (30) days of receipt of the written protest and petition for hearing,
unless the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties.
D. If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed within the forty five (45) day period, the tax determination, audit or assessment shall
become a final bill due and owing without further notice.
E. Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full payment of the contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of the
due date of the tax, the local tax administrator may reopen or extend the time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing. In no event
shall the time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing be reopened or extended for more than sixty (60) days after the expiration of
the forty five (45) day period. (Ord. 2000-16, 12-18-2000)
1-11-10: HEARING:
A. Whenever a taxpayer has filed a timely written protest and petition for hearing under section 1-11-9 of this chapter, the local tax administrator
shall conduct a hearing regarding any appeal.
B. No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack of
preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance granted shall not exceed fourteen (14) days.
C. At the hearing the local tax administrator shall preside and shall hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax determination,
audit or assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings shall not apply.
D. At the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax administrator shall make a written determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the
hearing. The taxpayer shall be provided with a copy of the written decision. (Ord. 2000-16, 12-18-2000)
1-11-11: INTEREST AND PENALTIES:
In the event a determination has been made that a tax is due and owing, through audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be paid within
the time frame otherwise indicated.
A. Interest: The village hereby provides for the amount of interest to be assessed on a late payment, underpayment, or nonpayment of the tax, to
be five percent (5%) per annum, based on a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days and the number of days elapsed.
B. Late Filing And Payment Penalties: If a tax return is not filed within the time and manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing
penalty, of five percent (5%) of the amount of tax required to be shown as due on a return shall be imposed; and a late payment penalty of five
percent (5%) of the tax due shall be imposed. If no return is filed within the time or manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance and prior
to the village issuing a notice of tax delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure to file penalty shall be assessed equal to twenty five
percent (25%) of the total tax due for the applicable reporting period for which the return was required to be filed. A late filing or payment
penalty shall not apply if a failure to file penalty is imposed by the controlling ordinance. (Ord. 2000-16, 12-18-2000)
1-11-12: ABATEMENT:
The local tax administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate any late filing penalty, late payment penalty or failure to file penalty if the
local tax administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay or failure to make a filing. (Ord. 2000-16, 12-18-2000)
1-11-13: INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS:
The village may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for the payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The local tax
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 25/387
administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice
by the local tax administrator that the payment is thirty (30) days delinquent, the taxpayer shall have fourteen (14) working days to cure any
delinquency. If the taxpayer fails to cure the delinquency within the fourteen (14) day period or fails to demonstrate good faith in restructuring the
installment contract with the local administrator, the installment contract shall be canceled without further notice to the taxpayer. (Ord. 2000-16,
12-18-2000)
1-11-14: STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS:
The village, through the local tax administrator, shall review all tax returns in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any amounts
due and owing. The taxpayer shall have forty five (45) days after receiving notice of the reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund or
provide any tax still due and owing.
A. No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than four (4) years after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the
applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.
B. If any tax return is not filed or if during any four (4) year period for which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by the
Village, the tax paid was less than seventy five percent (75%) of the tax due, the statute of limitations shall be six (6) years maximum after the
end of the calendar year in which return for the applicable period was due or end of the calendar year in which the return for the applicable
period was filed.
C. No statute of limitations shall apply if a fraudulent tax return was filed by the taxpayer. (Ord. 2000-16, 12-18-2000)
1-11-15: VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE:
For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has not received a written notice of an audit, investigation, or assessment from
the Local Tax Administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application with the Local Tax Administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A
taxpayer filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of tax due, along with interest of one percent (1%) per month, for
all periods prior to the filing of the application but not more than four (4) years before the date of filing the application. A taxpayer filing a valid
voluntary disclosure application may not be liable for any additional tax, interest, or penalty for any period before the date the application was
filed. However, if the taxpayer incorrectly determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the taxpayer is liable for the underpaid tax along with
applicable interest on the underpaid tax, unless the underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the taxpayer, in which case the
application shall be deemed invalid and void. The payment of tax and interest must be made by no later than ninety (90) days after the filing of the
voluntary disclosure application or the date agreed to by the Local Tax Administrator. However, any additional amounts owed as a result of an
underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under this section must be paid within ninety (90) days after a final determination and the
exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed to by the Local Tax Administrator, whichever is longer. (Ord. 2000-16,
12-18-2000)
1-11-16: PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES:
Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or standard publishing requirements. The posting of a tax ordinance on the
internet shall satisfy the publication requirements. Copies of all tax ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request at the Village
Clerk's Office. (Ord. 2000-16, 12-18-2000)
1-11-17: LIENS:
The Local Tax Administrator shall establish an internal review procedure regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes. Upon a
determination by the Local Tax Administrator that the lien is valid, the lien shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is determined to be
improper, the Local Tax Administrator shall:
A. Timely remove the lien at the Village's expense;
B. Correct the taxpayer's credit record; and
C. Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien. (Ord. 2000-16, 12-18-2000)
1-11-18: APPLICATION:
This chapter shall be liberally construed and administered to supplement all of the Village's tax ordinances. To the extent that any tax ordinance is
in conflict with or inconsistent with this chapter, this chapter shall be controlling. (Ord. 2000-16, 12-18-2000)
1-11-19: HOME RULE PROPERTY TAX CAP:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 26/387
A. Applicability And Purpose: This section shall apply only if the Village is a home rule unit. The purpose of this section is to restrict the Village's
authority to levy Property Taxes. As set forth in this section, the Village is limited in the amount of Property Taxes it may increase its levy over
the prior year to the lesser of five percent (5%) or the consumer price index.
B. Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following words and phrases have the following meanings:
AGGREGATE LEVY: The annual levy of Property Taxes by the Village for all purposes, with the exception of:
1. Amounts levied for the specific purposes of special service areas;
2. Amounts levied for payments of debt service up to an amount equal to that allowed to the Village under the PTELL while the Village was a
non-home rule unit; and
3. Other amounts excluded from the aggregate levy under the PTELL or other State Statute.
CONSUMER PRICE INDEX: The Consumer Price Index for all urban consumers for all items, published by the United States Department of
Labor.
LEVY CAP: The amount of the aggregate levy for the year preceding the effective date hereof increased each year thereafter by the lesser of
five percent (5%) or the percentage increase in the annualized consumer price index from December of two (2) years prior to the current levy
year to December of one year prior to the current levy year.
PTELL: The Property Tax Extension Limitation Law, as amended.
VILLAGE: The Village of Broadview and any other entity with the authority to levy taxes through the Village's authority to levy taxes.
C. Tax Cap: The Village shall not certify to the Cook County Clerk an aggregate levy in one year that exceeds the levy cap.
D. Tax Increase: The Village shall be limited in the amount of Property Taxes it may increase its levy over the prior year to the lesser of five
percent (5%) or the consumer price index, unless the electors of the Village, pursuant to a referendum to be initiated by the Village Board,
approve an increase in excess of the foregoing. (Ord. 2014-83, 11-17-2014)
Chapter 12
TAX INCREMENT FINANCING "INTERESTED PARTIES" REGISTRIES1
1-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in these registration rules, the following terms shall have the definitions set forth below:
ACT: The tax increment allocation redevelopment act, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-74.4-1 et seq., as amended from time to time.
INTERESTED PARTY(S): Any individual or organization or entity registered in a specific registry who has registered in such registry and whose
registration has not been terminated in accordance with these registration rules.
REDEVELOPMENT PROJECT AREA: A redevelopment project area that: a) is intended to qualify (or has subsequently qualified) as a
"Redevelopment Project Area" under the act, and b) is subject to the "Interested Parties" registry requirements of the act.
REGISTRATION FORM: The form appended to these registration rules or such revised form as may be approved by the village consistent with
the requirements of the act.
REGISTRY OR REGISTRIES: Each interested parties registry, and all such registries, collectively, established by the village pursuant to section
11-74.4-4.2 of the act for the redevelopment project area.
VILLAGE: The village of Broadview, an Illinois municipal corporation. (Ord. 2001-02, 2-20-2001)
1-12-2: ESTABLISHMENT OF REGISTRY:
The village shall establish a separate interested parties registry for each redevelopment project area, whether existing as of the date of the
adoption of these rules or hereafter established. The village shall establish a new registry whenever it has identified an area for study and
possible designation as a redevelopment project area. In any event the process of establishing the new registry must be completed prior to the
deadline for sending any of the notices required by section 1-12-9 of this chapter or any other notices required by the act with respect to the
proposed redevelopment project area. (Ord. 2001-02, 2-20-2001)
1-12-3: MAINTENANCE OF REGISTRY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 27/387
The registries shall be maintained by the village clerk or his or her designee. In the event the village determines that an individual other than the
clerk should maintain the registries, the village may transfer the responsibility for maintaining the registries to such other department provided that
the village: a) gives prior written notice to all interested parties not less than thirty (30) days prior to such transfer, and b) published notice of such
transfer in a newspaper of general circulation in the village. (Ord. 2001-02, 2-20-2001)
1-12-4: REGISTRATION PROCEDURE:
A. Registration By Residents: An individual seeking to register as an interested person with respect to a redevelopment project area must
complete and submit a registration form to the village clerk.
B. Registration By Organization: An organization seeking to register as an interested person with respect to a redevelopment project area must
complete and submit a registration form to the village clerk. (Ord. 2001-02, 2-20-2001)
1-12-5: DETERMINATION OF ELIGIBILITY:
All individuals and organizations whose registration form and supporting documentation complies with these registration rules shall be registered
in the applicable registry within ten (10) business days of the village clerk's receipt of all such documents. The clerk shall provide written notice to
the registrant confirming such registration. Upon registration interested parties shall be entitled to receive all notices and documents required to
be delivered under these rules or as otherwise required under the act with respect to the applicable redevelopment project area. If the village
clerk determines that a registrant's registration form and/or supporting documentation is incomplete or does not comply with these registration
rules, the clerk shall give written notice to the registrant specifying the defect(s), the registrant shall be entitled to correct any defects and resubmit
a new registration form and supporting documentation. (Ord. 2001-02, 2-20-2001)
1-12-6: RENEWAL AND TERMINATION:
An interested person's registration shall remain effective for a period of three (3) years. At any time after such three (3) year period the village
clerk may provide written notice by regular mail to the interested person stating that such registration shall terminate unless the interested person
renews such registration within thirty (30) days of the clerk's mailing of written notice. To renew such registration, the interested person shall,
within such thirty (30) day period, complete and submit the same registration form then required for initial registrants operations in the village. The
registration of all individuals and organizations whose registration form is submitted in a timely manner and complies with these registration rules
shall be renewed for an additional, consecutive three (3) year period. If the village clerk determines that a registrant's renewal registration form is
incomplete or does not comply with these registration rules, the clerk shall give written notice to the registrant at the address specified in the
renewal registration form submitted by such registrant, specifying the defect(s). The registrant shall be entitled to correct any defects and
resubmit a new registration form within thirty (30) days of receipt of the clerk's notice. If all defects are not corrected within thirty (30) days of the
interested person's receipt of the village clerk's notice, the interested person's registration shall be terminated. Any interested person whose
registration is terminated shall be entitled to register again as if a first-time registrant. (Ord. 2001-02, 2-20-2001)
1-12-7: AMENDMENT TO REGISTRATION:
An interested party may amend its registration by giving written notice to the village clerk by certified mail of any of the following: a) change in
address for notice purposes; b) in the case of organizations, a change in the name of the contact person; and c) a termination of registration.
Upon receipt of such notice, the clerk shall revise the applicable registry accordingly. (Ord. 2001-02, 2-20-2001)
1-12-8: REGISTRIES AVAILABLE FOR PUBLIC INSPECTION:
Each registry shall be available for public inspection during normal business hours. The registry shall include the name, address and telephone
number of each interested person and for organizations, the name and phone number of a designated contact person. (Ord. 2001-02, 2-20-2001)
1-12-9: NOTICES TO BE SENT TO INTERESTED PARTIES:
Interested parties shall be sent the following notices and any other notices required under the act with respect to the applicable redevelopment
project area:
A. Pursuant to subsection 74.4-5(a) of the act, notice of the availability of a proposed redevelopment plan and eligibility report, including how to
obtain this information, such notice shall be sent by mail within a reasonable period of time after the adoption of the ordinance fixing the public
hearing for the proposed redevelopment plan.
B. Pursuant to subsection 74.4-5(a) of the act, notice of changes to proposed redevelopment plans that do not: 1) add additional parcels of
property to the proposed redevelopment project area, 2) substantially affect the general land uses proposed in the redevelopment plan, 3)
substantially change the nature of or extend the life of the redevelopment project, or 4) increase the number of low or very low income
households to be displaced from the redevelopment project area, provided that measured from the time of creation of the redevelopment
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 28/387
project area the total displacement of inhabited households will exceed ten (10); such notice shall be sent by mail not later than ten (10) days
following the village's adoption by ordinance of such changes.
C. Pursuant to subsection 74.4-5(d)(9) of the act for redevelopment plans or projects that would result in the displacement of residents from ten
(10) or more inhabited residential units or that contain seventy five (75) or more inhabited residential units, notice of the availability of the
annual report described by subsection 74.4-5(d) of this act, including how to obtain the annual report; such notice shall be sent by mail within
a reasonable period of time after completion of the certified audit report.
D. Pursuant to subsection 74.4-6(e) of the act, notice of the preliminary public meeting required under the act for a proposed redevelopment
project area that will result in the displacement of ten (10) or more inhabited residential units or which will contain seventy five (75) or more
inhabited residential units; such notice shall be sent by certified mail not less than fifteen (15) days before the date of such preliminary public
meeting.
E. Pursuant to subsection 5/11-74.4-6(e) of the act, notice of the preliminary public meeting required under the act for a proposed redevelopment
project area that will result in the displacement of ten (10) or more inhabited residential units, such notice will be sent by certified mail not less
than fifteen (15) days before the date of such preliminary public meeting. (Ord. 2001-02, 2-20-2001)
1-12-10: NONINTERFERENCE:
These registration rules shall not be used to prohibit or otherwise interfere with the ability of eligible organizations and individuals to register for
receipt of information to which they are entitled under the act. (Ord. 2001-02, 2-20-2001)
1-12-11: AMENDMENT OF REGISTRATION RULES:
These registration rules may be amended by the village subject to and consistent with the requirements of the act. (Ord. 2001-02, 2-20-2001)
Chapter 13
CODE HEARING DEPARTMENT
1-13-1: PURPOSE:
The stated purpose of this chapter is to provide for the fair and efficient enforcement of the village ordinances as may be allowed by law and
directed by ordinance, through the adjudication of violations of such village ordinances and establishing procedures for collection of unpaid fines
and penalties. (Ord. 2001-25, 11-5-2001)
1-13-2: CREATION:
A. Pursuant to the statutory authority granted by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2.2-1 et seq., the village of Broadview code hearing department
is hereby established which shall have the power to enforce compliance with all municipal ordinances as from time to time authorized by the
board of trustees, except for any offense under the Illinois vehicle code or a similar offense that is a traffic regulation governing the movement
of vehicles and except for any reportable offense under section 6-204 of the Illinois vehicle code. The code hearing department shall also have
the authority to adjudicate and enforce building code violations pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-31.1-1 et seq.
B. The provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2.2-1 et seq., as it may be amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and incorporated
into this chapter as if fully set forth herein.
C. The provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-31.1-1 et seq., as it may be amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and
incorporated into this chapter as if fully set forth herein.
D. The department shall be administered by an ordinance enforcement administrator, and staffed by hearing officers and other employees as may
be needed, appointed by the president, subject to approval by the board of trustees.
E. The establishment of the village of Broadview code hearing department does not preclude the village from using any other method to enforce
municipal ordinances. (Ord. 2001-25, 11-5-2001)
1-13-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to code hearing proceedings conducted by the village of Broadview code hearing department to the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 29/387
extent that they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this code which set forth specific procedures for the code hearings of particular code
provisions. (Ord. 2001-25, 11-5-2001)
1-13-4: ORDINANCE ENFORCEMENT ADMINISTRATOR; POWERS AND DUTIES:
The powers and duties of the ordinance enforcement administrator shall include:
A. Directing the department with respect to its management and structure.
B. Promulgating rules and regulations for the conduct of code hearing proceedings.
C. Adopt, distribute and process all notices as may be required under this chapter or as may be reasonably required to carry out the purpose of
this chapter.
D. Collecting monies paid as fines, penalties and/or cost assessed after a final determination of the existence of a violation.
E. Certifying copies of a final determination of a code violation adjudicated pursuant to this chapter and any report verifying a final determination
of the existence of a code violation, issued in accordance with this chapter.
F. Keeping accurate records of the proceedings, including, but not limited to, appearances, nonappearances, pleas entered, and fines and
penalties assessed and paid.
G. Collecting unpaid fines and penalties through private collection agencies.
H. Establishing any other necessary rules and regulations as may be required to carry out the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2001-25, 11-5-
2001)
I. Certify reports to the secretary of state concerning initiation of suspension of driving privileges in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
as hereinafter set forth and those of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-306.5. (Ord. 09-41, 9-8-2009)
1-13-5: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The rules and regulations promulgated for the conduct of code hearings shall be published and kept on file in the office of the village clerk where
they shall be available to the public for inspection and copying at standard fees during business hours. (Ord. 2001-25, 11-5-2001)
1-13-6: HEARING OFFICERS QUALIFICATIONS:
Any person appointed, as a hearing officer shall:
A. Be an attorney licensed to practice law in the state for not less than three (3) years and shall be in good standing with the attorney registration
discipline committee.
B. Prior to conducting code hearings, have successfully completed a formal training program which includes the following:
1. Instruction on the rules of procedure of the code hearings to be conducted.
2. Orientation to each subject area of the code violations to be adjudicated.
3. Observation of code hearings.
4. Participation in hypothetical cases, including ruling on evidence and issuing final orders. (Ord. 2001-25, 11-5-2001)
1-13-7: HEARING OFFICERS; POWERS AND DUTIES:
Hearing officers shall preside over code hearings and shall have all powers necessary to conduct fair and impartial hearings including, but not
limited to:
A. Holding conferences for the settlement or simplification of the issues.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 30/387
B. Administering oaths and affirmations to witnesses.
C. Hearing testimony and accepting evidence that is relevant to the existence of a code violation.
D. Rule upon motions, objections and the admissibility of evidence.
E. At the request of any party or on the hearing officer's own motion, the hearing officer may subpoena the attendance of relevant witnesses and
the production of relevant books, records, or other information.
F. Preserve the record of the hearing, including all exhibits and evidence admitted into the record at the hearing.
G. Regulate the course of the hearing in accordance with this chapter, the rules adopted by the code hearing department, or other applicable law.
H. Issue a determination based upon a review of the notice of violation and on the evidence submitted. The determination shall be in writing, shall
be signed by the hearing officer, and shall be designated as findings, decision, and order.
I. Upon finding that a code violation exists, impose fines, penalties and costs consistent with applicable code provisions, except however, that in
no event shall the hearing officer have authority to impose a penalty of incarceration.
J. When applicable, each day a code provision is found to have been violated by the defendant shall constitute a separate offense, and each
separate offense subjects the defendant to the penalty provided by the governing penalty provision.
K. Asking questions of the parties and witnesses, if necessary, to ensure the clarity and completeness of the testimony and the record. (Ord.
2001-25, 11-5-2001)
1-13-8: INSTITUTING CODE HEARING PROCEEDINGS:
Any authorized department or agency of the village may institute a code hearing proceeding with the code hearing department by forwarding a
copy of a notice of violation to the code hearing department. (Ord. 2001-25, 11-5-2001)
1-13-9: NOTICE AND SERVICE:
All matters to be adjudicated by the code hearing department shall be commenced against the party alleged to have violated one or more code
provision(s) by issuing and serving upon that party a notice of violation and shall be conducted in accordance with the following procedures:
A. All police officers, the building commissioner, village inspectors, as well as other specifically authorized individuals of any village department
shall have the authority to issue a notice of violation.
B. The notice of violation shall contain, but shall not be limited to, the following information:
1. The name and address of the person or entity being charged with the alleged violation.
2. The sections of the code alleged to have been violated.
3. The date, time and place of the alleged violation.
4. A legally sufficient description of the activity or conduct alleged to constitute a violation of each code section set forth in the notice of
violation or a legally sufficient description of the facts giving rise to the allegations set forth in the notice of violation.
5. The name and identification number of the issuer of the notice of violation, certifying the correctness of the information by signing his or her
name to the notice.
6. The complainant's name if the complainant is not the issuing village officer or employee.
7. The legal authority and jurisdiction under which the hearing is to be held and the penalties for failure to appear at the hearing.
C. Unless otherwise provided by law or rule:
1. A notice of violation shall be served upon the alleged violator by first-class mail along with a summons, indicating the date, time, and
location of the hearing, commanding the appearance of the defendant. The hearing date shall not be less than thirty (30) nor more than forty
(40) days after the violation is reported.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 31/387
2. For violations issued pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-31.1-1, where property owners are required to register with the village,
service may be made on the owner by mailing the report and the summons to the owner's address registered with the village.
3. For violations issued pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-31.1-1, if the name of the owner of the structure cannot be ascertained
or if service on the owner cannot be made by mail, service may also be made on the owner by posting or nailing a copy of the violation
report form on the front door of the structure where the violation is found, not less than twenty (20) days before the hearing is scheduled.
(Ord. 2001-25, 11-5-2001)
1-13-10: CODE HEARINGS:
A. All code hearings conducted by the code hearing department are open to the public and shall be presided over by a duly appointed hearing
officer who is charged with providing the parties a full and fair opportunity to be heard.
B. An attorney, or any other agent or representative who appears on behalf of any person, shall file with the hearing officer a written appearance
on a form provided by the department.
C. In no event shall the case for the village be presented by an employee of the code hearing department, provided, however, that documentary
evidence, including the notice of violation, which has been prepared by another department or agency of the village may be presented at the
hearing by the hearing officer.
D. The hearing officer may grant continuances only upon a showing of good cause. Lack of preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance.
Any continuance granted by the hearing officer shall not exceed twenty five (25) days.
E. All testimony shall be given under oath or affirmation.
F. The formal and technical rules of evidence shall not apply in the conduct of the hearing. Evidence including hearsay, may be admitted only if it
is of a type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs.
G. No violation may be established except upon proof by a preponderance of the evidence, provided, however, that a notice of violation, or a copy
thereof, issued, signed and served in accordance with section 1-13-9 of this chapter shall be prima facie evidence of the correctness of the
facts specified therein.
H. The ordinance enforcement administrator shall determine the manner in which the record shall be preserved. Such preservation may be made
by tape recording or other appropriate means. Recording by any means by any member of the public is prohibited unless expressly authorized
by the ordinance enforcement administrator. The record of all hearings before a hearing officer shall include: 1) a record of the testimony
presented at the hearing, which may be made by tape recording or other appropriate means; 2) all documents, exhibits, and other physical
evidence presented at the hearing and admitted into evidence; 3) a copy of the notice of violation and notice of hearing; and 4) a copy of the
findings and decision and order of the hearing officer. (Ord. 2001-25, 11-5-2001)
I. At the conclusion of a hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a finding, decision and order, on the basis of the evidence presented at the
hearing, as to the existence of a code violation. If a code violation is found to exist the hearing officer may: 1) impose penalties and/or fines
that are consistent with applicable provisions of this code not exceeding seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense; however a
separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues, unless otherwise
provided; 2) issue orders that are consistent with applicable provisions of this code; and/or 3) assess costs reasonably related to instituting the
code hearing proceeding; provided, however, that in no event shall the hearing officer have the authority to impose a penalty of imprisonment.
(Ord. 2005-22, 8-8-2005)
J. At the conclusion of a hearing, the hearing officer shall inform the parties orally and in writing as to his or her determination and the defendant's
right to seek judicial review of the decision. (Ord. 2001-25, 11-5-2001)
1-13-11: DEFENSES TO CODE VIOLATIONS:
It shall be a defense to a code violation written pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-31.1 if:
A. The code violation alleged in the notice does not in fact exist, or at the time of the hearing the violation has been remedied or removed.
B. The code violation has been caused by the current property occupants and that in spite of reasonable attempts by the owner to maintain the
dwelling free of such violation(s), the current occupants continue to cause the violation.
C. An occupant or resident of the dwelling has refused entry to the owner or his agent to all or a part of the dwelling for the purpose of correcting
the code violation. (Ord. 2001-25, 11-5-2001)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 32/387
1-13-12: DEFAULTS:
A. If on the date set for hearing the defendant, or his attorney or agent of record, fails to appear, the hearing officer shall proceed with the hearing
and accept evidence relevant to the existence of a code violation and may enter a default finding against the defendant as to the existence of
code violations, imposing fines, penalties and assess costs.
B. A copy of the order of default shall be served in any manner for service of a notice of violation permitted by this chapter and applicable to the
violation.
C. A copy of the order of default shall apprise the defendant of the procedure for setting aside the default decision.
D. A defendant against whom an order of default is entered may file a motion with the code hearing department to set aside the order of default
and for a new hearing date. A motion to set aside an order of default must be filed within twenty one (21) days from the date of mailing.
E. A motion to set aside an order of default shall set forth the reason(s) the defendant failed to appear on the original hearing date. A hearing
officer shall hear and rule on the motion. If the hearing officer determines that the defendant's failure to appear at the hearing was for good
cause and grants the motion, a hearing will be held immediately on the alleged code violation set forth in the notice of violation unless the
defendant requests another hearing date and presents a showing of good cause for continuing the hearing.
F. If any default judgment is set aside pursuant to this section, the hearing officer shall have authority to enter an order extinguishing any lien
which has been recorded for any debt due and owing the village as a result of the vacated default judgment. (Ord. 2001-25, 11-5-2001)
1-13-13: JUDICIAL REVIEW:
Any final decision by a hearing officer that a code violation does or does not exist shall constitute a final determination for purposes of judicial
review under the Illinois administrative review law. (Ord. 2001-25, 11-5-2001)
1-13-14: FINAL DETERMINATION OF THE EXISTENCE OF CODE VIOLATIONS:
A final determination shall occur following the failure to pay the fine or penalty after the hearing officer's determination of the existence of a
violation, and the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, any administrative review procedures hereinafter set forth. (Ord. 2001-25, 11-5-2001)
1-13-15: ENFORCEMENT OF JUDGMENTS:
A. Any fine, other sanction, or cost imposed, or part of any fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of or the
failure to exhaust judicial review procedures under the Illinois administrative review law shall be a debt due and owing the municipality and be
collected in accordance with applicable law.
B. After expiration of the period in which judicial review under the Illinois administrative review law may be sought for a final determination of the
code violation, the municipality may commence a proceeding in the circuit court of the county in which the municipality is located for purpose
of obtaining a judgment on the findings, decision and order for the amount indicated.
C. Nothing in this section shall prevent the village from consolidating multiple findings, decisions, and orders against a person in such a
proceeding.
D. Upon commencement of the action, the village shall file a certified copy of the findings, decision, and order, which shall be accompanied by a
certification that recites facts sufficient to show that the findings, decision, and order was issued in accordance with this chapter and other
applicable ordinances. Service of the summons and a copy of the petition may be by any method provided for by section 2-203 of the code of
civil procedure or by certified mail, return receipt requested.
E. If the court is satisfied that the findings, decision and order was entered in accordance with state statutes, the provisions of this chapter and
other municipal ordinances, and that the defendant had an opportunity for a hearing under this chapter and for judicial review, the court shall
render judgment in favor of the village and against the defendant for the amount indicated in the findings, decision and order, plus cost.
F. Any judgment rendered in favor of the village and against the defendant shall have the same effect and may be enforced in the same manner
as other judgments for the recovery of money.
G. A lien shall be imposed on the real estate or personal estate, or both, of the defendant in the amount of any debt due and owing the
municipality under this section. The lien may be recorded and enforced in the same manner as a judgment lien pursuant to a judgment of a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 33/387
court of competent jurisdiction. No item may be enforced under this section until it has been recorded in the manner provided by article XII of
the code of civil procedure or by the uniform commercial code.
H. Nothing in this section shall prevent the village from enforcing or seeking to enforce any order of a hearing officer in any manner provided by
law. (Ord. 2001-25, 11-5-2001)
1-13-16: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS:
A. If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this chapter shall be held invalid, the invalidity thereof shall not affect any of the other
provisions of this chapter.
B. All ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
C. This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and publication as provided by law. (Ord. 2001-25, 11-5-2001)
1-13-17: EVICTION, RIGHTS OF OCCUPANTS:
In the case of a building code violation, no action for eviction, abatement of a nuisance, forcible entry and detainer or other similar proceeding
shall be threatened or instituted against an occupant of a dwelling solely because such occupant agrees to testify or testifies at a code violation
hearing. (Ord. 09-41, 9-8-2009)
1-13-18: SANCTIONS APPLICABLE TO THE BUILDING OWNER:
An order to correct a building code violation and the sanctions imposed by a municipality as the result of a finding of a code violation shall attach
to the property as well as to the owner of the property, so that a finding of a code violation against one owner cannot be avoided by conveying or
transferring the property to another owner. Further any subsequent transferee or owner of property shall be subject to the findings, decision, and
order of the hearing officer. (Ord. 09-41, 9-8-2009)
Chapter 14
OFFICE OF THE INDEPENDENT INSPECTOR GENERAL
1-14-1: OFFICE OF INDEPENDENT INSPECTOR GENERAL CREATED:
There is hereby created the Office of "Independent Inspector General" ("OIG") for the Village of Broadview to be appointed by majority vote of the
Corporate Authorities. (Ord. 2015-53, 7-6-2015)
1-14-2: TERM AND COMPENSATION:
The OIG shall serve for an initial term of approximately one year, which shall commence on the adoption date of this chapter and expire on April
30, 2016, and may be reappointed for successive one year terms by a majority vote of the Corporate Authorities of the Village. The OIG shall
serve without compensation. (Ord. 2015-53, 7-6-2015)
1-14-3: PURPOSE OF OFFICE:
The purpose of the OIG is to detect, deter and prevent corruption, fraud, waste, mismanagement, unlawful political discrimination, unlawful
activity and/or misconduct in the operation of Village government (collectively referred to elsewhere in this chapter as "misconduct"). "Unlawful
political discrimination" shall include, but not be limited to basing the terms and conditions of a non-exempt employee's employment such as
hiring, firing, promotion, transfer, discipline or termination on political reasons and factors. (Ord. 2015-53, 7-6-2015)
1-14-4: POWERS AND DUTIES OF OIG:
The OIG shall have the following powers and authorities:
A. To receive and register complaints concerning misconduct in the operation of Village government, including but not limited to:
1. Misconduct in connection with the Village's award of any contract, license, or benefit;
2. Misconduct of any Village employee;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 34/387
3. Misconduct of any elected or appointed official of the Village in the performance of his or her official duties;
4. Misconduct of contractors, vendors, and professional service providers who furnish goods and services to the Village;
5. Misconduct of persons and businesses seeking to do business with the Village; and
6. Retaliation against any Village employee or elected or appointed officials of the Village based upon their cooperation with the OIG.
B. To investigate misconduct in the operation of Village government, either in response to such complaints or on the OIG's own initiative. The OIG
acknowledges that it has read and understands the applicable provisions in State law (e.g., the Uniform Peace Officers' Disciplinary Act1), the
Village's Police Department General Orders and Procedures and its collective bargaining agreements that govern conducting internal
investigations for Village Police Department personnel and that failure to comply with the time periods and notice provisions regarding these
internal investigations can result in Village management being barred from prosecuting a Police Department employee for misconduct. It is
agreed by the OIG and the Village that investigations of Police Department employees by the OIG are subject to the applicable internal
investigation provisions of State law, the Village Police Department General Orders and Procedures and its collective bargaining agreements.
In conducting its investigations of alleged misconduct, the OIG agrees to cooperate with and assist the Police Chief, as warranted and
appropriate, including providing information, witness statements and other evidence, to allow the Village to pursue disciplinary action against
Village employees under applicable State law (e.g., Board of Fire and Police Commissioners Act2), the Village's Personnel Policy Manual, the
department General Orders and Procedures and its collective bargaining agreements. As it relates to the OIG's authority regarding the
Broadview Police Department, the OIG only has the authority to conduct OIG investigations, all other police matters remain within the
jurisdiction of the Broadview Police Department. The same provisions above will govern any OIG investigations of alleged misconduct within
other Village departments, subject to the applicable State laws, the Village's Personnel Policy Manual, any department General Orders and
Procedures and the applicable collective bargaining agreements.
C. To refer complaints and information regarding possible misconduct to the Mayor and Board of Trustees, Police Chief and other outside law
enforcement agencies, including, but not limited to the Cook County State's Attorney and United States Attorney, as warranted and as
appropriate. The OIG's referral of complaints and information regarding possible misconduct to the Mayor and Board of Trustees, as
warranted and appropriate, shall be done in order to ensure that appropriate discipline may be imposed in accordance with applicable State
law (e.g., Board of Fire and Police Commissioners Act3), the Village's Personnel Policy Manual, any department General Orders and
Procedures and the Village collective bargaining agreements.
D. To obtain information from, and conduct interviews under oath with Village employees, agents, contractors and persons doing or seeking to do
business with the Village for the purpose of investigating potential misconduct.
E. To provide periodic reports to the Mayor and Board of Trustees as to the status of matters within the scope of the OIG's authority, to the extent
such reporting would not impair the integrity of ongoing investigations.
F. To make recommendations for corrective action to the Mayor and Board of Trustees with respect to combating misconduct.
G. To maintain an OIG hotline number and email address in order to facilitate citizen and employee reports of misconduct.
H. In the event of any grievance arbitration or hearing before the Village Board of Fire and Police Commission arising from disciplinary charges or
actions taken by the Village against a Village employee based upon the results of an OIG investigation, OIG will fully cooperate with the
Village in the prosecution of the disciplinary action or defense of the grievance arbitration.
I. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as any limitation upon the existing legal authority of the Mayor and Board of Trustees to investigate,
prosecute and take remedial action in regards to issues or allegations of corruption, fraud, waste and other wrongdoing within all areas of the
Municipal government. The appointment of the Cook County Sheriff's Office as Inspector General for the Village shall be in conjunction with
the concurrent powers of the Corporate Authorities, and shall not divest the Corporate Authorities of any such powers, rights or duties. (Ord.
2015-53, 7-6-2015)
1-14-5: DUTY TO COOPERATE:
A. Upon proper notification of this chapter, it shall be the duty of all Village employees, elected and appointed officials, agents, independent
contractors to the Village, licensees, and those doing or seeking to do business with the Village, to cooperate with OIG in the conduct of any
investigation undertaken pursuant to OIG's authority.
B. Subject to Federal and State constitutional protections, State law employment rights, the Village's Personnel Policy Manual and any applicable
Village collective bargaining agreements, failure of any Village employee or appointed official to cooperate with OIG in regard to matters
covered by this chapter shall be considered, at the sole discretion of the Mayor and the Village Board of Trustees, cause for disciplinary
action, up to and including termination of employment or removal from office.
C. It shall be the duty of any party doing business with the Village to likewise cooperate with the OIG in regard to matters covered by this chapter.
Refusal to so cooperate shall be considered, at the sole discretion of the Mayor and the Village Board of Trustees, cause for termination of a
contract, license or similar benefit, or as grounds for the Village refusing to enter into a future contract, license or other benefit. (Ord. 2015-53,
7-6-2015)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 35/387
1-14-6: ACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF DUTY TO COOPERATE:
All contracts for goods and services, and all future licenses or other benefits issued by the Village after the effective date of this chapter, shall be
subject to the requirement that the individual or entity receiving the contract, license, or benefit, agree to fully comply with requirements of this
chapter relating to cooperation with the Inspector General's Office. (Ord. 2015-53, 7-6-2015)
1-14-7: DISSOLUTION:
This chapter can be repealed at any time by a majority vote of the Corporate Authorities of the Village. (Ord. 2015-53, 7-6-2015)
Chapter 15
SEXUAL HARASSMENT
1-15-1: PROHIBITION ON SEXUAL HARASSMENT:
It is unlawful to harass a person because of that person's sex, and sexual harassment is a form of discrimination under State and Federal law. All
persons have a right to work in an environment free from sexual harassment. Sexual harassment is unacceptable misconduct which affects
individuals of all genders and sexual orientations.
Therefore, it is the policy of the Village of Broadview (the "Village") to prohibit harassment of any person by any Village official, Village agent,
Village employee, or Village agency or office on the basis of sex or gender. All Village officials, Village agents, Village employees and Village
agencies or offices are prohibited from sexually harassing any person in the workplace or at work-related functions or activities, regardless of any
employment relationship or lack thereof. All Village officials, Village agents, Village employees and Village agencies or offices are encouraged to
report any incidents of sexual harassment as prescribed within this chapter. The Village takes every allegation of sexual harassment very
seriously, and all complaints received pursuant to this chapter will be fully investigated. Any official, agent or employee found to have acted in
violation of this chapter will be subject to appropriate disciplinary action, up to and including discharge. (Ord. 2018-01, 1-3-2018)
1-15-2: DEFINITION OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT:
For purposes of this chapter, the Village adopts the definition of sexual harassment used in the Illinois Human Rights Act. Under the Human
Rights Act sexual harassment is defined as:
A. Any unwelcome sexual advances or requests for sexual favors or any conduct of a sexual nature when:
1. Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or condition of an individual's employment,
2. Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used as the basis for employment decisions affecting such individual, or
3. Such conduct has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering with an individual's work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile
or offensive working environment.
B. Additionally, the following conduct may also constitute sexual harassment:
1. Verbal: Sexual innuendos, suggestive comments, insults, humor, jokes about sex, anatomy or gender-specific traits, sexual propositions,
threats, repeated requests for dates or statements about other employees of a sexual nature, even outside of their presence. The use of
terms such as "honey", "darling", and "sweetheart" may be objectionable to many individuals who believe that these terms undermine their
authority and their ability to deal with others on an equal and professional level. Therefore, employees should treat each other with respect
and refrain from using names or terms that may be offensive.
2. Non-verbal: Suggestive or insulting sounds (whistling), leering, obscene gestures, sexually suggestive bodily gestures, "catcalls",
"smacking" or "kissing" noises.
3. Visual: Displaying or circulating posters, signs, pin-ups or slogans of a sexual nature and viewing or circulating pornographic material or
websites.
4. Physical: Unwelcome touching, hugging, kissing, pinching, brushing up or against the body, any coerced sexual act, battery or assault.
5. Textual/electronic: "Sexting" (defined as sending electronic messages with sexual content and/or verbiage, which may or may not include
the sending of pictures and video), cyber stalking, the use of sexually explicit language, harassment, and threats via all forms of electronic
communication (including e-mail, text/picture/video messages, intranet/on-line postings, blogs, instant messages and social network
websites like Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, Snapchat, or other similar social networking platforms).
The most severe and overt forms of sexual harassment are easier to determine. On the other end of the spectrum, some sexual harassment
is more subtle and depends, to some extent, on individual perception and interpretation. A "reasonable person" standard shall apply to
assess claims of sexual harassment and determine what constitutes offensive behavior. (Ord. 2018-01, 1-3-2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 36/387
1-15-3: PROCEDURE FOR REPORTING SEXUAL HARASSMENT ALLEGATIONS:
A. An employee who either experiences or witnesses any form of sexual harassment or believes herself/himself to be the object of sexual
harassment should deal with the incident(s) as directly as possible by clearly communicating her/his position to the offender and her/his
immediate supervisor. An employee who either experiences or witnesses any form of sexual harassment or believes herself/himself to be the
object of sexual harassment should promptly report such incidents in accordance with the procedures described below. It is not necessary for
the sexual harassment to be directed at the person making the report. Early reporting and intervention have proven to be the most effective
method of resolving actual or perceived incidents of harassment or discrimination. Therefore, prompt reporting of complaints or concerns is
strongly encouraged by the Village to allow it to take rapid and constructive action. All sexual harassment complaints received will be
thoroughly investigated by the Village.
B. Any employee may make a complaint using the following procedures:
1. Electronic/Direct Communication With The Offender: If there is behavior which constitutes sexual harassment in the workplace, the
harassed employee should directly, firmly and clearly communicate that the conduct is unwelcome and request that the offending behavior
stop. The initial message may be verbal, but documentation of the notice should be made. If subsequent messages are needed, they should
be put in writing in a note or a memorandum.
2. Report/Contact With Supervisory Personnel: At the same time direct communication is undertaken, or in the event the employee feels
threatened or intimidated by the situation, the problem must be promptly reported to the immediate supervisor of the person making the
report, or if the employee feels uncomfortable speaking with the immediate supervisor, or the immediate supervisor is the source of the
problem, to a department head, Ethics Officer, or an appropriate member of management.
The employee experiencing what he or she believes to be sexual harassment must not assume that the employer is aware of the conduct. If
there are no witnesses and the victim fails to notify a supervisor or other responsible officer, the Village will not be presumed to have
knowledge of the harassment.
3. Resolution Outside The Village: All Village employees have the right to contact the Illinois Department of Human Rights (IDHR) or the Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) for information regarding filing a formal complaint with those entities.
4. Documentation Of Incident: Documentation of any incident may be submitted with any report (what was said or done, the date, the time and
the place), including, but not limited to, written records such as letters, notes, memos and telephone messages.
C. All allegations, including anonymous reports, will be accepted and investigated regardless of how the matter comes to the attention of the
Village. However, because of the serious implications of sexual harassment charges and the difficulties associated with their investigation and
the questions of credibility involved, the claimant's willing cooperation is a vital component of an effective inquiry and an appropriate outcome.
(Ord. 2018-01, 1-3-2018)
1-15-4: PROHIBITION ON RETALIATION FOR REPORTING SEXUAL HARASSMENT ALLEGATIONS:
A. The Village prohibits retaliation against any individual who reports sexual harassment. Specifically, no Village official, Village agent, Village
employee or Village agency or office shall take any retaliatory action against any Village employee due to a Village employee's:
1. Disclosure or threatened disclosure of any violation of this chapter;
2. Participation in any investigation, hearing or inquiry into any violation of this chapter before any public body; or
3. Assistance or participation in a proceeding to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
B. For the purposes of this chapter, retaliatory action means the reprimand, discharge, suspension, demotion, denial of promotion or transfer, or
change in the terms or conditions of employment of any Village employee that is taken in retaliation for a Village employee's involvement in
protected activity pursuant to this chapter.
C. No individual making a report will be retaliated against even if a report is not substantiated, as long as it was made in good faith. In addition,
any witness will be protected from retaliation.
D. The State Officials and Employees Ethics Act1 similarly provides whistleblower protection from retaliatory action such as reprimand, discharge,
suspension, demotion, or denial of promotion or transfer that occurs in retaliation for an employee who does any of the following:
1. Discloses or threatens to disclose to a supervisor or to a public body an activity, policy, or practice of any officer, member, State agency, or
other State employee that the State employee reasonably believes is in violation of a law, rule, or regulation; or
2. Provides information to or testifies before any public body conducting an investigation, hearing, or inquiry into any violation of a law, rule, or
regulation by any officer, member, State agency or other State employee; or
3. Assists or participates in a proceeding to enforce the provisions of the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act.
E. Pursuant to the Whistleblower Act2, an employer may not retaliate against an employee who discloses information in a court, an administrative
hearing, or before a legislative commission or committee, or in any other proceeding, where the employee has reasonable cause to believe
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 37/387
that the information discloses a violation of a State or Federal law, rule, or regulation. In addition, an employer may not retaliate against an
employee for disclosing information to a government or law enforcement agency, where the employee has reasonable cause to believe that
the information discloses a violation of a State or Federal law, rule, or regulation3.
F. According to the Illinois Human Rights Act4, it is a civil rights violation for a person, or for two (2) or more people to conspire, to retaliate against
a person because they have opposed that which they reasonably and in good faith believes to be sexual harassment in employment or
because they have made a charge, filed a complaint, testified, assisted, or participated in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing under the
Illinois Human Rights Act.
G. Any employee who feels they have been unlawfully retaliated against should register a complaint with their immediate supervisor, department
head, Ethics Officer, or an appropriate member of management. (Ord. 2018-01, 1-3-2018)
1-15-5: THE INVESTIGATION:
Any reported allegations of harassment or retaliation will be investigated promptly. The Village will make every reasonable effort to conduct an
investigation in a responsible and confidential manner. However, it is impossible to guarantee absolute confidentiality. The investigation may
include individual interviews with the parties involved, and where necessary, with individuals who may have observed the alleged conduct or may
have other relevant knowledge. The Village reserves the right and hereby provides notice that third parties may be used to investigate claims of
harassment. Employees must cooperate in any investigation of workplace wrongdoing or risk disciplinary action, up to and including termination.
(Ord. 2018-01, 1-3-2018)
1-15-6: CONSEQUENCES OF A VIOLATION OF THE PROHIBITION ON SEXUAL HARASSMENT:
Whether and what action constitutes sexual harassment or retaliation will be determined by the Village based on a review of the facts and
circumstances of each situation. Misconduct constituting sexual harassment or retaliation will be dealt with appropriately. Responsive action may
include, for example, training, referral to counseling and/or disciplinary action such as warning, reprimand, withholding of a promotion or pay
increase, reassignment, temporary suspension without pay or termination, as the Village believes appropriate under the circumstances. In
addition to any and all other discipline that may be applicable pursuant to Village policies, employment agreements, procedures, employee
handbooks and/or collective bargaining agreements, any person who violates this chapter or the Prohibition on Sexual Harassment contained in
the State Officials and Employee Ethics Act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/5-65, may be subject to a fine of up to five thousand dollars
($5,000.00) per offense, applicable discipline up to and including termination by the Village and any applicable fines and penalties established
pursuant to local ordinance, State law or Federal law. Each violation may constitute a separate offense. Any discipline imposed by the Village
shall be separate and distinct from any penalty imposed by an Ethics Commission and any fines or penalties imposed by a court of law or a State
or Federal agency. (Ord. 2018-01, 1-3-2018)
1-15-7: CONSEQUENCES FOR KNOWINGLY MAKING A FALSE REPORT:
A false report is defined as a report of sexual harassment made by an accuser who seeks to use the report to accomplish some end other than
stopping sexual harassment or retaliation for reporting sexual harassment. A false report is not made in good faith. Given the seriousness of the
consequences for the accused, a false or frivolous report is a severe offense that can itself result in disciplinary action. Any person who
intentionally makes a false report alleging a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be subject to discipline up to and including termination
pursuant to applicable Village policies, employment agreements, procedures, employee handbooks and/or collective bargaining agreements.
In addition, any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a violation of any provision of the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act
to an Ethics Commission, an Inspector General, the State Police, a State's Attorney, the Attorney General, or any other law enforcement official is
guilty of a Class A misdemeanor. An Ethics Commission may levy an administrative fine of up to five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) against any
person who intentionally makes a false, frivolous or bad faith allegation. (Ord. 2018-01, 1-3-2018)
1-15-8: ADDITIONAL RESOURCES:
An employee who believes that his or her complaint of sexual harassment or retaliation was not properly investigated or addressed by the Village
or wishes to obtain additional information regarding his or her legal rights may contact:
Illinois Department of Human Rights
(312) 814-6200 Chicago
(312) 263-1579 TDD Chicago
(217) 785-5100 Springfield
(217) 785-5119 TDD Springfield
Illinois Human Rights Commission
(312) 814-6269 Chicago
(312) 263-1579 TDD Chicago
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 38/387
(217) 785-4350 Springfield
(217) 785-5119 TDD Springfield
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
(312) 353-2713 Chicago
(800) 669-3362
(800) 800-3302 TDD
(Ord. 2018-01, 1-3-2018)
Title 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Chapter 1
BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS
2-1-1: BOARD CREATED, TERM OF OFFICE:
There is hereby created a board of fire and police commissioners consisting of three (3) members whose terms of office shall be three (3) years,
and until their respective successors shall be appointed and qualified. (1987 Code)
2-1-2: QUALIFICATIONS, OATH, BOND, REMOVAL FROM OFFICE:
The members of the board shall possess the qualifications required of other officers of the village, shall take oath or affirmation of office, and give
bond in the same manner as other appointive officers of the village. They shall be subject to removal of office as such other officers. (1987 Code)
2-1-3: COMPENSATION:
Each member of the board shall be compensated for any expenses incurred in the discharge of duties, upon presentation of documented
expenses. (1987 Code)
2-1-4: SECRETARY OF THE BOARD:
The board may employ a secretary or may designate one of its own members to act as such. The secretary shall keep the minutes of the board's
proceedings, shall be custodian of all papers pertaining to the business of the board, shall keep a record of all examinations held and shall
perform such other duties as the board shall prescribe. (1987 Code)
2-1-5: POWERS GENERALLY:
The board of commissioners shall make such rules, appointments and removals, and shall have such other and further powers as is contained in
an act as is specified "to provide for the appointment of a board of fire and police commissioners in all cities, villages, and incorporated towns of
this state having a population of not less than seven thousand (7,000) nor more than two hundred thousand (200,000) and prescribing the powers
and duties of such board," approved April 2, 1903, as amended1. (1987 Code)
2-1-6: APPOINTMENT OF FIRE AND POLICE DEPARTMENT MEMBERS:
The board of fire and police commissioners shall appoint all officers and members of the fire and police departments, except the chiefs of the
police and fire departments, which appointments are retained by the president and board of trustees, and the deputy chiefs of the police and fire
departments, which appointments are retained by their respective chief with the consent of the president and board of trustees. All appointments
to such departments other than that of the lowest rank shall be from the rank next below that to which the appointment shall be made. (Ord. 11-
69, 10-17-2011)
Chapter 2
POLICE PENSION BOARD
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 39/387
2-2-1: BOARD CREATED, ELECTION AND APPOINTMENT, TERMS OF OFFICE:
There is hereby created a Police Pension Board as is provided by statute1. The Board shall consist of five (5) members; two (2) of whom shall be
appointed by the Village President, and two (2) of whom shall be elected from the regular police force, and one from the beneficiaries under the
Police Pension Fund Act as created by statute2. (1987 Code)
2-2-2: DUTIES:
The Police Pension Board shall have the powers and duties delegated to it by statute3. (1987 Code)
Footnote 1: 40 ILCS 5/3-128.
Footnote 2: 40 ILCS 5/3-101.
Footnote 3: 40 ILCS 5/3-132.
Chapter 3
BOARD OF TRUSTEES, FIREFIGHTERS' PENSION FUND1
2-3-1: ESTABLISHED:
There shall be a Firefighters' Pension Fund established in the Village, as provided by statute. (Ord. 87-7, 8-3-1987)
2-3-2: TRUSTEES OF FUND; TERM:
The board of trustees of the Firefighters' Pension Fund shall consist of the following members: Village President, Village Clerk, Village Attorney,
Village Treasurer, Chief of the Fire Department, and three (3) additional persons chosen from active firefighters and one other person who has
retired under the terms of the Firefighters' Pension Fund Act, or such other members as may be provided from time to time by State statute2.
(Ord. 87-7, 8-3-1987)
2-3-3: SOURCES OF REVENUE:
There shall be deposited in the Pension Fund the sums required by law, which shall include:
A. The required percent per month to be deducted from the salary of the active firefighters, as required by statute.
B. All rewards made to the Fire Department.
C. The proceeds of such tax as may be levied for the Firefighters' Pension Fund.
D. The proceeds of all license fees paid by foreign fire insurance companies. (Ord. 87-7, 8-3-1987)
Chapter 4
BOARD OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS
2-4-1: BOARD CREATED, POWERS AND DUTIES GENERALLY:
There is created a Board of Local Improvements to do and perform all the duties and functions incumbent upon, and exercise all the rights of a
Board of Local Improvements, all as provided in and by an act of the General Assembly of the State entitled "An Act Concerning Local
Improvements1", approved June 14, 1897, and all acts amendatory thereof or supplemental thereto. (1987 Code)
2-4-2: MEMBERS DESIGNATED, ORGANIZATION:
The members of the Board of Trustees are designated and appointed members of the Board of Local Improvements. The members of the Board
of Trustees together with the Village President shall constitute the Board of Local Improvements. The Village President shall be president of the
Board of Local Improvements and the Village Clerk is hereby appointed secretary of said Board of Local Improvements. (1987 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 40/387
Footnote 1: 65 ILCS 5/9-2-1.
Chapter 5
PLANNING COMMISSION
2-5-1: PLANNING COMMISSION CREATED:
The Planning Commission of the Village shall be constituted by the Zoning Board of Appeals1 acting in ex officio capacity, as authorized by
ordinance. The Planning Commission may adopt its own bylaws. (Ord. 92-32, 9-8-1992)
2-5-2: DUTIES:
The Planning Commission shall discharge the following duties under this Chapter:
A. As directed by the Village Board of Trustees, to initiate, direct, and review from time to time, studies of the provisions of the zoning title and to
make reports of its recommendations to the Village Board;
B. As directed by the Village Board of Trustees, to hear and decide all matters upon which it is required to pass under the zoning title; and
C. To keep written records of its proceedings which shall be open to inspection by the Village Board of Trustees at all times. (Ord. 92-32, 9-8-
1992)
2-5-3: OTHER DUTIES REGARDING OFFICIAL PLAN AND MAP:
A. The Planning Commission shall have the power to prepare and recommend to the Board of Trustees from time to time, such changes in the
Plan as may be deemed necessary by the Board of Trustees or by the Planning Commission; provided, however that such changes shall not
affect the general principles of the Plan as adopted.
B. The Planning Commission shall have power to give aid to the officials of the Village charged with the direction of projects for improvements
embraced within the Official Plan, to further the making of such improvements, and generally to promote the realization of the Official Plan and
exercise such other powers germane to the powers granted by State law2, as may be conferred by the Board of Trustees.
C. The Planning Commission shall prepare and recommend to the Board of Trustees from time to time, plans for specific improvements in
pursuance of the Official Plan. (Ord. 92-32, 9-8-1992)
Footnote 1: See Chapter 6 of this Title.
Footnote 2: 65 ILCS 5/11-12-5.
Chapter 6
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
2-6-1: BOARD CREATED, ORGANIZATION:
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall be created in accordance with the applicable statutes of the State1 as follows:
A. Membership: The Zoning Board of Appeals shall consist of seven (7) members.
B. Appointments, Officers, Vacancies: All appointments to the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be made by the President with the consent of the
Village Board of Trustees. One of the members so appointed shall be named as chairman at the time of appointment. Vacancies shall be filled
as soon as possible for the unexpired term of any member whose place has become vacant. In the event that the office of chairman is vacated
for any reason, the Village Board of Trustees shall immediately appoint at its option, either one of the remaining members on the Board, or any
member who is appointed to fill such vacancy on the Board as the new chairman.
C. Meetings: All meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the Board may
determine. All testimony by witnesses at any hearing provided for in the zoning title2 shall be given under oath. The chairman, or in his
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 41/387
absence the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the
public. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon every question, or if absent or failing to vote,
indicating that fact, and shall also keep records of its examinations and other official actions. Every rule, regulation, every amendment or
repeal thereof, and every order, requirement, decision or determination of the Board shall immediately be filed in the office of the Village Clerk
and shall be of public record. (1987 Code)
2-6-2: JURISDICTION AND AUTHORITY:
The Zoning Board of Appeals is hereby invested with the following jurisdiction and authority:
A. To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Building Commissioner under the zoning title.
B. To hear and decide variations from the terms provided in the zoning title in the manner and subject to the standards set forth in said zoning
title.
C. To hold public hearings in matters pertaining to applications for special uses and amendments, and submit reports to the Village Board of
Trustees setting forth its findings and recommendations in the manner prescribed in Section 10-10-7 of this Code for special uses and Section
10-10-5 of this Code for amendments.
D. To hear and decide all matters referred to it or upon which it is required to pass under the zoning title. (1987 Code)
2-6-3: ZONING SPECIAL USE AND AMENDMENT DUTIES:
The Zoning Board of Appeals is hereby designated as the proper commission or committee to post or publish notices as required by statute and
the zoning title pertaining to special uses and proposed amendments to the regulations imposed and the districts created by the zoning title, and
to make a written report and recommendation to the Village Board of Trustees on any such proposed amendments or special uses. (1987 Code)
Footnote 1: 65 ILCS 5/11-13-3.
Footnote 2: See Title 10 of this Code.
Chapter 7
CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION
2-7-1: COMMISSIONERS APPOINTED, ORGANIZATION, FUNCTIONS:
The President of the Village shall forthwith appoint three (3) Civil Service Commissioners pursuant to State statutes1. Said Civil Service
Commissioners shall be organized and shall function in accordance with the statutes of the State2. (1987 Code)
2-7-2: CLASSIFICATION OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES, EXCEPTIONS:
Pursuant to State law3 the Civil Service Commissioners shall classify all of the offices and places of employment in the Village, except those
offices and places excluded by statute4 and except those offices of policemen and firemen heretofore subject to the Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners of the Village. (1987 Code)
2-7-3: FORMULATION OF RULES:
The Civil Service Commission shall make and publish rules to carry out the purposes of the Commission pursuant to State law5. (1987 Code)
Footnote 1: 65 ILCS 5/10-1-1.
Footnote 2: 65 ILCS 5/10-1-1.
Footnote 3: 65 ILCS 5/10-1-3.
Footnote 4: 65 ILCS 5/10-1-17.
Footnote 5: 65 ILCS 5/10-1-5 and 5/10-1-6.
Chapter 8
RESERVED
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 42/387
Chapter 9
EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM BOARD
2-9-1: JOINT EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM BOARD:
A. Establishment; Membership; Authority And Duties:
1. Establishment: Pursuant to resolution no. 2018-22 (adopted on April 2, 2018), the Village approved an intergovernmental agreement
entitled "Intergovernmental Agreement Establishing the IKE Joint Emergency Telephone System Board and Providing for the Consolidation
of and Operation of Certain Public Safety Answering Points and the 'Eisenhower Emergency Communication Center' ("IKE 911 Center")
(Participating Members: Village of Broadview and the Village of Maywood)", (the "intergovernmental agreement") that provided for the
establishment of an intergovernmental cooperative venture known as the "Eisenhower Emergency Communication Center" (also referred to
as the "IKE 911 Center") for the operation and maintenance of a centralized, combined emergency services dispatch and communication
system that includes 9-1-1 services and wireless E-9-1-1 services (the "system"). The intergovernmental agreement also provided for the
creation of the IKE Joint Emergency Telephone System Board.
2. Membership; Authority And Duties: The members of IKE Joint Emergency Telephone System Board shall be comprised of the appointed
public safety employees from the participating members (e.g., Fire Chiefs and Police Chiefs) plus an appointed public member and an
appointed PSAP representative. The authority and duties of the IKE Joint Emergency Telephone System Board and its members shall be
governed by the applicable provisions of the intergovernmental agreement and the Emergency Telephone System Act1 and any other
applicable laws.
B. Dissolution Of Local ETSB, Re-Instatement:
1. Dissolution Of Local ETSB: Pursuant to this chapter, the Village's ETSB was dissolved effective upon the date of the regulatory approval of
the IKE 911 Center and the IKE JETSB by the 9-1-1 Administrator of the Illinois Department of State Police.
2. Re-Instatement Of Local ETSB: In the event the Village withdraws from participation in the IKE 911 Center, to the extent permitted by
applicable laws and regulations, the Village will either take the necessary corporate actions to re-instate its local ETSB or join another Joint
Emergency Telephone System Board.
C. Use Of ETSB Funds; Surcharge Funds:
1. Use Of ETSB Funds: Under the intergovernmental agreement, the Village, in its own discretion, may use or expend any of its ETSB funds,
including any surcharge funds, to pay for budgeted items or obligations that exist in its current 2017/2018 ETSB budget in accordance with
the applicable laws, including the Emergency Telephone System Act2, the Wireless Emergency Telephone Safety Act3 and the Prepaid
Wireless 9-1-1 Surcharge Act4, except that upon termination of the Village's ETSB, any reserve funds held by the Village ETSB shall be
remitted to the IKE JETSB in compliance with the intergovernmental agreement, specifically section 6.3(G).
2. Surcharge Funds: Upon dissolution of the Village's ETSB and subject to the terms of the intergovernmental agreement and the Village's
continued participation in the IKE JETSB, all monies received or collected by the Village that are intended to be used to pay for the
operation and maintenance of the IKE 911 Center and its system from any surcharge or revenue source authorized by any Federal or State
law, including section 15.3 of the Emergency Telephone System Act5, the Wireless Emergency Telephone Safety Act6 and the Prepaid
Wireless 9-1-1 Surcharge Act7, shall be transferred to the IKE JETSB for deposit and expenditure by the IKE JETSB in accordance with the
intergovernmental agreement and applicable Federal or State law. (Ord. 2018-06, 4-2-2018)
Chapter 10
ZONING COMMISSION
2-10-1: CREATED:
There is hereby created a Zoning Commission consisting of at least three (3) members, who shall be appointed by the Village President with the
confirmation of the Board of Trustees. The members shall serve for one year terms, or less if the Zoning Commission ceases to exist as set forth
by statute. (Ord. 2000-05, 5-15-2000)
2-10-2: QUALIFICATIONS GENERALLY:
The members shall be chosen as near as practicable to represent the residential, commercial and industrial areas of the Village, and such other
members of the community as the Village President deems appropriate. (Ord. 2000-05, 5-15-2000)
2-10-3: POWERS GENERALLY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 43/387
Pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-13-2, the Zoning Commission shall recommend any changes to the districts, the boundaries of the
districts, the uses within the districts and the regulations pertaining thereto. A tentative report and ordinances shall be prepared, and a public
hearing held as set forth in said statute. Thirty (30) days after the conclusion of the hearing, a final report shall be submitted to the corporate
authorities for review. (Ord. 2000-05, 5-15-2000)
2-10-4: CHAIRPERSON, SECRETARY:
The Commission shall appoint one of its members as chairperson, and shall also appoint a secretary to be custodian of records of the
Commission. The secretary or other such person designated by the Commission, shall keep minutes of all of its meetings and hearings. Such
secretary or person may receive compensation for services, and the Commission shall be reimbursed by the Village for all expenses incurred.
(Ord. 2000-05, 5-15-2000)
Title 3
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL LICENSE PROVISIONS
3-1-1: APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS:
All business, commercial and industrial activities in the village of whatever nature except those listed in section 3-1A-2 of this chapter are required
to obtain a license to operate. No person, firm or corporation not otherwise licensed by this code except those engaged in a business listed in
section 3-1A-2 of this chapter shall engage in any commercial, business or industrial activity of whatever kind in the village without first having
obtained a business license as provided in this chapter. Application for a business license shall be made in conformance with the requirements of
section 3-1-2 of this chapter relating to application for licenses. (Ord. 2003-02, 3-3-2003)
3-1-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE OR CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION:
Each application for a license or a certificate of registration shall state, at a minimum, the following:
A. Whether the application is for a new business, a change of ownership, or a change of business location;
B. The name, home address, telephone number, social security number, driver's license number, date of birth, fax number, and e-mail address of
the applicant as well as his relationship to the business;
C. The business name, name it is doing business as (if different), type of business, nature of business, business address, telephone number,
FEIN number, state sales tax number, present zoning of property where business is to be located, and whether the business is a permitted or
special use;
D. Whether changes will be made to the interior or exterior of the business premises;
E. For the premises of the building, the square footage of the interior, the number of employees, the hours of operation, the number of delivery or
service vehicles, and whether any flammable or hazardous material will be used or stored;
F. For each owner, partner or officer of the business, his or her name, title/position, home address, telephone number, social security number,
driver's license number, and date of birth;
G. If the business is a corporation, the corporation name, address, telephone number, and name of contact;
H. If the property owner is different from the applicant, the property owner's name, address, telephone number, and, if applicable, a copy of a
lease agreement;
I. Whether a liquor license, vending license, or other specialty license will be applied for; and
J. Any other information required by the village in order for them to administer the provisions of this code. (Ord. 2003-02, 3-3-2003)
3-1-2-1: TEMPORARY BUSINESS LICENSE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 44/387
A. Any business that engages in commercial activity within the village may apply for a temporary business license.
B. A temporary business license shall be issued at the sole discretion of the building commissioner upon satisfactory completion of a temporary
business license application and payment of a fee in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00). Said application shall be available through the office
of the building commissioner.
C. An applicant herein must submit an application for a business license pursuant to section 3-1-2 of this chapter, and further, must comply with
all village code regulations.
D. No temporary business license shall issue for more than sixty (60) days and may be revoked at any time at the sole discretion of the building
commissioner. (Ord. 13-69, 10-21-2013)
3-1-3: SIGNATURES REQUIRED ON LICENSE OR REGISTRATION:
Each license or registration issued shall bear the signature of the president and clerk in the absence of any provisions to the contrary. (Ord. 2003-
02, 3-3-2003)
3-1-4: INVESTIGATION, INSPECTIONS:
A. Application And Inspection Procedures:
1. An incomplete application form will not be processed until all information on the application form is provided. Completed application forms
shall be submitted to the village clerk as set forth in section 3-1A-1 of this chapter.
2. An inspection by the health department is necessary for business in connection with the care and/or handling of food, the prevention of
nuisances, and the spread of disease for the protection of health. The applicant must contact the health department to coordinate an
inspection, if such an inspection is necessary. The village building department shall coordinate building, fire, health, electrical, and plumbing
inspections, as required. If any deficiencies are found during an inspection, corrections must be made and a reinspection scheduled with the
appropriate inspector. No license shall be issued until the property passes all inspections.
3. Once the village clerk receives notification that the property has passed all necessary inspections, the village clerk shall forward the
application to the chairman of the licensing committee. The licensing committee shall review the application along with the inspection
reports and shall issue a recommendation to the village board of trustees.
4. If the village board of trustees votes to grant the application, the village clerk shall issue the license to the applicant. If the village board of
trustees votes to deny the license, such vote constitutes final action on the application and no further processing of the application shall take
place. The village board of trustees may also vote to return the application to the licensing committee for further processing.
5. No business will be allowed to open or operate without a valid business license or registration.
6. When a business already operating in the village changes ownership, the new owner must apply for a new business license. When a
business already operating in the village changes location or increases its square footage, the business must apply for an amended
business license, including paying all increases in applicable licensing fees. If a business is changing location, the new location must submit
to all inspection procedures. Business, vending, cigarette, and liquor licenses are not transferable to a new owner.
7. No license shall be issued to any person, business, or entity indebted to the village unless and until such indebtedness is paid to the village,
or until the corporate authorities discharge such indebtedness in accordance with the terms and conditions fixed by the corporate
authorities.
B. Submission To Inspections, Analysis:
1. Whenever inspection of the premises used for or in connection with the operation of a licensed business or occupation is required or is
reasonably necessary to secure compliance with this code or other ordinances or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the
licensee or the person in charge of the premises to be inspected to admit thereto for the purpose of making the inspection, any officer or
employee of the village who is authorized or directed to make such an inspection at any reasonable time that admission is requested.
2. Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is reasonably necessary to secure conformance with any provision of this code or other
ordinance or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee to give to any authorized officer or employee of the village
requesting the same sufficient samples of such material or commodity for such analysis upon request.
3. In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the village president may revoke the license of any licensed proprietor of any
licensed business who refuses to permit any officer or employee who is authorized to make an inspection or to take such samples to make
the inspection, or to take an adequate sample of such commodity, or who interferes with such officer or employee while in the performance
of his duty in making such inspection. No license shall be revoked for such cause unless written demand is made upon the licensee or the
person in charge of the premises in the name of the village. Any such revocation shall be consistent with the procedures set out in section
3-1-11 of this chapter. (Ord. 2003-02, 3-3-2003)
3-1-4-1: PUBLIC WAYS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 45/387
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any business or occupations on premises which abut a public way, to litter or to permit the
accumulation of any paper, rubbish or refuse upon that portion of the public way abutting said premises. It shall be unlawful for any person using
any part of a public way for or in connection with his business or occupation to litter or to permit the accumulation of any paper, rubbish or refuse
upon the portion of the public way so used. It shall be the duty of a business which is required to either be licensed or obtain a certificate of
registration under the provisions of this chapter to remove snow and ice from the public way. (Ord. 2003-02, 3-3-2003)
3-1-5: TERMINATION OF LICENSE OR REGISTRATION, PAYMENT OF FEE:
A. Annual License: All annual licenses or registration shall terminate on December 31 of the calendar year. The village clerk shall mail all
licensees a statement of the time of expiration of licenses held by the licensees three (3) weeks prior to the date of expiration. The failure to
send out such notice or the failure of the licensee to receive it shall not excuse the licensee from the failure to obtain a new license or a
renewal thereof, nor shall it be a defense in any action for operating without a license.
B. Payment Of Fees: The fees shall be paid at the time the license or registration is issued. When an applicant has not engaged in business until
after the expiration of part of a current year, the license fee shall be prorated monthly and the fee paid for such period during which the
business has been or will be conducted.
C. Advance Payment: No such payment of any license fee in advance of the issuance of the license in due form shall entitle or authorize any
person to any of the rights or privileges conferred by the issuance of any license or to the opening or maintaining of any business or
establishment contrary to any of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2003-02, 3-3-2003)
3-1-6: BONDS FOR CERTAIN BUSINESSES:
As a prerequisite to the issuance of the license and in addition to the fees set forth in this title, the following enumerated businesses, trades and
occupations shall submit to the village a copy of their certificate of liability insurance, and shall also post a bond with the village in the amount set
out beside their names with sureties to be approved by the president:
Building wreckers $25,000.00
Catch basin and sewer cleaners (see section 4-5-5
of this code) 20,000.00
Electrical contractors (see chapter 10 of this title) 10,000.00
Excavators (see section 8-2-5 of this code) 10,000.00
House movers (see chapter 12 of this title) 25,000.00
Masonry contractors 10,000.00
Plumbing contractors 10,000.00
Scavengers 5,000.00
Sign contractors (see section 9-8-5 of this code) 25,000.00
(Ord. 2003-02, 3-3-2003)
3-1-7: LICENSE TO BE POSTED:
It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business in the village to keep his license posted in plain view on the premises used for
such business at all times. (Ord. 2003-02, 3-3-2003)
3-1-8: BUILDING AND PREMISES:
No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business if the premises and building to be used for the purpose do not fully comply with the
requirements of this code or other ordinances of the village. No such license shall be issued for the conduct of any business or performance of
any act that would involve a violation of the zoning regulations. (Ord. 2003-02, 3-3-2003)
3-1-9: LOCATION:
A. Schools And Churches: It shall be unlawful to establish or operate any hospital, foundry, machine shop, laundry, sanitarium, lumberyard, public
garage, filling station, or any business liable to cause excessive noise or that will endanger public health or safety within two hundred feet
(200') of any property used for church or school purposes unless the written consent of the governing body of such church or school is first
obtained.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 46/387
B. Residential Districts: It shall be unlawful to establish, maintain or operate any automobile rental agency, public garage or building for the
keeping, repair or storage of automobiles or other like vehicles for hire or profit, any gasoline station, hospital, reformatory, rescue or shelter
institution, lumberyard, foundry, machine shop, laundry, theater, medical dispensary, sanitarium or any other business liable to create any
noise or be in any way objectionable to a residential neighborhood, anywhere in the village where a majority of the buildings within a radius of
three hundred feet (300') are used for residence purposes without first securing the written consent of the owners of two-thirds (2/3) of the
property within such radius.
C. Frontage Consents Required: Wherever a provision of this code requires that frontage consents be obtained to operate a specific business, it
shall be unlawful for any person to establish or operate such business without having obtained the required consent.
1. No initial license to engage in, conduct or carry on the following businesses shall be issued nor shall any building permit be issued for the
erection of any structure or building to conduct or carry on the following businesses unless the applicant for such business license or for
such building permit shall first obtain frontage consents: tourist courts, trailer parks, rollerskating rinks, and dance halls.
2. The frontage consents referred to herein shall be obtained from the owners of property lying within a radius of three hundred feet (300')
from the extremities of the tract of property on which the business is to be located. The applicant must obtain the consent of two-thirds (2/3)
of the property owners of property within that radius in order to obtain a license and a building permit.
3. Whenever the consent of adjoining or neighboring owners is required as a prerequisite to the conduct of any business or occupation or the
location of any establishment, such consent shall be obtained by securing the necessary signatures to a written consent petition. Each
petition shall be filed with the village clerk with the application when signed. It shall be unlawful to forge any name to any petition concerning
frontage requirements or to falsely represent that the names thereon have been properly placed thereon if such is not the fact.
4. The frontage consent requirements contained herein shall not be construed to amend or change any zoning provision of the village.
D. Change Of Locations: The location of any licensed business or occupation or of any permitted act may be changed unless otherwise
specifically set forth in this code, provided, ten (10) days' notice thereof is given to the village clerk, and provided, that the building and zoning
requirements are therein complied with. (1987 Code)
3-1-10: NUISANCES PROHIBITED:
No business, licensed or not, shall be so conducted or operated as to amount to a nuisance in fact. (1987 Code)
3-1-11: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The president shall have the power to suspend or revoke any license issued under the provisions of this code for good and sufficient cause or if
the president determines that the licensee shall have violated any of the provisions of this code or any statutes of the state. However, no such
license shall be revoked or suspended except after a public hearing, first having given five (5) days' written notice of said hearing to the licensee
affording the licensee an opportunity to appear and defend. The public hearing shall be held before a license commissioner appointed by the
president, who shall report in writing his findings to the president.
If the president shall determine after such hearing that the license should be revoked or suspended, the president shall state, within fifteen (15)
days, the reason or reasons for such determination in a written order of revocation or suspension and shall serve a copy of such order upon the
licensee. Such revocation may be in addition to any fine imposed. (Ord. 2003-02, 3-3-2003)
ARTICLE A. BUSINESS LICENSE AND PERMIT FEES
3-1A-1: SCHEDULE OF LICENSE FEES:
The annual license fees set forth in subsection A of this section shall be charged to the various businesses, trades and occupations listed that are
located or doing business within the Village. For any business, trade or occupation not specifically listed below, the annual fee shall be based
upon square footage, as set forth in subsection B of this section. (Ord. 2003-02, 3-3-2003)
A. Specific Businesses:
Fee
Residential:
Rooming house/bed and breakfast $300.00 plus $15.00 per rental unit
Commercial:
Adult use $2,000.00 plus $0.01 per square foot
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 47/387
Auction room $150.00
Automobile laundry (vehicle wash) 225.00
Automobile truck/trailer rental (including yard) See subsection B1 of this section
Automotive vehicle sales (including yard) See subsection B1 of this section
Bakery $250.00 plus health inspection
Banks and financial institutions $200.00
Blueprinting and photocopying establishment 150.00
Bowling alley $20.00 per lane or alley
Building material sales (including yard) See subsection B1 of this section
Candy store See subsection B1 of this section plus health inspection
Contractors and construction office $150.00
Contractors and construction office (including yard) See subsection B2 of this section
Convenience store $250.00 plus health inspection
Currency exchange $200.00
Delicatessen $250.00 plus health inspection
Drive-in restaurant $250.00 plus health inspection
Exterminating shop $200.00 plus hazardous material inspection
Food carryout service $250.00 plus health inspection
Food store See subsection B1 of this section plus health inspection
Fortune tellers/psychics $350.00
Gasoline/fuel station $225.00 plus hazardous material inspection
Golf courses $1,000.00 plus health inspection
Gun dealers $1,000.00 plus $0.01 per square foot
Home occupations $50.00
Hotel/motel $300.00 plus $20.00 per rental unit
Indoor theater $500.00
Job printing shop (retail) See subsection B1 of this section
Machinery equipment sales See subsection B2 of this section
Meat market $250.00 plus health inspection
Mobile food vendors $250.00 annual license fee
$125.00 annual license fee if purchased after July 1
$50.00 1 day license fees
Pawnshop $500.00 plus $0.01 per square foot
Radio and television broadcasting station $200.00
Radio, television and audio equipment store See subsection B1 of this section
Recording studio $150.00
Restaurant $250.00 plus health inspection
Restaurant including live dancing and entertainment $350.00 plus health inspection
Scavengers $600.00
Shooting ranges $1,000.00 plus $0.01 per square foot
Tattoo parlor $500.00 plus $0.01 per square foot plus health inspection
Tavern $200.00
Tobacco sales (other than via a coin operated device) 100.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 48/387
Trailer/car/truck rental (including yard) See subsection B1 of this section
Truck sales (including yard) See subsection B2 of this section
Coin operated devices:
Operator $ 50.00
Proprietor 100.00
Amusement devices, electronic or mechanical:
Jukebox 150.00 per unit
All other devices 150.00 per unit
Laundry devices, washers and dryers:
Laundering machines only 20.00 per unit
Vending machines:
Beverage, candy, snacks, dry goods and other 30.00 per unit
Food service 60.00 per unit
Cigarette 100.00 per unit
(Ord. 2006-01, 1-17-2006; amd. Ord. 2006-03, 2-6-2006; Ord. 2017-133, 9-18-2017)
B. Other Businesses:
1. Retail business/office establishments not otherwise specified in subsection A of this section:
0 to 25,000 square feet $150.00 plus $0.01 per square foot
25,001 to 50,000 square feet $160.00 plus $0.01 per square foot
50,001 to 75,000 square feet $170.00 plus $0.01 per square foot
75,001 to 100,000 square feet $185.00 plus $0.01 per square foot
100,001 to 125,000 square feet $200.00 plus $0.01 per square foot
125,001 to 150,000 square feet $215.00 plus $0.01 per square foot
150,001 to 175,000 square feet $230.00 plus $0.01 per square foot
175,001 to 200,000 square feet $245.00 plus $0.01 per square foot
Over 200,000 square feet $260.00 plus $0.01 per square foot
Where applicable, a hazardous material inspection fee applies.
2. Manufacturing, storage, assembly, warehousing, distributors, fabricating, printers, processing and similar industrial zoned establishments:
Up to 5,000 square feet $150.00
5,001 to 10,000 square feet 200.00
10,001 to 20,000 square feet 300.00
20,001 to 40,000 square feet 400.00
40,001 to 80,000 square feet 500.00
80,001 to 120,000 square feet 550.00
120,001 to 150,000 square feet 600.00
150,001 to 200,000 square feet 650.00
200,001 to 300,000 square feet 700.00
Over 300,001 square feet 800.00
Where applicable, a hazardous material inspection fee applies.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 49/387
C. Inspections: Health and/or hazardous material inspections are required for the businesses indicated in subsection A of this section. The fee for
a health inspection is one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). The fee for a hazardous material inspection is one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).
(Ord. 2006-01, 1-17-2006)
3-1A-2: BUSINESS REGISTRATION REQUIRED; CHARGE:
A. All businesses located in the Village which are solely engaged in any of the business, professions or occupations listed below shall not be
required to obtain business licenses, but shall be required to register with the Village as set forth in section 3-1-2 of this chapter:
1. The practice of architecture;
2. The practice of beauty culture;
3. Private business and vocational schools which have been issued a certificate of approval by the State Superintendent of Education;
4. The practice of shorthand reporting;
5. The practice of dentistry;
6. The administering of detection or deception examinations;
7. The private detective business;
8. Insurance companies, insurance brokers, and insurance agencies;
9. The practice of land surveying;
10. The practice of law;
11. The practice of medicine or midwifery for which a State license is required;
12. The practice of professional nursing;
13. Businesses which operate and manage nursing homes; provided, however, that all nursing homes located in the Village must comply with
the provisions of title 4 of this Code;
14. The practice of optometry;
15. The practice of pharmacy;
16. The practice of physical therapy;
17. The practice of podiatry;
18. The practice of professional engineering;
19. The practice of psychology;
20. The public accounting business;
21. Real estate brokers and real estate salespersons;
22. The practice of structural engineering;
23. The practice of social work;
24. The business of tree experts;
25. The practice of veterinary medicine and surgery;
26. The practice of installing water wells and pumps;
27. The practice of home childcare;
28. The practice of professional plumbing.
B. The certificate shall be obtained prior to the start of operating a business, but in no event later than thirty (30) days after business is
commenced. Each new or existing business shall obtain the certificate annually thereafter. (Ord. 2003-02, 3-3-2003)
C. No person, firm or corporation shall engage in any of the businesses listed in subsection A of this section with the village unless the business
has registered with the village and has been issued a certificate of registration. Applications for certificates of registration shall be made in
conformance with the requirements of section 3-1-2 of this chapter relating to applications for certificates of registration. No certificate of
registration shall be issued until the applicant has paid an inspection fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) and the building department
has inspected the premises of the business for which the certificate is to be issued and has found that the premises is in compliance with all
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 50/387
applicable codes, ordinances, rules and regulations of the village. No certificate of registration shall be issued to any business which is
indebted to the village. (Ord. 2006-01, 1-17-2006)
D. It is not the intent of this section to regulate the business, professions and occupations which are listed in this section in the conduct of their
business or the practice of their profession or occupation, but to provide the village with complete information concerning all businesses in
order to protect such businesses in cases of emergency, to protect the public and other business in cases of complaints and to provide
reimbursement to the village for the cost of inspecting the premises where such businesses are located. (Ord. 2003-02, 3-3-2003)
3-1A-3: APPLICATION, PAYMENT:
All applications and fees shall be processed by the village clerk's office, and shall be made and payable annually, on or before January 31 of each
year. (Ord. 93-2, 1-19-1993)
3-1A-4: RECOVERY OF PROFESSIONAL FEES:
In the event that it is necessary for the village to retain the services of a professional, including, but not limited to, attorneys, engineers, land or
financial planners, architects, surveyors, traffic or drainage experts, or other consultants, in connection with any applicant's/petitioner's request for
the village to consider or otherwise take action upon any license, franchise, or economic incentive; or any zoning change, text amendment,
special use, planned unit development, or variation from this code, or any subdivision or other improvement or development upon real property,
then the applicant/petitioner and the owner of the property shall be jointly and severally liable for payment of such professional fees and
reimbursement shall be made to the village within thirty (30) days of receipt of an invoice for same. In addition, any expenses incurred, including,
but not limited to, mailing and copying, as a result of any such request, application, or development application shall be reimbursed to the village
in the same manner. Further, any professional opinion or otherwise requesting relief or assistance from the village, whether or not related to real
property, shall be reimbursed in accordance with this section, if, in the discretion of the village, a professional opinion is desired.
Failure to reimburse the village in accordance with this section may, in the village's discretion, result in the refusal of any board, committee, or
other governing body to consider or take action upon any further requests from a petitioner or owner who has failed to pay in full all amounts due
under this section. Further, the village may deny any application for a grading, building or other permit if such amounts have not been paid in full
and the village may elect to file a lien against any real property associated with such a petitioner's request. Interest in the amount of one and onehalf
percent (11/2%) per month shall accrue on all sums outstanding for thirty (30) days or more.
When any professional service contemplated by this section is rendered by the village staff, including any staff engineers, or services performed
by the executive level staff of the village, then, the party making the request shall reimburse the village for its costs incurred by providing the
professional services of the village staff, at the rate of forty dollars ($40.00) per hour.
The village staff, at the direction of the mayor or his designee, is hereby authorized to assign requests for professional services to village staff or
to consultants as the mayor deems appropriate. (Ord. 2004-26, 10-18-2004)
Chapter 2
MUNICIPAL OCCUPATION TAXES
3-2-1: MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX:
A. Tax Imposed: A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property at retail at the rate of one
percent (1%) of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business in accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-1.
B. Report Required: Every such person engaged in such business in the village shall file on or before the last day of each calendar month, the
report to the state department of revenue required by section three of "an act in relation to a tax upon persons engaged in the business of
selling tangible personal property to purchasers for use or consumption", approved June 28, 1933, as amended1.
C. Payment Of Tax: At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the state department of revenue the amount of tax imposed on account
of the receipts from sales of tangible personal property during the preceding month. (1987 Code)
3-2-2: MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
A. Tax Imposed: A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of making sales of service at the rate of one percent (1%) of
the cost price of all tangible personal property transferred by such servicemen either in the form of tangible personal property or in the form of
real estate as an incident to a sale of service, in accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-8-5.
B. Report Required: Every supplier or serviceman required to account for the municipal service occupation tax for the benefit of this municipality,
shall file, on or before the last day of each calendar month, the report to the state department of revenue required by state law2.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 51/387
C. Payment Of Tax: At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the state department of revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed.
(1987 Code)
3-2-2-1: NONHOME RULE OCCUPATION TAXES:
A. A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property, other than an item of tangible personal
property titled and registered with an agency of this state's government, at retail in this municipality at the rate of one percent (1%) of the gross
receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while this section is in effect; and a tax is hereby imposed upon all persons
engaged in this municipality in the business of making sales of service, at the rate of one percent (1%) of the selling price of all tangible
personal property transferred by such servicemen as an incident to a sale of service. Such "nonhome rule municipal retailers' occupation tax"
and the "nonhome rule municipal service occupation tax" shall not be applicable to the sales of food for human consumption that is to be
consumed off the premises where it is sold (other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks and food that has been prepared for immediate
consumption) and prescription and nonprescription medicines, drugs, medical appliances and insulin, urine testing materials, syringes and
needles used by diabetics. (Ord. 2004-27, 12-6-2004, eff. 7-1-2005; amd. Ord. 2007-02, 2-5-2007)
The imposition of these nonhome rule taxes is in accordance with the provisions of sections 8-11-1.3 and 8-11-1.4, respectively, of the Illinois
municipal code3.
B. The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the
department of revenue of the state of Illinois. The department of revenue shall have full power to administer and enforce the provisions of this
section.
C. The municipal clerk is hereby directed to file a certified copy of the ordinance codified herein and a certification that the ordinance received
referendum approval with the Illinois department of revenue on or before April 1, 2005. (Ord. 2004-27, 12-6-2004, eff. 7-1-2005)
3-2-3: MUNICIPAL UTILITY TAX4:
A. Definitions: For the purpose of this section the following definitions shall apply:
GROSS RECEIPTS: The consideration received for the transmission of messages, the consideration received for distributing, supplying,
furnishing or selling gas for use or consumption and not for resale, and the consideration received for distributing, supplying, furnishing or
selling electricity for use or consumption but not for resale, and the consideration received for distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling water
for use or consumption and not for resale, and for all services rendered in connection therewith valued in money, whether received in money
or otherwise, including cash, credit, services and property of every kind and material and for all services rendered therewith; and shall be
determined without any deduction on account of the cost of transmitting such messages without any deduction for the cost of the service,
product or commodity supplied, the cost of materials used, labor or service cost, or any other expenses whatsoever.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, municipal
corporation or political subdivision of this State, or receiver, trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court.
B. Tax Imposed: A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the following occupations or privileges: (1987 Code)
1. (Rep. by Ord. 93-17, 11-15-1993)
2. Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas for use or consumption within the corporate limits of the
Village, and not for resale, at the rate of five percent (5%) of the gross receipts therefrom.
3. Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling electricity for use or consumption within the corporate limits
of the Village, and not for resale, at the rate of five percent (5%) of the gross receipts therefrom.
C. Tax Additional To Other Fees: Such tax imposed by this Section shall be in addition to the payment of money or value of products or services
furnished to this Municipality by the taxpayer as compensation for the use of its streets, alleys or other public places, or installation and
maintenance therein, thereon or thereunder of poles, wires, pipes or other equipment used in the operation of the taxpayer's business.
D. Tax Returns: On or before December 31, each taxpayer under this Section shall make a return to the Village Collector for the months of
August, September and October stating:
1. His name.
2. His principal place of business.
3. His gross receipts during those months upon the basis of which the tax is imposed.
4. Amount of tax.
5. Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate authorities may require.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 52/387
On or before the last day of every third month thereafter, each taxpayer shall make a like return to the Village Collector with the amount of
tax herein imposed; provided that in connection with any return the taxpayer may if he so elects, report and pay an amount based upon his
total billings of business subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made (exclusive of any amounts previously billed) with
prompt adjustments of later payments based upon any difference between such billings and the taxable gross receipts.
E. Credit For Overpayment Of Tax: If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due under the provisions of this Section,
whether as a result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax due, or to become due, under
this Section from the taxpayer who made the erroneous payment; provided, that no amounts erroneously paid more than three (3) years prior
to the filing of a claim shall be so credited.
F. Limitation On Actions To Recover Tax Due: No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this Section shall be
commenced more than three (3) years after the due date of such amount. (1987 Code)
G. Exemptions From Tax: No tax is imposed by this Section with respect to any transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to
which such business may not, under the Constitution and statutes of the United States, be made subject to taxation by this State or any
political subdivision thereof; nor shall any persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas or electricity be
subject to taxation under the provisions of this Section for such transactions as are or may become subject to taxation under the provisions of
the "Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax Act5" authorized by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-1. (1987 Code; amd. Ord. 93-17, 11-15-
1993)
H. Penalty: Any tax payer who fails to make a return, who makes a fraudulent return or who wilfully violates any other provision of this Section is
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and in addition, shall be
liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due. (1987 Code)
3-2-4: MUNICIPAL AUTOMOBILE RENTING USE TAX:
A. Tax Imposed: A tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege of using in this Village an automobile which is rented from a renter outside Illinois and
which is titled or registered with an agency of this State's government in this Village at the rate of one percent (1%) of the rental price of such
automobile while this Section is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-8.
B. Persons Liable For Payment Of Tax: The tax provided for in this Section shall be collected from the persons whose Illinois address for titling or
registration purposes is given as being in this Village.
C. Payment Of Tax: The tax imposed by this Section shall be paid to the Illinois Department of Revenue. (1987 Code)
3-2-5: MUNICIPAL AUTOMOBILE RENTING OCCUPATION TAX:
A. Tax Imposed: A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of renting automobiles in this Village at a rate of one percent
(1%) of the gross receipts from such rentals made in the course of such business while this Section is in effect, in accordance with the
provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-7.
B. Report Required: Every such person engaged in such business in the Village shall file on or before the last day of each calendar month, the
report to the State Department of Revenue required by sections two and three of "An Act in Relation to a Tax upon Persons Engaged in the
Business of Selling Tangible Personal Property to Purchasers for Use or Consumption".
C. Payment Of Tax: At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the State Department of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on
account of the renting of automobiles during the preceding month. (1987 Code)
3-2-6: FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE COMPANIES:
A. Companies With Provisions: It shall be unlawful for any corporation or association, not incorporated under the laws of the State, to engage in
the Village in effecting fire insurance, or to transact any business of fire insurance in the Village, while in default by not fully complying with any
of the requirements of this Section, and until such requirements shall have been fully complied with; but this provision shall not relieve any
company, corporation or association from the payment of any risk that may be undertaken in violation of this Section.
B. Payment For Use And Benefit Of Fire Department: Any corporation, company or association not incorporated under the laws of the State,
which is engaged in the Village in effecting fire insurance shall pay the Village Collector for the maintenance, use and benefit of the Fire
Department, a sum of money equal in amount to two percent (2%) per annum of the gross receipts received as premiums upon fire insurance
policies by any and all agents of such corporation, company or association during the year ending on July 1 in each year for any insurance
effected or agreed to be effected on property located in the Village by or with such corporation, company or association during such year.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 53/387
C. Report Required, Payment Of Tax: Every person acting in the Village as agent for or on behalf of any corporation, company or association not
incorporated under the laws of the State shall, on or before July 15 of each and every year, render the Village Clerk a full, true and just
account verified by his oath, of all premiums upon fire insurance policies which during the year, ending July 1 preceding such report, shall
have been received by him, or by some other person for him, in his behalf of any such corporation, company or association on property
located in the Village. Such agent shall also at the time of rendering the aforesaid report, pay to the Village Collector the sum of money for
which company, corporation or association represented by him is chargeable by virtue of the provisions of this Section.
D. Action By Village: The sum of money for which such company, corporation or association is so chargeable may be recovered of it or its agents
or agent by an action in the name of and for the use of the Village as for money had and received. Nothing in this Section shall be held to
exempt any person from indictment and conviction under the provisions of an act entitled "An Act to enable cities, towns and villages,
organized under any general or special law, to levy and collect a tax or license fee from foreign insurance companies for the benefit of
organized fire departments", in force July 1, 18956.
E. Agents Prohibited From Representing Fraudulent Companies: No insurance agent in the Village shall have any insurance business or dealings
with any company, association or corporation not incorporated under the laws of this State which shall be in default for not reporting or making
payments as hereinbefore provided, until it shall have complied with all the requirements of this Section. (1987 Code)
3-2-7: TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX:
A. Tax Imposed: A tax is imposed on the following acts or privileges:
1. The act or privilege of originating in the Village or receiving in the Village intrastate telecommunications by a person at the rate of five
percent (5%) of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer by such person. However, such tax is not
imposed on such act or privilege to the extent such act or privilege may not, under the Constitution of the United States, be made the
subject of taxation by municipalities in this State.
2. The act or privilege of originating in the Village or receiving in the Village interstate telecommunications by a person at the rate of five
percent (5%) of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer by such person. To prevent actual
multistate taxation of the act or privilege that is subject to taxation under this subsection, any taxpayer, upon proof that the taxpayer has
paid a tax in another state on such event, shall be allowed a credit against any tax enacted pursuant to this subsection to the extent of the
amount of such tax properly due and paid in such other state which was not previously allowed as a credit against any other state or local
tax in this State. However, such tax is not imposed on the act or privilege to the extent such act or privilege may not, under the Constitution
and statutes of the United States, be made the subject of taxation by municipalities in this State.
B. Collection Of Tax By Retailers: The tax authorized by this Section shall be collected from the taxpayer by a retailer maintaining a place of
business in this State and making or effectuating the sale at retail and shall be remitted by such retailer to the Village. Any tax required to be
collected pursuant to an ordinance authorized by this Section and any such tax collected pursuant to an ordinance authorized by this Section
and any such tax collected by such retailer shall constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the Village. Retailers shall collect the tax from the
taxpayer by adding the tax to the gross charge for the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications when sold for use. The
tax authorized by this Section shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the retailer who provided such taxable services until paid, and if
unpaid, is recoverable at law in the same manner as the original charge for such taxable services. If the retailer fails to collect the tax from the
taxpayer, then the taxpayer shall be required to pay the tax directly to the Village.
Whenever possible, the tax authorized by this Section shall, when collected, be stated as a distinct item separate and apart from the gross
charge for telecommunications.
C. Definitions: For the purposes of the taxes authorized by this Section:
AMOUNT PAID: The amount charged to the taxpayer's service address in the Village regardless of where such amount is billed or paid.
GROSS CHARGE: The amount paid for the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications in the Village and for all services
rendered in connection therewith, valued in money whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services and property of
every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the
materials used, labor or service costs or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended, the amount thereof shall be included
only as and when paid. However, "gross charge" shall not include:
1. Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made pursuant to: a) the tax imposed by this Section, b) additional
charges added to a purchaser's bill pursuant to section 9-222 of the Public Utilities Act, c) the tax imposed by the Telecommunications
Excise Tax Act, or d) the tax imposed by section 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code;
2. Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside of the Village;
3. Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of data or information or subsequent retrieval or the processing of
data or information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes, but is not limited to, the use of calculators,
computers, data processing equipment, and also includes the usage of computers under a time-sharing agreement;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 54/387
4. Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such
charges are desegregated and separately identified from other charges;
5. Charges to business enterprises certified under section 9-222.1 of the Public Utilities Act to the extent of such exemption and during
the period of time specified by the Department of Commerce and Community Affairs;
6. Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries when the tax imposed under this Section has already been paid to a
retailer and only to the extent that the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned
subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the corporations and not the generation of profit for the corporation rendering such
service;
7. Bad debts ("bad debt" means any portion of the debt that is related to a sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise
deductible or excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under applicable Federal income tax standards; if
the portion of the debt deemed to be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that portion during the
reporting period in which the payment is made); or
8. Charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated telecommunication devices.
INTERSTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS: All telecommunications that either originate or terminate outside this State.
INTRASTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS: All telecommunications that originate and terminate within this State.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, or a receiver,
trustee, guardian or other representative appointed by order of any court, the Federal and State governments, including State universities
created by statute, or any city, town, county, or other political subdivision of this State.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL: The acquisition, consumption or use of telecommunications through sale at retail.
RETAILER: Means and includes every person engaged in the business of making sales at retail as defined in this Section. The Village may,
upon application authorize the collection of the tax hereby imposed by any retailer not maintaining a place of business within this State, who
to the satisfaction of the Village, furnishes adequate security to ensure collection and payment of the tax. Such retailer shall be issued,
without charge, a permit to collect such tax. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer to collect the tax upon all of the gross
charges for telecommunications in the Village in the same manner and subject to the same requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of
business within the Village.
RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE (Or Any Like Term): Means and includes any retailer having or
maintaining within this State, directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities, transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse or
other place of business, or any agent or other representative operating within this State under the authority of the retailer or its subsidiary,
irrespective of whether such place of business or agent or other representative is located here permanently or temporarily, or whether such
retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in this State.
SALE AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying or furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection therewith for a
consideration to persons other than Federal and State governments, and State universities created by statute, and other than between a
parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the tax has already been paid to a retailer
and the gross charge made by one such corporation is not greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption
and not for resale.
SERVICE ADDRESS: The location of telecommunications equipment from which telecommunications services are originated or at which
telecommunications services are received by a taxpayer. If this is not a defined location, as in the case of mobile phones, paging systems,
maritime systems, air-to-ground systems and the like, "service address" shall mean the location of a taxpayer's primary use of the
telecommunications equipment as defined by telephone number, authorization code, or location in Illinois where bills are sent.
TAXPAYER: A person who individually or through his agents, employees, or permittees engages in an act or privilege of originating in the
Village or receiving in the Village telecommunications and who incurs a tax liability under any ordinance authorized by this Section.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: In addition to the usual and popular meaning, includes, but is not limited to: messages or information transmitted
through use of local, toll and wide area telephone service, channel services, telegraph services, cellular service, computer exchange
services, cellular mobile communications service, specialized mobile radio services, paging service, or any other form of mobile and
portable one-way or two-way communications, or any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar facilities. The definition of
"telecommunications" shall not include value added services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form,
content, code and protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by him to the ultimate
retail consumer who originates or terminates the taxable end-to-end communications. Carrier access charges, right of access charges,
charges for use of intercompany facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision used as a component of, or
integrated into, end-to-end telecommunications service shall be nontaxable as sales for resale.
VILLAGE: The Village of Broadview, Illinois, a Municipal corporation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 55/387
D. Resale Numbers: If a person, who originates or receives telecommunications in the Village claims to be a reseller of such telecommunications,
such person shall apply to the Village for a resale number. Such applicant shall state facts which will show the Village why such applicant is
not liable for tax under this Section on any of such purchases and shall furnish such additional information as the Village may reasonably
require.
Upon approval of the applications, the Village shall assign a resale number to the applicant and shall certify such number to the applicant. The
Village may cancel any number which is obtained through misrepresentation, or which is used to send or receive such telecommunications
tax-free when such actions in fact are not for resale, or which no longer applies because of the person's having discontinued the making of
resales.
Except as provided hereinabove in this Section, the act or privilege of sending or receiving telecommunications in this State shall not be made
tax-free on the grounds of being a sale for resale unless the person has an active resale number from the Village and furnishes that number to
the retailer in connection with certifying to the retailer that any sale to such person is nontaxable because of being for resale.
E. Returns; Filing, Contents, Payment Of Tax: On or before October 31 of each year, each retailer shall make a return to the Village Collector for
the months of July, August, and September, stating:
1. Its name;
2. Its principal place of business;
3. The gross charges during those months upon the basis of which the tax is imposed;
4. Amount of tax;
5. Such other reasonable and related information as the Village may require.
F. Quarterly Returns: On or before the last day of every third month thereafter, each retailer shall make a like return to the Village Collector for a
corresponding three (3) month period.
G. Payments; Adjustments: The retailer making a return herein provided for shall, at the time of making such return, pay to the Village Collector,
the amount of tax herein imposed; provided that in connection with any return the retailer may, if he so elects, report and pay an amount
based upon his total billings of business subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made (exclusive of any amounts previously
billed) with prompt adjustments of later payments based upon any differences between such billings and the taxable gross charges.
H. Erroneous Payment: If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due under the provisions of this Section, whether as
the result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax due, or to become due, under this Section
from the taxpayer who made the erroneous payment; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than three (3) years prior to the filing of
a claim therefor shall be so credited.
I. Books And Records Of Retailer: Every retailer under this Section shall keep books, records and other documents which are adequate to reflect
that the tax imposed by this Section to be kept shall, at all times during business hours of the day, be subject to inspections by the Village or
its duly authorized agents and employees. Books and records reflecting gross charges during any period with respect to which the tax is
imposed shall be preserved until the expiration of three (3) years following the period the tax was incurred, unless the Village, in writing,
authorizes their destruction or disposal at an earlier date.
J. Failure To Make Return Or Fraudulent Return: Any retailer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent return, or who wilfully violates
any other provision of this Section is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and in addition shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due. (Ord. 93-17,
11-15-1993)
3-2-8: MUNICIPAL ELECTRIC UTILITY TAX:
A. Definitions: As used in this Section, unless the context otherwise requires:
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability
company, municipal corporation, the State or any of its political subdivisions, any State university created by statute, or a receiver, trustee,
conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court.
PERSON MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE: Any person having or maintaining within this State, directly or by a
subsidiary or other affiliate, an office, generation facility, distribution facility, transmission facility, sales office or other place of business, or any
employee, agent, or other representative operating within this State under the authority of the person or its subsidiary or other affiliate,
irrespective of whether such place of business or agent or other representative is located in this State permanently or temporarily, or whether
such person, subsidiary or other affiliate is licensed or qualified to do business in this State.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL: Any acquisition of electricity by a purchaser for purposes of use or consumption, and not for resale, but shall not
include the use of electricity by a public utility, as defined in section 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code7, directly in the generation,
production, transmission, delivery or sale of electricity.
PURCHASER: Any person who uses or consumes, within the corporate limits of the Village, electricity acquired in a purchase at retail.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 56/387
TAX COLLECTOR: The person delivering electricity to the purchaser.
VILLAGE: The Village of Broadview.
B. Tax Imposed:
1. Pursuant to section 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code8 and any and all other applicable authority, a tax is imposed upon the privilege of
using or consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at retail and used or consumed within the corporate limits of the Village at the
following rates, calculated on a monthly basis for each purchaser:
a. For the first 2,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.606 cents per kilowatt-hour;
b. For the next 48,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.398 cents per kilowatt-hour;
c. For the next 50,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.358 cents per kilowatt-hour;
d. For the next 400,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.348 cents per kilowatt-hour;
e. For the next 500,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.338 cents per kilowatt-hour;
f. For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.318 cents per kilowatt-hour;
g. For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.313 cents per kilowatt-hour;
h. For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.308 cents per kilowatt-hour;
i. For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.303 cents per kilowatt-hour;
j. For all electricity used or consumed in excess of 20,000,000 kilowatt-hours in a month; 0.298 cents per kilowatt-hour.
The tax rates as previously set forth shall be used at least through December 31, 2008, are proportional to the rates enumerated in 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-2 (as modified by Public Act 90-561), and do not exceed the revenue that could have been collected
during 1997.
2. Pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-2, the rates set forth in subsection B1 of this Section shall be effective: a) with the first bill
being issued on or after September 1, 1998, for residential customers, and b) on the earlier of: 1) the last bill issued prior to December 31,
2000, or 2) the date of the first bill issued pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/16-104, for nonresidential customers.
3. The tax is in addition to all taxes, fees and other revenue measures imposed by the Village, the State or any other political subdivision of
the State.
4. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section, the tax shall not be imposed if and to the extent that imposition or collection of the tax
would violate the Constitution or statutes of the United States or the constitution of the State.
C. Collection Of Tax:
1. The tax authorized by this Section shall be collected from the purchaser by the person maintaining a place of business in this State who
delivers the electricity to the purchaser. This tax shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the person who delivers the electricity to the
purchaser and if unpaid, is recoverable in the same manner as the original charge for delivering the electricity. Any tax required to be
collected pursuant to this Section and any such tax collected by a person delivering electricity shall constitute a debt owed to the
Municipality by such person delivering the electricity. Persons delivering electricity shall collect the tax from the purchaser by adding such
tax to the gross charge for delivering the electricity.
2. Any tax required to be collected by this Section, and any tax in fact collected, shall constitute a debt owed to the Village by the person
delivering the electricity, provided, that the person delivering electricity shall be allowed credit for such tax related to deliveries of electricity
the charges for which are written off as uncollectible, and provided further, that if such charges are thereafter collected, the delivering
supplier shall be obligated to remit such tax at such later time.
3. Persons delivering electricity shall also be authorized to add to such gross charge an amount equal to three percent (3%) of the tax to
reimburse the person delivering electricity for the expense incurred in keeping records, billing customers, preparing and filing returns,
remitting the tax and supplying data to the Municipality upon request.
4. If the person delivering electricity fails, upon reasonable and good faith efforts, to collect the tax from the purchaser, then the purchaser
shall be required to pay the tax directly to the Municipality in the manner prescribed by the Municipality.
D. Tax Remittance And Returns:
1. Every tax collector shall, on a monthly basis, file a return in a form prescribed by the Village that shall include at least the following:
a. The purchaser;
b. The purchaser's location;
c. The kilowatt-hour usage during the preceding month;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 57/387
d. The amount of tax due the Village.
2. The return shall be accompanied by a remittance for the amount of tax due the Village, and shall be due on or before the last day of the
month following the month during which the tax is collected.
E. Credit For Overpayment: If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due under the provisions of this Section, whether
as the result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax due, or to become due, under this
Section from the person delivering electricity who made the erroneous payment; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than one
year prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be so credited.
No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this Section shall be commenced more than one year after the due date of
such amount.
F. Penalty: Any tax collector who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent return, or who wilfully violates any other provision of this
Section is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined no less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than two
hundred dollars ($200.00) and in addition, shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due plus reasonable attorney fees for the
collection thereof.
G. Additional Remedies: Nothing in this Section shall be construed as limiting any additional or further remedies that the Village may have for
enforcement of this Section.
H. Severability: If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this Ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional
by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not
affect the validity of the remaining provisions hereof. (Ord. 98-16, 7-20-1998)
Chapter 3
LIQUOR CONTROL
3-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: Includes alcohol, spirits, wine and beer, and every liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer
and capable of being consumed as a beverage by a human being. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to alcohol used in the
manufacture of denatured alcohol produced in accordance with acts of congress and regulations promulgated thereunder nor to any liquid or solid
containing one-half of one percent (0.5%), or less, of alcohol by volume.
CLUB: A corporation organized under the laws of this state, not for pecuniary profit, solely for the promotion of some common object other than
the sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors, kept, used and maintained by its members through the payment of annual dues and owning, hiring or
leasing a building or space in a building, of such extent and character as may be suitable and adequate for the reasonable and comfortable use
and accommodation of its members and their guests and provided with suitable and adequate kitchen and dining room space and equipment and
maintaining a sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing and serving food and meals for its members and their guests; provided, that
such club files with the president at the time of its application for a license under this chapter, two (2) copies of a list of names and residences of
its members, and similarly files within ten (10) days of the election of any additional member, his name and address; and, provided further, that its
affairs and management are conducted by a board of directors, executive committee or similar body chosen by the members at their annual
meeting, and that no member or any officer, agent or employee of the club is paid, or directly or indirectly receives, in the form of salary or other
compensation, any profits from the distribution or sale of alcoholic liquor to the club or the members of the club or its guests introduced by
members, beyond the amount of such salary as may be fixed and voted at any annual meeting by the members or by its board of directors or
other governing body out of the general revenue of the club.
HOTEL: Every building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public to be a place where food is actually served
and consumed and sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests whether transient, permanent or residential, in
which twenty five (25) or more rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations of such guests and having one or more public dining rooms
where meals are served to such guests, such sleeping accommodations and dining rooms being conducted in the same building in connection
therewith and such building or structure being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity.
RESTAURANT: Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are served, and where
meals are actually and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, such space being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and
dining room equipment and capacity and having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable
food for its guests.
RETAIL SALE: The sale for use or consumption and not for resale.
SALE: Any transfer, exchange or barter in any manner, or by any means whatsoever, including the transfer of alcoholic liquors by and through the
transfer or negotiation of warehouse receipts or certificates, and includes and means all sales made by any person, whether principal proprietor,
agent, servant or employee.
TO SELL: Includes to keep or expose for sale and to keep with intent to sell. (1987 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 58/387
3-3-1-1: LIQUOR CONTROL ACT ADOPTED:
Each and every part of the liquor control act of 1934, 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-1 et seq., and regulations promulgated hereunder, as
amended, which relate in any manner to the retail sale of alcoholic liquors, is adopted by this reference and made a part of this chapter as to the
same extent and with the same legal effect as if fully set forth in this section, except as otherwise specifically provided, changed or amended in
this chapter. Any violation of such applicable and adopted provision of such act or regulation shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and
subject to the penalties provided in this chapter. (Ord. 09-58, 11-16-2009)
3-3-1-2: ADMINISTRATION OF CHAPTER:
The local liquor control commissioner and the deputy local liquor control commissioner shall have the power to adopt such rules and regulations
consistent with this chapter that the local liquor control commissioner and/or the deputy local liquor control commissioner deem(s) necessary to
carry on his, her or their functions and duties and for the efficient administration of this chapter. (Ord. 09-58, 11-16-2009)
3-3-2: LICENSING PROVISIONS:
3-3-2-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail in the village any alcoholic liquor without having a retail liquor dealer's license, or to sell liquor in
violation of the terms of such license. (1987 Code)
3-3-2-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Application for a retailer's license shall be made to the village president1 in writing, signed by the applicant, if an individual or by a duly authorized
agent thereof if a club or corporation, verified by oath or affidavit, and shall contain the following information and statements:
A. The name, age and address of the applicant in the case of an individual; in the case of a copartnership, the persons entitled to share in the
profits thereof; and in the case of a corporation for profit or a club, the date of incorporation, the objects for which it was organized, the names
and addresses of the officers and directors, and if a majority in interest of the stock of such corporation is owned by one person or his
nominees, the name and address of such person.
B. The citizenship of the applicant, his place of birth and if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of his naturalization.
C. The character of business of the applicant, and in case of a corporation, the objects for which it was formed.
D. The length of time that the applicant has been in business of that character, or in the case of a corporation, the date on which its charter was
issued.
E. The amount of goods, wares and merchandise on hand at the time application is made.
F. The location and description of the premises or place of business which is to be operated under such license.
G. A statement whether the applicant has made similar application for a similar other license on premises other than described in this application,
and the disposition of such application.
H. A statement that applicant has never been convicted of a felony and is not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing
contained in this code or the laws of this state, or the ordinances of the village.
I. Whether a previous license by any state or subdivision thereof, or by the federal government has been revoked, and the reasons thereof.
J. A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of the state or of the United States, or this code in the conduct of his place of
business. (1987 Code)
3-3-2-3: RESTRICTIONS ON LICENSE:
No such license shall be issued to:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 59/387
A. A person who is not a resident of the village.
B. A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community.
C. A person who is not a citizen of the United States.
D. A person who has been convicted of a felony under the laws of the state.
E. A person who has been convicted of being the keeper of or is keeping a house of ill fame.
F. A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality.
G. A person whose license issued under this chapter has been revoked for cause.
H. A person who, at the time of application for renewal of any license issued hereunder, would not be eligible for such license upon a first
application.
I. A copartnership, unless all of the members of such copartnership shall be qualified to obtain a license.
J. A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any stockholder owning in the aggregate more than five percent (5%) of the stock of
such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than citizenship and residence within the political
subdivision.
K. A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent unless the manager or agent possesses the same qualifications
required of the licensee.
L. A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor,
subsequent to the effective date hereof, or shall have forfeited his bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such violation.
M. A person who does not own the premises for which a license is sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which the
license is to be issued.
N. Any law enforcing public official, president of the village board of trustees, any member of the village board of trustees, or any president or
member of a county board; and no such official shall be interested in any way, either directly or indirectly, in the manufacture, sale or
distribution of alcoholic liquor.
O. Any person, association or corporation not eligible for a State retail liquor dealer's license. (1987 Code)
3-3-2-4: SCHEDULE OF ANNUAL LICENSE FEES:
The following annual license fees shall be charged for liquor licenses:
Class A license $3,400.00
Class B license 3,400.00
Combination Class A and B license 3,400.00
Class C license 1,500.00
Combination Class A and C license 2,500.00
The license fees shall be paid by January 1. Any new application for a liquor license made after January 1 shall be subject to a prorated portion of
the applicable fee. (Ord. 09-58, 11-16-2009)
3-3-2-5: TERM OF LICENSE:
Each license required by section 3-3-2-1 of this chapter shall terminate on December 31 next following its issuance. (1987 Code; amd. Ord. 2005-
29, 12-5-2005)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 60/387
3-3-2-6: RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
Any licensee may renew his license at the expiration thereof; provided, that he is then qualified to receive a license and the premises for which
such renewal license is sought is suitable for such purpose; provided further, that the renewal privilege herein provided for shall not be construed
as a vested right which shall in any case prevent the President from decreasing the number of licenses to be issued within his jurisdiction, in
accordance with any law or ordinance ordering such decrease. (1987 Code)
3-3-2-7: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
A license shall be purely a personal privilege, good for not to exceed one year after issuance unless sooner revoked, and shall not constitute
property, nor shall it be subject to attachment, garnishment or execution, nor shall it be alienable or transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or
subject to being encumbered or hypothecated. Such license shall not descend by the laws of testate or intestate devolution but it shall cease
upon the death of the licensee; provided, that executors or administrators of the estate of any deceased licensee, and the trustee of any insolvent
or bankrupt licensee, when such estate consists in part of alcoholic liquor, may continue the business of the sale or manufacture of alcoholic
liquor under the order of the appropriate court, and may exercise the privileges of the deceased or insolvent or bankrupt licensee after the death
of such decedent, or such insolvency or bankruptcy until the expiration of such license, but not longer than six (6) months after the death,
bankruptcy or insolvency of such licensee. A refund shall be made of that portion of the license fees paid for any period in which the licensee shall
be prevented from operating under such license in accordance with the provisions of this section. (1987 Code)
3-3-2-8: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The President may revoke any retail liquor dealer's license for any violation of any provision of this chapter, or for any violation of any State law
pertaining to the sale of alcoholic liquor. Any such revocation shall be in compliance with the procedures set out in section 3-1-11 of this title.
(1987 Code)
3-3-3: CLASSIFICATION OF LICENSES:
Retail liquor licenses shall be divided into the following classes:
Class A license: Which shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption only, on the premises specified.
Class B license: Which shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor but not for consumption on the premises where sold.
Combination of Classes A and B: Any person engaged in the retail sale of alcoholic liquor and qualified to purchase both a Class A and a Class B
license may do so if such businesses are conducted in one premises or location and provided there are licenses available.
Class C license: Which shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises in conjunction with the sale of food for
consumption on the premises.
Combination of Classes A and C: Any person engaged in the retail sale of alcoholic liquor and qualified to purchase both a Class A and Class C
license may do so if such businesses are conducted in one premises or location and provided there are licenses available (i.e., banquet halls or
combination restaurant/bar).
Class D license: Shall be known as a restaurant license, which shall authorize the retail sale of beer and wine for consumption on the premises in
conjunction with the sale of food for consumption on the premises. (Ord. 2015-42, 5-18-2015)
3-3-4: SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR CERTAIN LICENSES:
A. Class A License: Musical entertainment (i.e., live band, disc jockey, karaoke, etc.) shall not be allowed after twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight.
Coin operated amusement devices, other than video poker machines, shall be allowed under a Class A license provided all applicable fees
under section 3-1A-1 of this title are paid.
B. Class C License: Ninety percent (90%) of the square foot area of any premises with a Class C license must be devoted to the preparation and
serving of food and used as such under that class of license. Musical entertainment (i.e., live band, disc jockey, karaoke, etc.) shall not be
allowed after twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight.
C. Class D License: Each restaurant license may be issued and held only for a business that generates at least sixty percent (60%) of its gross
annual sales from the sale of food within the licensed premises. The licensee must provide, at the time of license application, license renewal,
and when otherwise requested by the Village, proof of compliance with that sixty percent (60%) sales requirement, and the licensee must
maintain compliance with that sales requirement at all times. Live entertainment shall not be allowed.
D. Combination Class A And C License: Musical entertainment (i.e., live band, disc jockey, karaoke, etc.) shall not be allowed after twelve o'clock
(12:00) midnight. (Ord. 2015-42, 5-18-2015)
3-3-5: NUMBER OF LICENSES ISSUED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 61/387
There shall be issued in the Village, to be effective at any time, no more than one Class A license; no more than six (6) Class B licenses; no more
than three (3) Class C licenses where a service bar only is allowed on the premises; no more than two (2) Class D licenses; no more than one
combination Class A and B license; and no more than one combination Class A and C license. (Ord. 2017-141, 12-4-2017)
3-3-6: LIST OF LICENSES KEPT:
The President shall keep or cause to be kept a complete record of all licenses issued by him and shall furnish the Clerk, Treasurer and Chief of
Police each with a copy thereof. Upon the issuance of any new license or the revocation of any old license, the President shall give written notice
of such action to each of these officers within forty eight (48) hours of such action. (1987 Code)
3-3-7: DISPOSITION OF LICENSE FEES:
One-half (1/2) of the fees charged by section 3-3-2-4 of this chapter shall be paid to the President at the time application is made and shall be
turned over to the Collector. In the event the license applied for is denied, the fee shall be returned to the applicant. If the license is granted, then
the fee shall be deposited in the General Corporate Fund or in such other fund as shall have been designated by the Board of Trustees by proper
action. (1987 Code)
3-3-8: BUILDING AND LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
A. Location Restrictions: No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor within one hundred feet (100') of any church,
school, hospital, home for aged or indigent persons or for veterans, their wives or children or any military or naval station; provided, that this
prohibition shall not apply to hotels offering restaurant service, regularly organized clubs, or to restaurants, food shops or other places where
sale of alcoholic liquors is not the principal business carried on, if such place of business so exempted shall have been established for such
purposes prior to the taking effect of this subsection. No person shall hereafter engage in business as a retailer of any alcoholic liquor within
fifty feet (50') of any business previously licensed by the Village for the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor.
B. View From Street: In premises upon which the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption upon the premises is licensed other than as a
restaurant, hotel, club or any bowling establishment other than one situated on the first or ground floor, no screen, blind, curtain, partition,
article or thing shall be permitted in the windows or upon the doors of such licensed premises nor inside such premises which shall prevent a
clear view into the interior of such licensed premises from the street, road or sidewalk at all times, and no booth, screen, partition or other
obstruction nor any arrangement of lights or lighting shall be permitted in or about the interior of such premises which shall prevent a full view
of the entire interior of such premises from the street, road or sidewalk, and the premises must be so located that there shall be a full view of
the entire interior of such premises from the street, road or sidewalk. All rooms where liquor is sold for consumption upon the premises shall
be continuously lighted during business hours by natural light or artificial white light so that all parts of the interior of the premises shall be
clearly visible. In case the view into any such licensed premises required by the foregoing provisions shall be wilfully obstructed by the
licensee or by him wilfully suffered to be obscured or in any manner obstructed, then such license shall be subject to revocation in the manner
provided in section 3-3-2-8 of this chapter. In order to enforce the provisions of this subsection the President shall have the right to require the
filing with him of plans, drawings and photographs showing the clearance of the view as above required.
C. Change Of Location: A retail liquor dealer's license shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor only on the premises described in the application
and license. Such location may be changed only upon the written permit to make such change issued by the president. No change of location
shall be permitted unless the proposed new location is a proper one for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor under the laws of the state and the
ordinances of the village. (1987 Code)
3-3-9: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
A. Operating Hours: It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail in the village any alcoholic liquor except during the hours as follows:
1. All licensed establishments, Monday through Thursday, from six o'clock (6:00) A.M. to twelve forty five o'clock (12:45) A.M. of the following
day. Friday and Saturday, from six o'clock (6:00) A.M. to one forty five o'clock (1:45) A.M. of the following day. Sunday, from twelve o'clock
(12:00) noon to twelve forty five o'clock (12:45) A.M. of the following day, provided however, that sale of alcoholic liquor by and from class B
liquor establishments in original packages and not for consumption on the premises where sold, shall be permitted from ten o'clock (10:00)
A.M. to one o'clock (1:00) A.M.
2. All patrons and invitees shall leave the premises where alcoholic beverages are served no later than fifteen (15) minutes after the hours
specified in this section.
B. Consumption On Premises: It shall be unlawful for anyone not having a class A or class C license to sell or offer for sale any alcoholic liquor for
consumption on the premises where sold or to permit same to be consumed on the premises where sold.
C. Peddling: It shall be unlawful to peddle alcoholic liquor in the village. (Ord. 09-58, 11-16-2009)
3-3-10: SANITARY CONDITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 62/387
A. Premises: All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor, or for the storage of such liquor for such sale, shall be kept in a clean and
sanitary condition, and shall be kept in full compliance with the provisions of this code regulating the condition of premises used for the
storage or sale of food for human consumption2.
B. Employees: It shall be unlawful to employ in any premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor any person who is afflicted with, or who is
a carrier of, any contagious, infectious or venereal disease, and it shall be unlawful for any person who is afflicted with or a carrier of any such
disease to work in or about any premises or to engage in any way in the handling, preparation or distribution of such liquor. (1987 Code)
3-3-11: MINORS:
A. Presence Of Underage Persons In Establishments: A licensee or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent, or employee of a
licensee shall be prohibited from permitting a person under the age of twenty one (21) years to enter and remain in that portion of a licensed
premises that sells, gives, or delivers alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises. No prohibition under this subsection, however, shall
apply to any licensed premises, such as, without limitation, a restaurant or food shop, where selling, giving, or delivering alcoholic liquor is not
the principal business of the licensee at those premises. In addition to any other penalty imposed for violations of this chapter, a minimum fine
of one hundred dollars ($100.00) and a maximum fine of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) shall be imposed for violations of this
subsection.
B. Underage Persons Frequenting Establishments Or Purchasing Or Receiving Liquor: It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty
one (21) years to knowingly frequent any dramshop where alcoholic beverages are sold or to purchase any alcoholic beverages, whether for
consumption on the premises or in package form for consumption off the premises. Any person under the age of twenty one (21) years who
knowingly frequents any dramshop wherein intoxicating beverages are sold shall be subject to a minimum fine of one hundred dollars
($100.00) and a maximum fine of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) shall be imposed for violations of this subsection.
C. Notification Of Guardians: When any person under the age of twenty one (21) years is charged as a delinquent child, the department of police
shall notify the parent, guardian or legal representative when to appear before the juvenile court of the county, wherein the minor's case will be
heard.
D. Unlawful To Serve Underage Persons: It shall be unlawful for any licensee, manager for the licensee or any other person in charge of the
premises or employed by the licensee or manager to sell, give away, deliver or offer any alcoholic beverage to a person under the age of
twenty one (21) years. In addition to any other penalty imposed for violations of this chapter, a minimum fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00)
and a maximum fine of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) shall be imposed for violations of this subsection. For the purposes of preventing
the violation of this subsection, all licensees, agents or employees must refuse to sell or serve alcoholic beverages to any person who is
unable to produce adequate written evidence of identity and of the fact that such person is over the age of twenty one (21) years. For
purposes of this subsection, a nonoperator's identification card issued by this state or any other identification wherein proof of age is not
required for the issuance of the identification card is not competent evidence of age and may not be relied upon by any licensee, his employee
or agent in any transaction. (Ord. 09-58, 11-16-2009)
3-3-12: SALE TO INTOXICATED PERSONS, HABITUAL DRUNKARDS:
No licensee nor any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee shall sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to
any intoxicated person or to any person known by him to be a habitual drunkard, spendthrift, insane, mentally ill, mentally deficient or in need of
medical treatment. (1987 Code)
3-3-13: VIOLATIONS, PENALTY:
A. Any person who manufactures, imports for distribution or use, or distributes or sells alcoholic liquor at any place within the village without
having first obtained a valid license under the provisions of this chapter, or shall make any false statement or otherwise violate any of the
provisions of this chapter in obtaining any license hereunder, or who having obtained a license hereunder shall violate any of the provisions of
this chapter with respect to the manufacture, possession, distribution or sale of alcoholic liquor, or with respect to the maintenance of the
licensed premises, or shall violate any other provision of this chapter, shall levy a fine on the licensee for violations. The fine imposed shall not
exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for a first violation within a twelve (12) month period, one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00)
for a second violation within a twelve (12) month period, and two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for a third or subsequent violation
within a twelve (12) month period. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation, but not more than fifteen thousand
dollars ($15,000.00) in fines may be imposed against any licensee during the period of the license.
B. In the event that a liquor license holder fails to submit a license renewal application to the village before or on the expiration date of the current
license, the licensee will be assessed a late filing fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00). Late applications and instruments of payment will be
returned to the licensee. Late filing fees will be in addition to any fines or penalties ordered for operating without a valid license.
C. If, after a hearing on any citation charging a violation of any provision of this chapter, the local liquor control commissioner or the deputy local
liquor control commissioner finds adversely to the licensee, in addition to the suspension or revocation of the license, any fine imposed, and
any other costs imposed, the local liquor control commissioner or the deputy local liquor control commissioner may order the licensee to pay
to the village reasonable attorney fees incurred by the village and the local liquor control commissioner or the deputy local liquor control
commissioner in the prosecution of the violation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 63/387
D. If such decision is appealed and is upheld by the state liquor control commission, the licensee shall be responsible for attorney fees incurred
by the village in defending the appeal to the state liquor control commission.
E. Any servant or employee engaged in the business of the sale of alcoholic liquors or beverages who shall violate any section of this chapter
shall be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each
offense. (Ord. 09-58, 11-16-2009)
3-3-14: BEVERAGE ALCOHOL SELLERS AND SERVERS TRAINING (BASSET) PROGRAM:
A. Each applicant for a liquor license shall have each person who will supervise or be in charge of the sale of liquor upon commencement of their
license successfully complete a beverage alcohol sellers and servers training (BASSET) program conducted by an agency licensed by the
Illinois liquor commission, or successfully complete a state of Illinois certified alcohol awareness program, prior to issuance of a liquor license
except as set forth in subsections B and C of this section. Proof of successful completion of BASSET training shall be required prior to
issuance of the liquor license.
B. Each employee, whether or not supervisory, of a liquor licensee, who is engaged in the selling, mixing, preparing, serving or delivering of
alcoholic beverages to customers, guests or patrons, for consumption on or off the premises, shall successfully complete a BASSET program
conducted by an agency licensed by the Illinois liquor control commission, or successfully complete a state of Illinois certified alcohol
awareness program. Such training shall be completed not more than sixty (60) days after the employee begins employment with the licensee.
A copy of the employee's certificate of completion of training shall be filed with the village liquor commission.
C. Liquor license applicants applying for a liquor license effective January 1, 2010, shall be granted a ninety (90) day grace period from January
1, 2010, to have supervisors and employees, as designated by this section, successfully complete a BASSET program conducted by an
agency licensed by the Illinois liquor commission, or successfully complete a state of Illinois certified alcohol awareness program. This grace
period shall not apply to new liquor license applicants when the application for the liquor license is submitted after December 31, 2009.
D. Liquor license holders shall keep a standing record of when the required BASSET training, and/or successfully completed a state of Illinois
certified alcohol awareness program, was completed. This will include, but is not limited to, a photocopy of a BASSET card and/or a
photocopy of a certificate from a state of Illinois certified alcohol awareness program. This standing record shall be kept on the business
premises and available to inspection by representative(s) of the village liquor commission or other village representative. (Ord. 09-58, 11-16-
2009)
3-3-15: SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
A. Suspension Of Business Operation: When the conduct or operation of any liquor licensee shall constitute a nuisance in fact and a clear and
present danger to the public health, safety, or general welfare, the liquor control commissioner shall be authorized to summarily order the
cessation of business, the closing of the premises and the suspension of any license for a period not to exceed seven (7) days. Within the
seven (7) days after he or she has so acted, the liquor control commissioner shall call a hearing for the purpose of determining whether the
license should be suspended for an additional period of time or revoked.
B. Revocation Of License: Liquor licenses issued under this chapter, unless otherwise provided, may be suspended for up to thirty (30) days or
revoked by the liquor control commissioner after notice and hearing as provided below for any of the following causes:
1. Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the application for the license;
2. Any violation by the licensee of this code relating to the license, the subject matter of the license, or the premises occupied;
3. Conviction of the licensee of any felony or of a misdemeanor when such conviction indicates his or her inability to operate a safe, honest, or
legitimate business operation within the village;
4. Failure of the licensee to pay any fine or penalty owing to the village;
5. Refusal to permit an inspection, or any interference with a duly authorized village officer or employee while in the performance of his or her
duties in making such inspections, as provided in this chapter; or
6. Any other violation of any village code, ordinances, resolutions, or regulations.
Such suspension or revocation, if ordered, shall not preclude prosecution and imposition of any other penalties provided for the violation of
other applicable ordinances of the village.
C. Hearing: Notice of the hearing for suspension or revocation of a license shall be given in writing setting forth specifically the grounds of the
complaint and the time and place of the hearing.
At the hearing, the village attorney shall present the complaint and shall represent the village. The licensee shall be permitted counsel and
shall have the right to submit evidence and cross examine witnesses. A stenographic or electronically recorded record of the hearing shall be
kept. The liquor control commissioner and/or his designee shall preside and shall render the decision within a reasonable time after the
conclusion of the hearing, but not later than thirty (30) days thereafter. The decision shall be in writing and shall summarize the evidence and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 64/387
state the reasons for the decision.
Any licensee whose license is suspended or revoked shall pay to the village the costs of the hearing before the liquor control commissioner
and/or his designee.
The liquor control commissioner and/or his designee shall determine the costs incurred by the village for the hearing, including, but not limited
to, court reporter fees, the costs of transcripts or records, attorney fees, the cost of preparing and mailing notices and orders, and all other
miscellaneous expenses incurred by the village or such lesser sum as the liquor control commissioner and/or his designee may allow.
The licensee shall pay said costs to the village within thirty (30) days of notification of the costs by the liquor control commissioner and/or his
designee. Failure to pay these costs within thirty (30) days of notification is a violation of this section and may be cause for license suspension
or revocation or the levy of a fine. (Ord. 09-58, 11-16-2009)
3-3-16: LICENSEE OR REPRESENTATIVE'S PRESENCE ON PREMISES:
An owner, partner, corporate officer or approved manager must be present on the premises licensed under this chapter during all business hours.
In addition to any other penalty imposed for violations of this chapter, a minimum fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) and a maximum fine of
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) shall be imposed for violations of this section. (Ord. 09-58, 11-16-2009)
3-3-17: RESPONSIBILITY FOR AGENTS AND EMPLOYEES:
Every act or omission of whatsoever nature, constituting a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter by an officer, director, manager or other
agent or employee of any licensee, if such act is committed or omission is made within the scope of such agency or employment or with the
authorization, knowledge, or approval of the licensee, shall be deemed and held to be the act of such employer or licensee and such employer
and licensee shall be punishable in the same manner as if such act or omission has been done or omitted by the licensee personally. (Ord. 09-58,
11-16-2009)
3-3-18: DECOY/STING OPERATIONS:
The chief of police, and/or the local liquor control commissioner, the deputy local liquor control commissioner and/or their respective designees
are hereby authorized to conduct sting operations for the purpose of purchasing alcoholic beverages and/or tobacco products through the use of
decoy agents under the minimum age for the lawful purchase of the alcoholic beverages or tobacco products. The local liquor control
commissioner, the deputy local liquor control commissioner and the chief of police are hereby authorized to adopt rules, regulations and
procedures for the employ of underage decoy agents. (Ord. 09-58, 11-16-2009)
3-3-19: CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR AT UNLICENSED ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED:
A. No person or entity shall allow alcoholic liquor to be brought into and/or consumed on the premises of an establishment which is not in
possession of a retail liquor dealer's license specifically allowing alcoholic liquor to be sold and/or consumed on such premises; provided,
however, nothing contained in this section shall prevent the possession and transportation of alcoholic liquor for the lawful, noncommercial use
of the possessor, and his family and guests within the possessor's own property.
B. No person shall bring to and/or consume alcoholic liquor upon the premises of an establishment which is not in possession of a retail liquor
dealer's license specifically allowing the sale and/or consumption of alcoholic liquor on such premises.
C. For purposes of this section, an "establishment" shall be defined as an enterprise or concern, whether for profit or not, which is engaged in the
conducting of business within the village.
D. Individuals and entities which violate this section shall be subject to the penalties described in section 1-4-1, "General Penalty", of this code.
Further, establishments which violate this section may be subject to revocation of operating and business licenses. (Ord. 10-38, 8-16-2010)
Chapter 4
AMUSEMENTS
3-4-1: APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this chapter, except as to licenses and fees, shall apply to all public shows, theatricals, circuses and other amusements in the
village, whether licensed specifically in another article of this chapter or not. (1987 Code)
3-4-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 65/387
It shall be unlawful to conduct or operate any amusement which is open to the public and for admission to which a fee is charged without having
first secured a license therefor; provided, that the provisions of this section shall not be held to apply to those amusements which are specifically
licensed by other provisions of this chapter, this code or other ordinances. Applications for such licenses shall be made to the village clerk and
shall comply with the general provisions of this chapter relating to such applications. Except as otherwise provided, the fees for such licenses
shall be as provided in section 3-1A-1 of this title. (1987 Code)
3-4-3: CIRCUSES AND CARNIVALS, BOND REQUIRED:
No license for a circus, menagerie or carnival shall be issued until the applicant therefor shall have filed with the village clerk a surety and
indemnity bond in such amount as may be required by the board of trustees from a surety company authorized to do business in the state. The
bond shall be approved by the village attorney and shall be conditioned to save harmless the village from any liability which might arise by reason
of the operation or conduct of such circus, menagerie or carnival. (1987 Code)
3-4-4: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
A. Order, Crowding:
1. The audience of any amusement, show or theatrical shall be orderly and quiet at all times and it shall be unlawful to create or permit a
disturbance at such performance.
2. It shall be unlawful to permit or gather such a crowd to witness any amusement or show as to create a dangerous condition because of fire
or other risks.
B. Indecent Shows: It shall be unlawful for any person to present, exhibit or conduct any indecent show, theatrical, motion picture, exhibition or
other form of public amusement or show.
C. Riots, Public Disturbances: It shall be unlawful to present any public amusement or show of any kind which tends to or is calculated to cause
or promote any riot or public disturbance. (1987 Code)
3-4-5: BUILDING AND PREMISES:
A. Compliance With Building Regulations: It shall be unlawful to conduct or hold any public show, theatrical or public meeting in any building or
premises which does not comply with the requirements of this code, the village fire prevention code1 and other ordinances of this village
relating to the construction of buildings.
B. Exits Required: It shall be unlawful to conduct or hold any such performance or exhibition in any place not equipped with adequate exits, and
all exits in such building or place shall be kept free of access and unobstructed. (1987 Code)
3-4-6: ENFORCEMENT:
It shall be the duty of the chief of police to see to the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. (1987 Code)
ARTICLE A. POOL AND BILLIARD ESTABLISHMENTS
3-4A-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall operate, maintain or conduct a billiard, pool, bagatelle or pigeon hole table open to the public without first having secured a
license therefor as provided in this Article. (1987 Code)
3-4A-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE, FEE:
All applications for such licenses shall be made in writing to the Village Clerk and shall state thereon the location of the place of business and the
number of tables to be used therein. The annual license fee for any license required by this Article shall be as provided in Section 3-1A-1 of this
Title. (1987 Code)
3-4A-3: CONSENT OF ADJOINING LANDOWNERS:
It shall be unlawful to conduct or operate any billiard or pool establishment anywhere in the Village where a majority of the buildings lying wholly
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 66/387
within a radius of three hundred feet (300') are used for residential purposes without having first secured the written consent of the owners of twothirds
(2/3) of the lots or parcels of land lying within such radius. (1987 Code)
3-4A-4: CLOSING HOURS:
All pool or billiard establishments open to the public in this Village are hereby required to be closed for all purposes and cease doing business of
any kind whatsoever at one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and they shall remain so closed and no business whatever be done therein until six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. (1987 Code)
3-4A-5: MINORS:
Minors under the age of seventeen (17) years shall under no circumstances frequent, loiter, go or remain in any pool or billiard establishment
licensed pursuant to this Article at any time unless it be upon some lawful errand and sent by the direction and with the consent and knowledge of
the parent, guardian or other person having the lawful custody of such minor. It shall be unlawful for the proprietor of any pool or billiard
establishment so licensed to allow or permit any such minor to frequent, loiter or remain within the pool or billiard establishment in violation of this
Section. (1987 Code)
ARTICLE B. BOWLING ESTABLISHMENTS
3-4B-1: LICENSE REQUIRED1:
It shall be unlawful to operate or conduct a bowling lane, pin or ball lane open to the public or for use of which a fee is charged, without having
first secured a license therefor. (1987 Code)
3-4B-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Applications for licenses shall conform to the general provisions of this chapter relating to applications for licenses and shall state, in addition to
all other matters required, the number of lanes to be operated. (1987 Code)
3-4B-3: CONSENT OF ADJOINING LANDOWNERS:
It shall be unlawful to conduct or operate any bowling lane anywhere in the village where a majority of the buildings lying wholly within a radius of
three hundred feet (300') are used for residential purposes without having first secured the written consent of the owners of two-thirds (2/3) of the
lots or parcels of land within such radius. (1987 Code)
3-4B-4: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
A. Conduct Of Patrons: It shall be unlawful to permit boisterous or disorderly conduct by any persons in or on the premises operated as a bowling
lane, or to use or permit the use of profane, obscene or indecent language therein.
B. Gambling Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to gamble, to bet or to tolerate any form of gambling or betting in any premises used
for a bowling lane, pin or ball lane. (1987 Code)
3-4B-5: SANITARY CONDITIONS:
It shall be the duty of every person conducting or operating a bowling lane, pin or ball lane in the village to keep the premises in a clean and
sanitary condition. (1987 Code)
3-4B-6: PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
No such business shall be conducted, and no such license shall be issued, unless there is provided within two hundred feet (200') of the premises
an adequate and suitable place for the parking of at least two (2) motor vehicles for each lane operated, which place shall not be on any public
street, parkway or lane or other public place. The use of such parking place shall be permitted without extra charge to patrons of the bowling lane.
(1987 Code)
ARTICLE C. COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 67/387
3-4C-1: DEFINITIONS:
COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE: Any mechanical or electronic amusement machine or device, the operation of which is governed or
controlled by the deposit of a coin or token, including, without being limited thereto, any such coin-controlled machine or device capable of
producing or reproducing any vocal or instrumental sounds, for the purpose of amusement or skill and for the playing of which a fee is charged.
The term does not include vending machines in which are not incorporated gambling or amusement features, nor does the term include any coinoperated
mechanical musical devices or billiard or pool tables.
MULTIPLE-PLAY MACHINES OR DEVICES: Any machine or device in which more than one coin, token or similar object can be inserted so as to
affect the results of the person playing such machine or device.
OPERATOR: Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or association who sets up for operation by another or leases or distributes for the
purpose of operation by another, any machine or device as herein described, whether such setting up for operation, leasing or distributing be for a
fixed charge or rental, or on a basis of a division of the income derived from such device or otherwise.
PROPRIETOR: Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association or club who, as the owner, lessee or proprietor, has under his or its control,
any establishment, place or premises in or at which such machine or device is placed or kept for use or play or on exhibition for the purpose of
use or play.
SINGLE-PLAY MACHINES OR DEVICES: Any machine or device in which not more than one coin, token or similar object can be inserted for the
playing of said machine or device. (1987 Code)
3-4C-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in the business of an operator or proprietor of coin-operated amusement devices, as the terms are herein defined,
without first having obtained the proper license therefor. (1987 Code)
3-4C-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
An application for said license shall be made to the Village Clerk in conformity with Chapter 1 of this Title, except as otherwise provided herein. In
addition, the application shall set forth the following:
A. The location and character of the building or place where such amusement device is to be located, maintained or operated;
B. The charge to be made to the player for operating each such device; and
C. The main or principal occupation or business being conducted or to be conducted by the applicant upon the same premises wherein such
device or devices are to be located, maintained or operated. The proper license fee shall accompany such application. (1987 Code)
3-4C-4: LICENSE FEES, RENEWALS:
A. Operator: The license fee for an operator shall be as set forth in section 3-1A-1 of this title, payable upon application for the license and
renewable annually, for each year the operator sets up, sells, leases or distributes coin operated amusement devices within the village.
B. Proprietor: The license fee for a proprietor shall be as set forth in section 3-1A-1 of this title, for each coin operated amusement device placed
or kept by the proprietor for public use within the village. This fee shall be payable upon application for the license and said license shall be
renewable annually. (1987 Code)
3-4C-5: TERM OF LICENSE, LICENSE NONTRANSFERABLE:
All licenses under this article shall expire on December 31, following their issuance and no license issued to any person under this article shall be
transferable. (1987 Code)
3-4C-6: INVESTIGATIONS:
A. Applicant: Applications for license hereunder shall first be referred by the village clerk to the president and board of trustees who shall make or
cause to be made such investigation as they deem necessary. If the application is approved by the president and board of trustees, the
license shall be issued by the village clerk. If the license is denied, the fee shall be returned to the applicant.
B. Premises, Machines: No such license shall be issued until the office of the building commissioner shall have investigated the location wherein
the machine or device is proposed to be operated and has determined that the proposed operation of the machine or device complies with all
the terms of this article and other applicable ordinances of the village. (1987 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 68/387
3-4C-7: LICENSE TO BE POSTED:
The license or licenses herein provided for shall be posted permanently or conspicuously at the location in the premises wherein the machine or
device is to be operated or maintained. (1987 Code)
3-4C-8: LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF DEVICES:
No license shall be issued to any proprietor or for any premises in excess of one license for every five hundred (500) square feet of gross floor
area for each premises in which said machine or device is located; provided however, that no more than six (6) such amusement devices may be
located, maintained or operated in or upon any single business establishment, and no such device or devices shall be so located, maintained or
operated unless the location, maintenance or operation thereof is secondary or incidental to the main or principal occupation or business being
conducted or to be conducted by the applicant in or upon said establishment. (1987 Code)
3-4C-9: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
A. Closing Hours: No coin operated amusement device shall be operated on any premises within the village between the hours of one o'clock
(1:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
B. Disturbing The Peace, Nuisances: No license issued hereunder shall permit the operation of a coin operated amusement device at any place
or in any manner which will disturb the peace of persons otherwise properly within or without the licensed premises, or shall permit the
operation thereof to amount to a nuisance in fact.
C. Gambling: No coin operated amusement device shall be operated or permitted to be used in such a manner as to violate the gambling laws of
the village or of the state1.
D. No Free Replays: No proprietor, operator or person in charge of a coin operated amusement device shall permit free replays to players on the
basis of the player's skill, accumulated score or any other means, and no machine shall record or indicate free replays. (1987 Code)
3-4C-10: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The President and Board of Trustees shall have the right to revoke any license issued hereunder for the violation of any of the provisions of this
Article. (1987 Code)
3-4C-11: PENALTY:
Any person violating or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this Article shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (1987 Code)
ARTICLE D. MOTION PICTURES AND THEATRICALS
3-4D-1: LICENSE REQUIRED, EXCEPTIONS:
It shall be unlawful to give, present or conduct any motion pictures or theatricals, for admittance to which a fee is charged, excepting
performances given solely for the benefit of and under the supervision and auspices of a religious, educational or charitable organization, without
having first secured a license therefor. (1987 Code)
3-4D-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Applications for licenses shall be made in conformance with the general provisions relating to such applications as set out in Chapter 1 of this
Title and shall state in addition to the other information required, the place of the intended performance and the seating capacity thereof. (1987
Code)
3-4D-3: LICENSE FEES:
The license fees for motion pictures including those which are to be presented in premises which are not covered by an annual license, shall be
as provided in Section 3-1A-1 of this Title. (1987 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 69/387
3-4D-4: BUILDING AND PREMISES:
No motion picture shall be presented in or on any premises or building which does not fully comply with the requirements of this Code for the
construction or maintenance of buildings for this purpose.
A. Exits: It shall be unlawful to present any public motion picture in any building or structure which does not contain the number of exits required
for buildings or places intended for motion picture performances by this Code and the ordinances of the Village or by State statute.
B. Electric Wiring1: It shall be unlawful to present any public motion picture in premises in which the electric wiring does not fully comply with this
Code.
C. Ventilation: All places used for the exhibition of theatricals must be kept adequately ventilated during the performance and for so long a time as
the audience may remain therein.
D. Obstruction Of Exits And Aisles: It shall be unlawful to obstruct or permit the obstruction of any aisles, corridors or exits leading from any room
or enclosure in which a motion picture performance is being given or in which an audience for such a performance is gathered.
E. Scenery: It shall be unlawful to use scenery in any theater that has not been rendered noninflammable by application of fire preventive
coatings or by other adequate means.
F. Parking Requirements: No such business shall be conducted, and no license shall be issued, unless there is provided within one hundred feet
(100') of the premises adequate and suitable place for the parking of at least one motor vehicle for each four (4) seats, which place shall not
be on any public street, parkway or alley or other public place. The use of such parking place shall be permitted without extra charge to
patrons of the theater. (1987 Code)
3-4D-5: CROWDING:
It shall be unlawful to permit any person, excepting ushers or other theater employees, to remain standing in a hall or room in which a motion
picture is presented during the time of such performance, and it shall be unlawful to admit to any hall more persons than can be accommodated
by the seating arrangements for the premises. (1987 Code)
3-4D-6: TYPES OF MOTION PICTURES RESTRICTED:
It shall be unlawful to offer or present any motion picture which has a tendency to cause a riot or public disturbance of the peace, or any indecent
picture or performance2. (1987 Code)
Chapter 5
AUCTIONS AND AUCTIONEERS
3-5-1: LICENSE REQUIRED1, EXCEPTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct an auction in the Village or to do business as an auctioneer, whether the goods are owned by the
auctioneer or not, without having first obtained a license therefor.
Nothing in this Chapter shall be held to apply to any public auction or sale made or conducted by a public officer by virtue of any judicial order or
process or by virtue of any power or authority in a mortgage or trust deed. (1987 Code)
3-5-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Application for an auctioneer's license or for a single auction shall state thereon the place of business intended to be occupied if any, or the place
of such auction, and such applications shall give the names of the employees, not to exceed two (2), who are to be authorized to conduct
auctions under the authority of the license. (1987 Code)
3-5-3: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT:
No such license shall be issued to any but a person of good character. The Chief of Police shall investigate the character of each applicant before
the license shall be issued. (1987 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 70/387
3-5-4: NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES, LIABILITY OF LICENSEE:
Every person licensed as an auctioneer may designate not to exceed two (2) employees who may be authorized by him to conduct auctions. The
employer shall be liable for any violations of this Code and other ordinances committed by such employees in conducting an auction. (1987 Code)
Chapter 6
PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
ARTICLE A. PEDDLERS, ITINERANT VENDORS AND CANVASSERS
3-6A-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of peddling, itinerant vending or canvassing within the Village without having first
procured a license therefor. (1987 Code)
3-6A-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE1:
Applicants for a license under this article must file with the Village Clerk a sworn application in writing, in duplicate, on a form to be furnished by
him, which shall give the following:
A. Name of applicant.
B. Permanent home address and full local address of applicant.
C. Names, permanent home addresses and full local addresses of each peddler, itinerant vendor or canvasser or any other member of a transient
or itinerant crew.
D. Brief description of the nature of applicant's business.
E. If employed, the name and address of the employer together with credentials establishing the exact relationship.
F. The length of time for which the right to do business is required.
G. A photograph of the applicant and each member of the applicant's crew taken within sixty (60) days immediately prior to the date of filing the
application, which picture shall be two inches by two inches (2" x 2") showing the head and shoulders in a clear and distinguishing manner.
H. The names of at least two (2) reliable property owners of Cook County who will certify as to the applicant's good character and business
respectability, or in lieu of the names of references, such other evidence as to the good character and business responsibility of the applicant
as will enable an investigator of the Village to properly evaluate such character and business responsibility.
Upon receipt of the application, the original shall be submitted to the President and Board of Trustees for their consideration. (1987 Code)
3-6A-3: BOND:
Every applicant for a peddler's, itinerant vendor's or canvasser's license shall file with the Village Clerk a surety bond running to the Village in the
amount as provided in section 3-1-6 of this title with surety acceptable to and in form approved by the Village Attorney, conditioned that the
applicant shall comply fully with all the provisions of this Code and the ordinances of the Village and guaranteeing to any resident in the Village
that all money paid as a down payment will be accounted for and applied according to the representations of such peddler, itinerant vendor or
canvasser and further guaranteeing to any resident of the Village that any merchandise or service contracted for will be delivered or performed
according to the presentations of such peddler, itinerant vendor or canvasser. (1987 Code)
3-6A-4: INVESTIGATION, FEE:
At the time of filing the application, a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be paid to the Village Clerk to cover the cost of the investigation of the facts
stated on the application. This fee is in addition to the license fees shown in section 3-1A-1 of this title.
Upon receipt of the application, the duplicate shall be transferred to the Chief of Police who shall cause such investigation of the applicant's
business and moral character to be made as he deems necessary for the protection of the public good. (1987 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 71/387
3-6A-5: APPROVAL OR DISAPPROVAL OF LICENSE APPLICATION:
The report of the Chief of Police on the application shall be forwarded to the President and Board of Trustees. The President and Board of
Trustees, together with the original application and the report of the Chief of Police, shall either approve or disapprove the application at the
regularly constituted meeting following date of application for permit. (1987 Code)
ARTICLE B. SOLICITORS
3-6B-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this Section:
REGISTERED SOLICITOR: Any person who has obtained a valid certificate of registration as hereinafter provided, and which certificate is in the
possession of the solicitor on his or her person while engaged in soliciting.
RESIDENCE: Every separate living unit occupied for residential purposes by one or more persons contained within any type of building or
structure providing they comply with Section 3-6B-5 of this Article.
SOLICITING: Any one or more of the following activities:
A. Seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, services of any kind, character or description
whatever, for any kind of consideration whatever.
B. Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application or purchase of insurance of any type, kind or character.
C. Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals, newspaper and every other type or kind of publication.
D. Seeking to obtain gifts or contributions of money, clothing or any other valuable thing for the support or benefit of any charitable or nonprofit
organization, association, corporation or project1. (1987 Code)
3-6B-2: CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION REQUIRED, APPLICATION:
A. Certificate Required, Fees: Every person desiring to engage in "soliciting" as herein defined from persons in residences within this Municipality
is hereby required to make written application for a certificate of registration as hereinafter provided together with the fees as required in
Section 3-1A-1 of this Title.
B. Application For Certificate: Application for a certificate of registration shall be made upon a form provided by the Village Clerk and filed with the
Clerk. The applicant shall truthfully state in full, the following information requested on the application:
1. Name and address of present place of residence and length of residence at such address; business address if other than residence
address; also social security number;
2. Address or place of residence during the past three (3) years if other than present address;
3. Age of applicant;
4. Physical description of the applicant;
5. Name and address of the person whom the applicant is employed by or represents; and the length of time of such employment or
representation;
6. Name and address of employer during the past three (3) years if other than the present employer;
7. Description sufficient for identification of the subject matter of the soliciting which the applicant will engage in;
8. Period of time for which the certificate is applied;
9. The date, or approximate date, of the latest previous application for certificate under this Article, if any;
10. Has a certificate of registration issued to the applicant under this Article ever been revoked;
11. Has the applicant ever been convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this Article, or the ordinance of any other Illinois municipality
regulating soliciting;
12. Has the applicant ever been convicted of the commission of a felony under the laws of the State or any other state or Federal law of the
United States;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 72/387
13. Such additional information as the Chief of Police may deem necessary.
All statements made by the applicant upon the application or in connection therewith shall be under oath.
C. Fingerprints Required: Every applicant shall submit to fingerprinting by the Police Department in connection with the application for certificate.
D. Records Kept: The Village Clerk shall cause to be kept in his office an accurate record of every application received and acted upon together
with all other information and data pertaining thereto and all certificates of registration issued under the provisions of this Article and of the
denial of applications. Applications for certificates shall be numbered in consecutive order as filed. Every certificate issued and any renewal
thereof shall be identified with the duplicate number of the application upon which it was issued.
E. Persons Not Eligible For Certificates: No certificate of registration shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of the commission of
a felony under the laws of the State or any other state or Federal law of the United States, within five (5) years of the date of the application;
nor to any person whose certificate of registration issued hereunder has previously been revoked as herein provided. (1987 Code)
3-6B-3: ISSUANCE AND REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATE:
A. Issuance Of Certificate: The Village Clerk, after consideration of the application and all information obtained relative thereto, shall deny the
application if applicant does not possess the qualifications for such certificate as herein required, and that the issuance of a certificate of
registration to the applicant would not be in accord with the intent and purpose of this Article. Endorsement shall be made by the Village Clerk
upon the application of the denial of the application. When the applicant is found to be fully qualified, the certificate of registration shall be
issued forthwith.
B. Revocation Of Certificate: A certificate of registration issued hereunder shall be revoked by the Village Clerk if the holder of the certificate is
convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this Article, or has made a false material statement in the application, or otherwise becomes
disqualified for the issuance of a certificate of registration under the terms of this Article. Immediately upon such revocation, written notice
thereof shall be given by the Village Clerk to the holder of the certificate in person or by certified U.S. mail addressed to his or her residence
address set forth in the application. Immediately upon the giving of such notice the certificate of registration shall become null and void. (1987
Code)
3-6B-4: VILLAGE POLICY ON SOLICITING:
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the governing body of this Municipality that the occupant or occupants of the residences in this
Municipality shall make the determination of whether solicitors shall be, or shall not be, invited to their respective residences. If no determination
is made as is provided in Section 3-6B-5 of this Article then, in that event, registration is not required. (1987 Code)
3-6B-5: NOTICE REGULATING SOLICITING:
Every person desiring to secure the protection intended to be provided by the regulations pertaining to soliciting contained in this Article, shall
comply with the following directions:
Notice of the determination by the occupant of giving invitation to solicitors, or the refusal of invitation to solicitors, to any residence, shall be given
in the manner as follows:
A weatherproof card, approximately three inches by four inches (3" x 4") in size, shall be exhibited upon or near the main entrance door to the
residence, indicating the determination by the occupant, containing the applicable words as follows:
ONLY SOLICITORS REGISTERED IN BROADVIEW INVITED
or
NO SOLICITORS INVITED
The letters shall be at least one-third inch (1/3") in height. For the purpose of uniformity the cards shall be provided by the Village to persons
requesting at no charge. Such card so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any solicitor of the determination by the occupant of the
residence of the information contained thereon. (1987 Code)
3-6B-6: DUTY OF SOLICITORS:
It shall be the duty of every solicitor upon going onto any premises in the Municipality upon which a "residence" as herein defined is located to
first examine the notice provided for in Section 3-6B-5 of this Article, if any is attached, and be governed by the statement contained on the
notice. If the notice states "ONLY SOLICITORS REGISTERED IN BROADVIEW INVITED", then the solicitor not possessing a valid certificate
registration as herein provided, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises; and if the notice states "NO SOLICITORS INVITED",
then the solicitor, whether registered or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 73/387
Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence, whether invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when
requested to do so by the occupant. (1987 Code)
3-6B-7: UNINVITED SOLICITING PROHIBITED:
It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near
any door, or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence, for the purpose of
securing an audience with the occupant thereof and engage in "soliciting" as herein defined, in defiance of the notice exhibited at the residence in
accordance with the provisions of Section 3-6B-5 of this Article. (1987 Code)
3-6B-8: TIME LIMIT ON SOLICITING:
It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person whether registered under this Article or not, to go upon any
premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door of a residence located thereon, or rap or knock upon any door, or create any sound in any
other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant
thereof, and engage in "soliciting" as herein defined, prior to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or after eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. of any weekday, or at any
time on a Sunday or on a State or national holiday. (1987 Code)
3-6B-9: SOLICITING BUSINESS ON STREETS, HIGHWAYS OR PUBLIC SIDEWALKS:
No person shall stand on any street, highway or other thoroughfare or public sidewalk in the Village for the purpose of soliciting business,
employment or sales from the driver or occupant of any motor vehicle. (1987 Code)
Footnote 1: See Article C of this Chapter.
ARTICLE C. CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS
3-6C-1: APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS:
A. Solicitors: In accordance with State law, no person shall stand on a highway or street within the Village for the purpose of soliciting
contributions from the occupant of any vehicle except as specifically permitted herein.
B. Soliciting Agencies: Solicitation on highways and streets within the Village shall be permitted for only those soliciting agents which meet the
requirements contained herein. (1987 Code)
3-6C-2: REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
Soliciting agencies shall be registered with the Attorney General as a charitable organization as provided in "An Act to regulate a solicitation and
collection of funds for charitable purposes, providing for violations thereof, and making an appropriation thereof", approved July 26, 1963, as
amended1, and such agencies must be engaged in a Statewide fundraising activity. (1987 Code)
3-6C-3: APPLICATION TO SOLICIT, LIABILITY INSURANCE:
Soliciting agencies shall make application upon a form provided by the office of the Village Clerk wherein it shall be liable for, and indemnify the
Village, against any injuries to any person or property during the solicitation which is related to an act of ordinary negligence of the soliciting
agent. Such agencies shall present proof of public liability insurance in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal injury and
five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for property damage, and show the Village as an additional insured. (1987 Code)
3-6C-4: APPROVAL OF SOLICITATION REQUEST:
All requests for permission to solicit hereunder shall be approved by the President and Board of Trustees before solicitation commences. (1987
Code)
3-6C-5: CONDITIONS OF SOLICITATIONS:
A. Location: Solicitation on streets and highways within the Village shall be allowed only at intersections where all traffic is required to come to a
full stop.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 74/387
B. Minors: Soliciting agencies shall not permit solicitation by any person under seventeen (17) years of age.
C. Clothing: Soliciting agencies shall cause any person engaged in the act of solicitation to be wearing a high-visibility vest. (1987 Code)
3-6C-6: VIOLATION:
Any person who violates the provisions of this Article shall be in violation of State law2 and shall be subject to prosecution thereunder. (1987
Code)
Footnote 1: 225 ILCS 460/1 et seq.
Footnote 2: 625 ILCS 5/11-1006.
Chapter 7
SECONDHAND DEALERS AND PAWNBROKERS
3-7-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall operate or conduct a secondhand store in the Village without having first obtained a license therefor or without complying with the
provisions of this Chapter. (1987 Code)
3-7-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE, INVESTIGATION:
Application for such license shall be made to the Village Clerk in writing and shall state the location intended to be occupied. Upon receipt of any
such application, the Chief of Police or any person authorized by him or by the President to do so, shall investigate the character of the applicant.
No license shall be issued to any person of bad character nor to any person who shall have been convicted of receiving stolen goods, burglary or
robbery. (1987 Code)
3-7-3: RECORDS REQUIRED, INSPECTION:
Every person operating a secondhand store shall keep a record of all articles purchased, which record together with the articles themselves shall
be open to inspection by any member of the Police Department at all reasonable hours. (1987 Code)
3-7-4: PAWNBROKER'S LICENSE REQUIRED1:
No person operating a secondhand store shall do business as a pawnbroker without having obtained a pawnbroker's license in addition to the
secondhand dealer's license. (1987 Code)
Chapter 8
TAXICABS
3-8-1: DEFINITION OF TAXICAB:
For the purpose of this Chapter, the term "taxicab" shall mean and include all vehicles, however propelled, which carry passengers for hire upon
or along the streets of the Village, except vehicles operating regularly upon established routes. (1987 Code)
3-8-2: LICENSES REQUIRED1:
A. Business License: No person shall operate or maintain any taxicab without first obtaining a license therefor and unless the license is in full
force.
B. Driver's License: No person shall operate a taxicab as the driver thereof without first having obtained a driver's license in the manner set forth
in this Chapter, and unless the license is in full force. (1987 Code)
3-8-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 75/387
A. Business License: Any person desiring a license for any taxicab shall file an application therefor with the Village Clerk setting forth the name,
business and address of the applicant, a full description of the motor vehicle for which a license is desired, including the make, model, motor
and engine number and the State license number, and any other information that the President or the Village Clerk may require.
B. Driver's License: Any person desiring a license as a driver of a taxicab shall file an application with the Village Clerk setting forth the name,
sex, residence address, date and place of birth, former occupation, experience as a driver and such other information as the President or
Village Clerk may require. (1987 Code)
3-8-4: ISSUANCE OF LICENSES:
A. Business License: The license for a taxicab shall be issued upon conformance with the terms of this Chapter.
B. Driver's License: The license required by subsection 3-8-2B of this Chapter shall be issued by the Village Clerk to all persons of good moral
character who have complied with this Chapter and with all the laws of the State governing taxicab drivers. No license shall be issued to any
person under the age of twenty one (21) years. (1987 Code)
3-8-5: LICENSE FEES:
Fees for licenses required herein shall be as provided in Section 3-1A-1 of this Title. Said license fees shall be paid semiannually, in advance.
(1987 Code)
3-8-6: INFORMATION REQUIRED TO BE CARRIED:
A. Certificate For Taxicab: All licenses under this Chapter must be accompanied by a satisfactorily completed "vehicle inspection report" as
designated in Section 3-8-10 of this Chapter in order for the Village Clerk to issue a certificate for each taxicab so licensed and so inspected.
This certificate shall at all times be firmly affixed above the Village sticker.
B. Driver's License To Be Carried At All Times: Every driver shall carry the license issued to him under this Chapter at all times that he is driving
or on duty with any such taxicab, and shall exhibit it upon demand to any Village police officer or law enforcement officer.
C. Rates Posted: The rates as approved by the President and Board of Trustees shall be posted in plain view in every licensed taxicab.
D. Additional Information Required: In addition to having the approved rates posted, the name of the driver, his or her picture and the State
license number shall be posted in each taxicab in front of the passenger compartment in such a position that it will be in plain view of
passenger(s) riding therein and so lighted as to be plainly visible at night. (1987 Code)
3-8-7: REVOCATION OF LICENSES:
A. Business License: The President shall have the right to revoke any taxicab license issued under this Chapter whenever the taxicab is not kept
in the mechanical or sanitary condition required by this Chapter, or is not equipped with a governor or other similar device in good repair. Any
such revocation shall be in compliance with the procedure set out in Section 3-1-11 of this Title.
B. Driver's License: The President shall have the right to revoke any license issued under this Chapter to any person as a taxicab driver
whenever such person violates any of the provisions of this Chapter or any other ordinance governing taxicabs or traffic2, and also whenever it
appears that a person holding any such license is not of a good moral character. (1987 Code)
3-8-8: INSURANCE REQUIRED:
Every owner of a taxicab operating upon streets in the Village shall submit for approval to the President and Board of Trustees, insurance policies
covering liability, property damage and medical coverage in the following amounts:
Bodily injury liability
1 person $200,000.00
2 or more persons 500,000.00
Property damage liability 50,000.00
Medical payments, per person 5,000.00
A cab owner must also have a certificate (filed with the State) for "uninsured motorist" of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per person and twenty
thousand dollars ($20,000.00) for each accident.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 76/387
Failure to carry such insurance coverage shall subject owner and operator of each taxicab to a minimum fine of twenty five dollars ($25.00) and
not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or revocation of license or both. (1987 Code)
3-8-9: RATES:
A. Approval Of Rates Required: Rates which are to be charged per trip and per person must be first submitted and approved by the President and
Board of Trustees before a license is issued. It shall be unlawful to charge more than the approved rates.
B. Rates On File: The approved rates shall be on file with the Village Clerk. (1987 Code)
3-8-10: VEHICLE EQUIPMENT, CONDITION:
A. Meter Required: Every licensed taxicab shall be equipped with a meter.
B. Mechanical Condition, Safety Test Required: Every taxicab operated upon the streets of the Village shall be kept and maintained in a good and
safe mechanical condition. Every taxicab, during the month of January and the month of July of each year, shall be subject to a safety test by
a duly authorized State testing station. A sticker showing the passing of such safety test must be prominently displayed on the window of
taxicab. The passing of a safety test shall not be a bar at any time to prosecution for operating or causing to be operated a taxicab not in good
and safe mechanical condition. Charges for all safety inspections are to be paid for by the owner of the cab or cab company.
In the event that a safety test by a duly authorized State testing station is not available for taxicabs, the President and Board of Trustees shall
authorize the License Committee to set up a "vehicle inspection report" form, similar to that which the State is presently requiring of trucks.
Said "vehicle inspection report" tests are to be made by a licensed mechanic within the State. This form shall be issued by the Village Clerk to
the applicant requesting a business license. Applicant must return same to the Village Clerk, with all requirements checked off as satisfactory
before a business license certificate can be issued.
C. Sanitary Conditions: Each taxicab shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition at all times. (1987 Code)
3-8-11: OPERATION OF VEHICLE:
A. Manner Of Operation: No taxicab shall be driven, operated or controlled so as to violate any of the parking or traffic regulations of the Village or
so as to obstruct traffic or interfere with the free movement of traffic upon any street, alley or public place.
B. Passengers In Front Seat Prohibited, Exception: No person shall be allowed to ride in the front seat of any taxicab with the driver except at
such times as the rear seat or seats are fully occupied by paying passengers and the person riding in the front seat is a bona fide paying
passenger.
C. Use Of Taxicab Stands Required3: No unemployed taxicab shall stand or be parked upon any public street or alley except at such places as
from time to time shall be designated by the Board of Trustees as taxicab stands and allotted to the particular licensee in question.
D. Operating Under The Influence Of Alcohol Or Controlled Substances: No person shall drive, operate or control any taxicab while under the
influence of intoxicating liquor or controlled substances. (1987 Code)
3-8-12: SOLICITING TRADE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for the owner or driver of any vehicle licensed as a taxicab, to solicit by word or gesture or otherwise, the patronage of any
person upon any public street in the Village. (1987 Code)
Footnote 1: See Title 7, Chapter 2 of this Code.
Footnote 2: See Title 7 of this Code.
Footnote 3: See subsection 7-4-2F of this Code.
Chapter 9
GASOLINE STATIONS, PUBLIC GARAGES
ARTICLE A. GASOLINE STATIONS
3-9A-1: DEFINITION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 77/387
"Filling stations" or "gasoline stations", as used in this Article, shall mean any building, structure or premises, enclosure or other place within the
Village where a container or containers, tank or tanks, either portable or stationary and containing ether, carbon bisulphite, gasoline, acetone,
kerosene, hydrocarbon, liquefied petroleum, naphtha, turpentine or other inflammable liquids are kept or located for the purpose of selling,
offering for sale or distributing any such liquid from such container or containers, tank or tanks. (1987 Code)
3-9A-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall operate the business of a filling station without first having obtained a license therefor. (1987 Code)
3-9A-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE1:
The application for such license for a filling station shall conform to the general provisions of Chapter 1 of this Title relating to licenses and shall
specify the location of the building, structure, premises, enclosure or other place in which it is proposed to keep such filling station, and the
capacity or capacities in gallons of the containers, tank or tanks. (1987 Code)
3-9A-4: INSPECTION OF PREMISES:
Each filling station shall be erected, conducted and maintained in accordance with the provisions of this Code and the ordinances of the Village,
the State statutes and the rules of the State Fire Marshal. Each filling station shall be inspected at least twice every year by the Bureau of Fire
Prevention2 or some person duly authorized to make such inspection. It shall be the duty of the person making such inspection to see that the
premises are maintained in compliance to this and other sections of this Code to see that there is no dangerous accumulation of waste or other
combustible material on the premises, and to report to the President any violation which may be discovered during such inspection. (1987 Code)
3-9A-5: LOCATION:
A. Restricted: No filling station or gasoline station or any installation for the storing and handling of inflammable liquids shall hereafter be
constructed or maintained in the Village within two hundred feet (200') of any dwelling, school, hospital, church, theater or any public meeting
place. The two hundred feet (200') shall be measured from the extremities of the tracts of property in question.
B. Frontage Consents Required In Residential Districts: It shall be unlawful to conduct or operate any such filling station anywhere in the Village
where a majority of the buildings lying wholly within a radius of three hundred feet (300') are used for residential purposes without having first
secured the written consent of the owners of two-thirds (2/3) of the lots or parcels of land lying within such radius. (1987 Code)
3-9A-6: SELF-SERVICE GAS STATIONS:
Self-service gas stations are permissible for operation in the Village. (1987 Code)
3-9A-6-1: RULES AND REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
Rules and regulations relating to the storage, transportation, sale and use of gasoline and volatile oils, and the law prescribing the color and label
for gasoline or benzol receptacles, are hereby adopted by reference3. (1987 Code)
3-9A-6-2: PERMIT TO OPERATE:
A. Permit Required: It is hereby unlawful for any individual to operate a self-service gas station in the corporate limits of the Village unless said
individual has first obtained a permit for the operation thereof.
B. Information Required: Prior to issuance, an individual must display the following:
1. A permit issued by the State Fire Marshal of the State of Illinois;
2. An accurate description of the location of the self-service gas station;
3. The name, address and phone number of the individual owning and operating the self-service gas station and the name, address and
phone number of the individual owning the property in question.
C. Fee: Said permit shall require a fee as provided in Section 3-1A-1 of this Title.
D. Issuance: All said permits issued for the operation of a self-service gas station shall be issued by the Fire Chief of the Village.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 78/387
E. Permit In Addition To Filling Station License: The permit required by this Section is in addition to and separate from the license required for a
gasoline filling station. (1987 Code)
3-9A-6-3: RESTRICTIONS:
A. Employment Of Minors: No individual shall be permitted to be employed at a self-service gas station unless said individual has attained the age
of sixteen (16) years.
B. Use Of Pumps:
1. Licensed Drivers: Self-service pumps are to be used only by licensed drivers.
2. Minor: No individual shall operate any device used for the pumping of gas within the Village unless that individual has attained the age of
sixteen (16) years.
C. Portable Containers: It is hereby unlawful to sell gasoline by means of a portable container unless said portable container is approved by the
Underwriters Laboratory and is six (6) gallons or less in capacity. (1987 Code)
3-9A-6-4: PENALTY:
Any violation of this Section 3-9A-6 is hereby declared to be an offense and is punishable by a fine of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00)
but not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) per occurrence. Each day that a violation continues shall be interpreted as a separate
occurrence. (1987 Code)
ARTICLE B. PUBLIC GARAGES
3-9B-1: DEFINITION:
A "public garage" shall mean the building and grounds used for the storage of vehicles and/or the repair or maintenance of vehicles. (1987 Code)
3-9B-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall operate or maintain a public garage in the Village without having first obtained a license therefor. (1987 Code)
3-9B-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE1:
Applications for licenses shall be made in writing to the Village Clerk and shall state the location of the garage and the number of cars which can
be accommodated therein. (1987 Code)
3-9B-4: INSPECTIONS:
A. Premises: It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief to make or cause to be made such inspections of public garages in the Village as may be
necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Article.
B. Vehicles: Any police officer shall be permitted at any reasonable hour to view every car stored in any public garage, and it shall be unlawful to
hinder any such inspection or to conceal any car or motor vehicle from such inspection. (1987 Code)
3-9B-5: BUILDING AND LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
A. Generally: It shall be unlawful to maintain or operate any public garage in any building which does not conform to the requirements of the
building code2.
B. Frame Building: It shall be unlawful to maintain or operate any public garage in a frame building.
C. Location Restricted: It shall be unlawful to maintain or operate any public garage within fifty feet (50') of any building or structure used for
church, school or theater purposes.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 79/387
D. Premises To Be Clean, Safe From Fire: The premises of every garage must be clean and free from inflammable waste material. (1987 Code)
Footnote 1: See Section 3-1A-1 of this Title for license fees.
Footnote 2: See Section 9-1-2 of this Code.
Chapter 10
ELECTRICAL CONTRACTORS1
3-10-1: ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR DEFINED:
The term "electrical contractor" as used in this Chapter shall mean any person engaged in the business of installing or altering equipment and
electrical appliances for the utilization of electricity supplied for light, heat or power not including radio apparatus or equipment for wireless
reception of sounds and signals, and not including apparatus, conductor and other equipment installed for or by public utilities, including common
carriers, which are under the jurisdiction of the Illinois Commerce Commission for use in their operation as public utilities. The term "electrical
contractor" does not include employees employed by such contractor to do or supervise such work. (1987 Code)
3-10-2: CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
A. Village Contractors: No person shall engage in the business of electrical contractor without having first obtained a certificate of registration
therefor as herein required.
B. Out Of Town Contractors, Fee Exemption: Any electrical contractor who is registered as such in any other city or village in the State shall not
be required to pay a fee for being registered in this Village, but every person doing business in this Village as an electrical contractor shall
secure a certificate of registration. Such certificate shall be issued without charge to electrical contractors registered as such under the
ordinances of another city or village in this State. (1987 Code)
3-10-3: APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE:
Applications for such certificate shall be made to the Village Clerk and a list of all contractors registered shall be given by the Village Clerk to the
Chief Electrical Inspector. (1987 Code)
3-10-4: REGISTRATION FEE:
The annual fee for registering as an electrical contractor shall be as provided in subsection 9-3-1D1a of this Code; provided that an application
made after the expiration of the first six (6) months of the register year shall be issued upon the payment of one-half (1/2) of this fee. The register
year shall correspond with the license year. (1987 Code)
3-10-5: COMPLIANCE WITH ELECTRICAL REGULATIONS, INSTALLATION PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person registered under the provisions of this Chapter to install any electrical appliances, wiring or fixtures without
strict compliance with the regulations relating to such fixtures; and it shall be unlawful for any such person to do any such work without having
obtained such permits as may be required. (1987 Code)
Footnote 1: See Section 9-3-3 of this Code.
Chapter 11
COMMERCIAL LAUNDRIES AND DRY CLEANERS
3-11-1: COMMERCIAL LAUNDRIES:
3-11-1-1: DEFINITION:
A "commercial laundry" is hereby defined as a commercial establishment wherein clothing and household furnishings are laundered. (1987 Code)
3-11-1-2: LICENSE REQUIRED, EXCEPTION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 80/387
No person shall operate or conduct a laundry in the Village without having first obtained a license therefor; provided, that establishments licensed
as dry-cleaning establishments need not obtain a laundry license in addition to the dry-cleaning license. (1987 Code)
3-11-1-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE1:
Applications for such licenses shall be made in writing to the Village Clerk and shall state thereon the location intended to be occupied. (1987
Code)
3-11-1-4: SANITARY CONDITIONS:
A. Premises: Premises used for laundries must be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. No refuse of any kind shall be permitted to accumulate
on such premises, and the premises must be kept free from rats, mice and vermin.
B. Employees: It shall be unlawful to employ any person afflicted with a venereal or any contagious disease in a laundry. (1987 Code)
3-11-1-5: INSPECTIONS:
It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief, or some other person designated by said Chief, to inspect or cause to be inspected every establishment
licensed under this Section at least once every six (6) months. Any violations, under the terms of this Section shall be reported to the Village
President. (1987 Code)
3-11-1-6: COIN-OPERATED LAUNDRIES:
A. Attendant Required: During the hours of operation an adult attendant shall be present at all coin-operated laundries.
B. Closing Hours: All automatic coin-operated laundries shall close at eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M., and no automatic coin-operated laundry shall
remain open between eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
C. Compliance With Electrical Code Required: No license for the operation of a coin-operated automatic laundry shall be issued unless the
installation of such coin-operated laundry machines complies with the provisions of the electrical code of the Village2. (1987 Code)
3-11-2: COMMERCIAL DRY CLEANERS:
3-11-2-1: DEFINITION:
A "commercial dry cleaner" is a commercial establishment wherein a process of cleaning garments and textiles by use of chemical solvents
instead of water is conducted. (1987 Code)
3-11-2-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall operate or conduct a dry cleaning establishment within the village without having first obtained a license. The use of
perchloroethylene (also known as PERC) is prohibited. (Ord. 2008-23, 7-21-2008)
3-11-2-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE3:
Applications for licenses shall be filed with the clerk and referred to the fire chief for investigation and recommendation before a license shall be
issued. Applications shall also state if coal, oil, benzine, turpentine or petroleum will be used at the location. (Ord. 2008-23, 7-21-2008)
3-11-2-4: FRONTAGE CONSENTS REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to establish a dry cleaning establishment in any place where a majority of the buildings within a radius of four hundred feet
(400') are used exclusively for residence purposes without having first secured the written consent of the owners of a majority of the lots or
parcels of ground within such radius. (1987 Code)
3-11-2-5: FIRE REGULATIONS4:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 81/387
A. Buildings: No dry cleaning establishment shall be operated in a frame building, nor in any building which does not comply with the provisions of
this code relating to the construction of buildings5.
B. Inflammable Waste: Such establishment shall be kept as free as possible from inflammable wastes.
C. Open Flames: It shall be unlawful to maintain or permit a stove or open flame of any kind on the premises.
D. Smoking: Smoking in or on such premises is prohibited.
E. Storage And Handling Of Inflammable Liquids: The provisions of this code relating to the storage or handling of inflammable liquids must be
fully complied with in every dry cleaning establishment. (1987 Code)
3-11-2-6: COIN OPERATED DRY CLEANERS:
A. Attendant Required: During the hours of operation, an adult attendant shall be present at all coin operated dry cleaners.
B. Closing Hours: All automatic coin operated dry cleaning shops heretofore established and hereafter to be established shall close at eleven
o'clock (11:00) P.M., and no automatic coin operated dry cleaning shop shall remain open between eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and six o'clock
(6:00) A.M.
C. Compliance With Electrical Code Required: No license for the operation of an automatic coin operated dry cleaning establishment shall be
issued unless the installation of such machines complies with the provisions of the electrical code of the village6. (1987 Code)
3-11-2-7: ENFORCEMENT:
It shall be the duty of the village fire chief to see to the enforcement of the provisions of this section 3-11-2. (1987 Code)
Chapter 12
HOUSE MOVERS
3-12-1: DEFINITION:
A "house mover" is hereby defined to be a business wherein buildings are moved or raised. (1987 Code)
3-12-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to engage in the business of house mover or raiser in the Village without having obtained a license therefor. (1987 Code)
3-12-3: PERMIT TO MOVE BUILDINGS REQUIRED:
Licensed house movers shall file with the Village Clerk application for, and shall secure the necessary permits for moving any building on or over
any public street, sidewalk, alley or other public place. (1987 Code)
3-12-4: BOND:
Each licensed house mover may file an annual bond, conditioned to save the Municipality harmless from any loss, damage or liability resulting
from the conduct of the business by the licensee, in the sum provided in Section 3-1-6 of this Title. If such bond is duly filed, it shall be
unnecessary for such licensee to file a bond for each individual house moved in the Village. (1987 Code)
Chapter 13
MACHINE SHOPS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 82/387
3-13-1: MACHINE SHOP DEFINED:
The term "machine shop" as used in this Chapter, shall include every workshop in which machines are made or metal parts thereof are repaired,
or where parts of machines or tools, implements, gears, dies, screws or other metal articles are cut, filed, shaped or repaired by means of a lathe
or other machinery. (1987 Code)
3-13-2: LICENSE REQUIRED1:
No person shall operate a machine shop within the Village without having first obtained a license therefor; provided, that this Chapter shall not be
construed as requiring an additional license for any class of machine shops specifically licensed under any other provision of the ordinances of
the Village. (1987 Code)
3-13-3: SANITARY CONDITIONS:
A. Generally: No building, structure or part thereof used for or in connection with any machine shop shall be so used as to endanger the health or
property of the employees or of the public.
B. Premises: The owner, occupant or manager of any machine shop shall cause all floors and other surface around or beneath any machine or
workbench to be kept in good order and repair and shall have suitable, convenient and sanitary receptacles for receiving waste and cloths
used in and about the machine shop for the purpose of cleaning machines or parts thereof or which are intended for any other use.
C. Employees: No person suffering from any actively contagious or infectious disease shall be employed in or about any machine where cutting
compound or fluid is used. All such cutting compound or fluid shall be kept free from infectious or harmful matter. (1987 Code)
3-13-4: HOURS PROHIBITED IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT:
No machine shop shall be operated in the nighttime between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. in any place in
which a majority of the buildings within a radius of four hundred feet (400') are used exclusively for residence purposes. (1987 Code)
3-13-5: INSPECTION OF PREMISES:
It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief to make or cause to be made such inspections as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions
of this Chapter. (1987 Code)
Footnote 1: See Section 3-1A-2 of this Title.
Chapter 14
COIN-OPERATED CAR WASHES1
3-14-1: DEFINITION:
A "coin-operated car wash" is any business where motorized vehicles may be washed upon deposit of coins in payment for use of the business's
facilities. (1987 Code)
3-14-2: LICENSE REQUIRED, FEE:
Any person engaging in the business of coin-operated car wash must first obtain license from the Village Clerk. There shall be a business
registration fee for a coin-operated car wash as provided in Section 3-1A-2 of this Title which shall be paid before engaging in such business.
(1987 Code; amd. Ord. 93-2, 1-19-1993)
3-14-3: DEPOSIT TO WATER DEPARTMENT REQUIRED:
Any person making application for a coin-operated car wash business must deposit fifty dollars ($50.00) for water and such deposit will be
returned at the termination of business. (1987 Code)
3-14-4: BUILDING AND PREMISES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 83/387
A. Building Construction: Each building for a coin-operated car wash must be completely constructed with face brick.
B. Lighting Required: Such building for coin-operated car washes must be illuminated from dusk until dawn, interior and exterior.
C. Driveway Construction: All drives for coin-operated car washes must be installed and constructed with blacktop or concrete. (1987 Code)
3-14-5: ATTENDANT REQUIRED:
There must be an adult attendant present at all times during business hours of a coin-operated car wash. (1987 Code)
Footnote 1: See subsection 9-4-4F of this Code.
Chapter 15
LUMBERYARDS
3-15-1: DEFINITION:
A "lumberyard" is hereby defined as any buildings and/or grounds used for the storage and sale of lumber and allied construction items. (1987
Code)
3-15-2: LICENSE REQUIRED1:
It shall be unlawful to do business as a lumber dealer maintaining a lumberyard, or to operate or maintain a lumberyard in the Village without first
having secured a license therefor. (1987 Code)
3-15-3: FRONTAGE CONSENTS REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to establish any lumberyard anywhere where a majority of the houses within a radius of three hundred feet (300') are used for
residence purposes without having secured the written consent of the owners of two-thirds (2/3) of the lots or parcels of land within such radius.
(1987 Code)
3-15-4: FIRE EQUIPMENT REQUIRED:
Every person owning or operating a lumberyard shall have the same equipped with sufficient firefighting apparatus to handle any small fires which
may start and to prevent their spread. (1987 Code)
3-15-5: PILING LUMBER RESTRICTED:
It shall be unlawful to pile or stack any lumber in such a way that the lumber overhangs or is in danger of falling onto any adjoining property or
street, alley or other public place. (1987 Code)
3-15-6: INSPECTIONS:
It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief to make or cause to be made such inspections as may be necessary to see to the enforcement of the
provisions of this Chapter. (1987 Code)
Footnote 1: See Section 3-1A-1 of this Title for license fees.
Chapter 16
REAL ESTATE BUSINESS
3-16-1: DEFINITION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 84/387
A "real estate business" is a business in which a fee or commission is charged for acting as an agent in making real estate contracts or sales.
(1987 Code)
3-16-2: LICENSE REQUIRED1:
No person shall operate or conduct a real estate business without first being licensed by the Village. Applications for business licenses shall be
made in writing to the Village Clerk, and no business license shall be issued to anyone who has not obtained a certificate of registration as
required by the laws of this State. (1987 Code)
3-16-3: FRAUDULENT PRACTICES; ISSUANCE RESTRICTED, LICENSE REVOKED:
No license shall be issued to anyone who has been found guilty of fraudulent practices in violation of the State statute in relation to real estate
brokers. Licenses may be revoked for such fraudulent practices. (1987 Code)
Footnote 1: See Section 3-1A-2 of this Title.
Chapter 17
CHRISTMAS TREE SALES
3-17-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in the business of selling Christmas trees (evergreen trees) without first having obtained a license therefor. (1987 Code)
3-17-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE1:
Applications for the license shall be made to the Village Clerk, in writing, and shall state the name and address of the applicant, the description of
the place where business is to be conducted and the name and home address of the proprietor, owner or person designated to manage such
place of business. In addition, the applicant shall set forth whether such business is to be conducted on a vacant lot or within a building, structure,
room or enclosure.
Every application for a license shall be approved by the Fire Chief as to the compliance of the premises named therein with the fire regulations of
the Village2 before a license is issued. (1987 Code)
3-17-3: SMOKING PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit smoking in any building, room, structure or enclosure where Christmas trees are being sold. (1987
Code)
Footnote 1: See Section 3-1A-2 of this Title.
Footnote 2: See Title 5 of this Code.
Chapter 18
DRAYMEN AND EXPRESSMEN
3-18-1: DEFINITION:
A "drayman or expressman business" is any business utilizing vehicles for the purpose of collecting and delivering packages and materials. (1987
Code)
3-18-2: LICENSE REQUIRED1:
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct the business of drayman, carter, or expressman in the Village without having first obtained a license
therefor. (1987 Code)
3-18-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 85/387
Application for such licenses shall be made to the Village Clerk and shall designate thereon the name of the licensee, the location of his business,
and the number of vehicles intended to be used by him. (1987 Code)
3-18-4: VEHICLES TO BE MARKED:
Every vehicle used for such business shall have printed thereon in a place easily visible from the side of the vehicle, the name and address of the
owner in letters legible to one of normal eyesight at a distance of twenty five feet (25'). (1987 Code)
Footnote 1: See Section 3-1A-2 of this Title.
Chapter 19
UNDERTAKERS1
3-19-1: LICENSE REQUIRED2:
It shall be unlawful to maintain an undertaking establishment or to operate as an undertaker or mortician in the Municipality without first having
obtained a license therefor. (1987 Code)
3-19-2: POLICE TO BE NOTIFIED:
It shall be the duty of every undertaker to notify the police whenever a body is brought to him or turned over to him for his services. (1987 Code)
3-19-3: EXHIBITIONS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any undertaker to permit his establishment to be used for the exhibition of the body of any deceased person to the public,
other than friends and relatives of the deceased. (1987 Code)
Footnote 1: See also subsection 4-2-1B and Title 4, Chapter 11 of this Code.
Footnote 2: See Section 3-1A-1 of this Title for license fees.
Chapter 20
MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS PROVISIONS
3-20-1: CIGARETTE, CIGAR AND TOBACCO SALES:
A. License Required1: It shall be unlawful to engage in the retail sale of cigarettes, cigars or tobacco without having first obtained a license
therefor.
B. Sale To Minors: It shall be unlawful to sell or give cigarettes, cigars or tobacco to any child under eighteen (18) years of age.
C. Possession Of Tobacco Products By Minors: It shall be unlawful for any person under eighteen (18) years of age to possess any type of
tobacco.
D. Sale Of Tobacco Products Other Than In Sealed Packages: No retailer may break or otherwise open any cigarette or smokeless tobacco
package to sell or distribute individual cigarettes or a number of unpackaged cigarettes that is smaller than the minimum cigarette package
size of twenty (20) cigarettes or any quantity of cigarette tobacco or smokeless tobacco that is smaller than the smallest package distributed
by the manufacturer for individual consumer use.
E. Self-Service Sales Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to sell, offer for sale, give away, or display tobacco products for sale at any location where
the consumer can acquire those products through self-service. All tobacco products will be displayed from behind a sales/service counter so
that no consumer can access tobacco products without assistance by an employee of the licensee. This restriction shall not apply to customer
self-service through tobacco product vending machines. (Ord. 2002-10, 7-15-2002)
3-20-2: JUNKYARDS PROHIBITED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 86/387
It shall be unlawful to keep or store any junk, or to establish or maintain any junkyard in the Village. (1987 Code)
3-20-3: MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS:
As used in this section, the following words are defined as follows:
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT: Any premises, place of business, or membership club, where there is conducted the business or activity of
furnishing, providing or giving for a fee or other form of consideration, a massage, fomentation, bath, manipulation of the body, electric or
magnetic treatment, alcohol rub or other similar massage service or procedure.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT - EXCEPTION: The words "massage establishment" and the provisions of this section shall not apply to any duly
licensed physician, surgeon, osteopath, chiropractor or to other persons duly licensed by the State of Illinois to treat, manipulate, operate upon, or
prescribe for the person or bodies of human beings and who are actually practicing said licensed profession or to graduate nurses registered with
the Department of Registration and Education of the State of Illinois.
The operation of massage establishments in the Village is hereby prohibited.
Any person violating any provisions of this section shall be fined not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) and not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for each offense and every day that such violation continues and exists shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. (1987
Code)
3-20-4: MINIMUM HOURLY WAGES AND PAID SICK LEAVE:
A. Employers located within the Village shall comply with all applicable Federal and/or State laws and regulations as such laws and regulations
may exist from time to time with regard to both the payment of minimum hourly wages and paid sick leave. Employee eligibility for paid sick
leave and minimum hourly wages shall also be in compliance with all applicable Federal and/or State laws and regulations as such laws and
regulations may exist from time to time.
B. No additional obligations with regard to paid sick leave, or minimum hourly wages, including, without limitation, any additional obligations by
ordinance adopted by the County of Cook Board of Commissioners, shall apply to employers located within the Village, except those required
by Federal and/or State laws and regulations as such laws and regulations may exist from time to time.
C. For the purposes of this section, the term "employee" means an individual permitted to work by an employer regardless of the number of
persons the employer employs, and the term "employer" means any person employing one or more employees, or seeking to employ one or
more employees, if the person has its principal place of business within the Village or does business within the Village.
D. For the purposes of this section, the term "employer" does not mean:
1. The government of the United States or a corporation wholly owned by the government of the United States;
2. A Native American tribe or a corporation wholly owned by a Native American tribe;
3. The government of the State or any agency or department thereof; or
4. The government of any municipality. (Ord. 2017-121, 6-5-2017)
Chapter 21
REGULATION OF FILM PRODUCTION
3-21-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings and be construed in accordance with the definitions
below:
BUILDING COMMISSIONER: The Building Commissioner for the Village of Broadview, and his/her designee(s).
FILM PRODUCTION: Any and all activities relating to the process of recording live action on film, magnetic tape, or any other medium for later
commercial sale, use, or distribution as a movie, advertising commercial, video, film, or program, including the activities related to the
mobilization, set-up, operation, dismantling, or storage of film production equipment, and site repair/restoration activities, as well as the gathering
of persons related to the film production.
FILM PRODUCTION EQUIPMENT: Any object used in film production, including but not limited to, lighting and sound equipment, cameras,
dressing rooms, trailers, props, furnishings, and vehicles.
FILM PRODUCTION PERMIT: A permit issued in accordance with the procedures and provisions herein.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 87/387
PERMITTEE: The individual or entity to whom a film production permit has been issued.
VILLAGE: The Village of Broadview, Cook County, Illinois, its employees, agents, contractors, and designees.
VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR: The Village Administrator of the Village of Broadview, Illinois, and his/her designee(s). (Ord. 2017-125, 8-7-2017)
3-21-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall engage in, participate in, or initiate film production anywhere within the Village, including the
interior or exterior of public or private property, without first having obtained a film production permit in accordance with the requirements set forth
herein. (Ord. 2017-125, 8-7-2017)
3-21-3: PERMIT EXCEPTIONS:
A. No film production permit shall be required for:
1. The recording of news events or news features;
2. Film production intended solely for personal use such as private events, weddings, reunions, and parties;
3. Film production conducted by, or on behalf of, the Village; or
4. Non-commercial purposes.
B. The Building Commissioner shall have the authority and discretion to waive or modify the permit requirements set forth herein. (Ord. 2017-125,
8-7-2017)
3-21-4: GENERAL PERMIT APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
A. Minimum Processing Period: A complete permit application must be filed with the Building Department at least ten (10) business days,
excluding holidays, prior to the proposed start of film production. No applications will be accepted for processing that are received less than
the required ten (10) business days or that fail to include all attachments required by this section.
B. Information Required: No permit application shall be deemed complete unless and until the following has been submitted:
1. Fifty dollar ($50.00) non-refundable application processing fee;
2. Signed and notarized Permit Application Form; and,
3. All permit application documentation required by section 3-21-6 of this chapter, including:
a. Certificate of Insurance.
b. Indemnification and Hold Harmless Agreement.
c. Neighbor Notification Certification.
d. Property Owner Approval Form. (Ord. 2017-125, 8-7-2017)
3-21-5: PERMIT APPLICATION FORM:
Applicants shall submit the following information on an Application Form to be provided by the Village:
A. The name, addresses, and telephone numbers of the applicant, contact person(s), and individual(s) responsible for the day to day operations
of the film production;
B. A description and summary of the type of film to be produced;
C. The proposed dates and hours for film production;
D. The proposed locations for film production, including staging and storage locations;
E. Identification of all public right-of-ways and public property for which the applicant seeks to use, requests closures or partial closures, and, for
which the applicant seeks alterations of normal parking, vehicular, or pedestrian traffic patterns;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 88/387
F. A description of the methods and procedures to be used for food service, emergency medical treatment, health and sanitation, and removal of
garbage and waste; and,
G. Such other and further information as the Village may deem necessary to evaluate the permit application. (Ord. 2017-125, 8-7-2017)
3-21-6: PERMIT APPLICATION DOCUMENTATION:
The following documentation must be submitted as attachments to the application form:
A. Certificate Of Insurance: The applicant shall attach a certificate of insurance, naming the Village as an additional insured, in the amount of five
million dollars ($5,000,000.00) general liability, including bodily injury and property damage; and automobile liability (if applicable) in the
amount of five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) including bodily injury and property damage. The Village, its Corporate Authorities, elected
officials, officers, boards, commission, attorneys, employees, and agents shall be designated as an additional insured under the policy with
respect to any and all claims which arise out of, or are in any way related to, the film productions activities. The certificate of insurance shall
state whether there are any outstanding claims against the policy and whether there are any policy exclusions which would defeat or reduce
the coverage amounts.
B. Indemnification And Hold Harmless Agreement: Applications for a film production permit shall be accompanied by an indemnification and hold
harmless agreement (in a form acceptable to the Village) wherein the applicant agrees to indemnify, defend and hold the Village, its officers,
employees and agents harmless from any loss, damage, expense, claim and cost of every nature and kind whatsoever, including attorney's
fees, arising out of, or in connection with, the film production.
C. Certification Of Neighborhood Notice/Objections: Applications for a film production permit shall be accompanied by a signed certification (in a
form acceptable to the Village) stating that written notice has been given to all owners of record and/or occupants of all property situated within
a five hundred foot (500') radius of each separate proposed film production location. The Village reserves the right to require a greater area of
notification, if warranted by the size or impact of the proposed film production. The neighborhood notice shall contain a written description of
the proposed film production, including the proposed production schedule, type of film production activities and film production equipment to
be used, and requested street closures and/or parking restrictions.
D. Notice To Those Entitled: Notice must be either hand delivered, or sent by first class mail, with service being deemed as of the day the notice
is postmarked. Those owners or occupants entitled to notice under this subsection shall have five (5) days from the date of service within
which to submit to the Village, in writing, any objections to the proposed film production.
E. Posting Of Notice: Notice shall also be posted on the public streets where filming will occur to notify the residents and guests or visitors of the
Village that filming will be occurring in that area.
F. Property Owner Approval: To the extent any film production will take place on property not owned by the applicant, the permit application shall
be accompanied by a signed statement of property owner approval (in a form acceptable to the Village) indicating that the owner and/or
lessee consent to, and approve of, the use of their property for purposes of film production. (Ord. 2017-125, 8-7-2017)
3-21-7: PERMIT APPLICATION APPROVAL OR DENIAL PROCESS:
The process for reviewing and approving or denying permit application under this chapter (film permits), shall be as follows:
A. Review Of Applications: Each permit application shall be reviewed by the Building Commissioner, as well as by the appropriate operational and
administrative departments within the Village, including but not limited to Police, Fire, and Public Works.
B. Standards: Applications shall be evaluated in light of all facts and circumstances surrounding the proposed film production including but not
limited to the following:
1. Impact film production will have on the use of public property including right-of-ways and public buildings;
2. Impact on governmental functions and the provision of public services;
3. Extent to which the film production would require additional Village personnel and/or services and the cost of said services;
4. Potential health, safety, or traffic hazards that film production may cause;
5. Nature and extent to which the personal and property rights of Village residents and businesses are impacted; and,
6. Objections received from those entitled to notice under section 3-21-6 of this chapter.
C. Permit Decisions:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 89/387
1. By The Building Commissioner: Permit applications for film production that will last five (5) days or less shall be evaluated by the Building
Commissioner, who shall have the discretion to either deny or grant the permit, with or without additional conditions. If the Building
Commissioner determines that the circumstances of the proposed film production warrant consideration by the Village Board, then the
Building Commissioner may prepare a report along with recommendations and refer the matter to the Village Board for its decision.
2. By The Village Board: Permit applications for which film production will last more than five (5) days or, in cases that have been referred to
the Village Board by the Building Commissioner, the Village Board shall have the discretion to either deny or grant the permit, with or
without additional conditions. (Ord. 2017-125, 8-7-2017)
3-21-8: PERMIT ISSUANCE:
Upon approval of the permit application, and prior to the issuance of the film production permit, all permit fees, costs, and deposits shall be paid to
the Village.
A. Permit Fees:
1. Filming for five (5) days or less: Three hundred twenty five dollars ($325.00).
2. Filming for more than five (5) days: Five hundred fifty dollars ($550.00).
3. The Village Administrator shall have the discretion to waive the permit fees for film production to be conducted by students or not-for-profit
organizations.
B. Costs For Use Of Village Personnel: Unless otherwise agreed to and negotiated with the Village, applicant shall pay in full, before the initiation
of film production, the estimated costs of any police, fire, public works, or other Village personnel to be used for the film production. Such costs
shall include cost of services specifically requested by the applicant and the cost of services which, in the judgment of the Village, are needed
as a result of the film production. The costs billed for such direct Village labor shall be equal to 1.5 times the hourly rate of pay for each
individual Village employee so assigned, including any applicable overtime, plus an administrative charge of five dollars ($5.00) per hour. The
Village reserves the right to assign additional fire and/or police personnel to the film production or film production location, where in the opinion
of the Chief of Police or Fire Chief, such protection is warranted by the nature of the film production. After completion of film production site
repair and restoration, the permittee shall reimburse the Village for all costs incurred by the Village in excess of the estimated cost for use of
Village personnel. To the extent the actual costs incurred by the Village are less than the estimated amounts paid, the Village shall reimburse
the permittee for any such amounts. No reimbursement shall be made to the permittee, however, until the completion of all film production site
repair and restoration.
C. Cost Of Use Of Village Property: Applicant shall pay in full, before film production, the costs for the use of all Village property and public rightof-
ways. The costs billed for such use shall be at the rates hereinafter set forth, based on the extent of interference with or disruption to the
normal use and operation of Village property or public ways. The rates shall be as follows:
1. Total closure of public right-of-ways, including sidewalks and parking: Seventy five dollars ($75.00) per hour per block.
2. Partial closure of public right-of-ways: Fifty dollars ($50.00) per hour per block.
D. Deposit: Applicant shall deposit funds in escrow with the Village in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) in order to secure the repair
and restoration of public property as required herein. Based upon the circumstances of the film production and its potential impact upon public
property, the Village shall have the discretion to increase the amount of deposit required under this chapter. The Village shall have the right to
draw against the escrowed funds in order to pay any portion of repair or restoration costs not paid by the permittee within fourteen (14) days of
the issuance of an invoice for payment. (Ord. 2017-125, 8-7-2017)
3-21-9: PERMIT CONDITIONS:
In addition to any conditions imposed pursuant to this chapter and by the Building Commissioner or the Village Board, all permits issued under
this section are deemed to incorporate by reference and include the following conditions:
A. Hours Of Film Production: Film production, including time for set-up and restoration, shall occur only between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00)
A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. Monday through Friday and from nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) P.M. Saturday, Sunday and
holidays. Upon request, the Building Commissioner shall have the authority and discretion to allow film production to occur at times other than
those stated herein.
B. Permit Expiration: Film production permits shall be valid only for the time period stated in the permit. The Village shall have the discretion to
extend the time period upon written request with a showing of good cause. Any such extension may be conditioned upon the satisfaction of
the requirements stated herein, including but not limited to additional neighborhood notice.
C. Restoration And Repair Of Property: Permittee shall restore any public property used during film production to the condition it was in prior to
the initiation of film production. Permittee shall pay in full promptly upon receipt of invoice, the cost of repair for any and all damage to public
property arising out of, or related to, the film production.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 90/387
D. Emergency Access: Notwithstanding the approval of the closure of a public right-of-way, emergency access through the right-of-way must be
maintained at all times. Permittee shall immediately comply with any order deemed necessary by the Broadview Police Department for the
protection of the public health, safety, or welfare.
E. Inspection: The Village shall have the right, but not obligation, to inspect all structures, devices and/or film production equipment to be used in
connection with the film production at reasonable times during film production. (Ord. 2017-125, 8-7-2017)
3-21-10: PERMIT VIOLATIONS, REVOCATION, AND PENALTIES:
A. Revocation Of Permit: Upon violation of any permit term or condition, or upon violation of any other applicable Village ordinance or State law,
any permit issued pursuant to this section may be revoked by the Village. Such revocation may be in addition to any citation issued or fine
imposed for any such violation.
B. General Penalty: Any person who violates a provision of this section, who makes a false statement in obtaining a permit under this section, or,
who violates a condition of any permit issued under this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00),
but not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
C. Separate Offenses: Each act of violation and each day on which a violation of this chapter has occurred shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 2017-125, 8-7-2017)
Title 4
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SANITATION
Chapter 1
HEALTH DEPARTMENT
4-1-1: DEPARTMENT CREATED, COMPOSITION:
There is hereby created a Health Department, an executive department of the Village. The Health Department shall consist of the Health Officer
who shall be the head of the Department, and such other officers and employees as may be assigned to it. (1987 Code)
4-1-2: DEPARTMENT DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS GENERALLY:
It shall be the function of the Health Department, and the duty of every officer and employee assigned thereto, to see to the enforcement of all
ordinances and Code provisions relating to the care and handling of food and drink, the care of contagious diseases and vaccinations, nuisances
dangerous to public health and such other matters as may be assigned to it or may properly come within its jurisdiction. (1987 Code)
4-1-3: HEALTH OFFICER:
A. Office Created: There is hereby created the office of Health Officer, an executive office of the Village.
B. Appointment: The Health Officer shall be appointed by the President and Board of Trustees.
C. Powers And Duties Generally: The Health Officer shall be the head of the Health Department and shall be responsible for the efficient conduct
of its affairs. All officers and employees assigned to this Department shall obey all orders and instructions given by the Health Officer. (1987
Code)
4-1-4: VILLAGE SANITARIAN:
A. Position Created: There is hereby created the position of Village Sanitarian.
B. Appointment: The Village Sanitarian shall be appointed by the President and Board of Trustees.
C. Powers And Duties: The Village Sanitarian is charged with the duty of enforcing all provisions of this Code and statutes of the State pertaining
to the public health. In the accomplishment of his duties, he shall have the power to inspect premises at reasonable hours, to take samples of
foodstuffs and materials for testing, and to issue such orders as may be necessary for and conducive to the public health. (1987 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 91/387
Chapter 2
GENERAL HEALTH PROVISIONS
4-2-1: BIRTH AND DEATH RECORDS:
A. Births: It shall be the duty of every physician or other person in attendance at any birth within the village to make a report thereof to the county
clerk. Said report shall contain all the information required by statute1.
B. Deaths2:
1. Report Required: A report of every death occurring in the village must be made by the physician in attendance, or the funeral director, to the
coroner or the coroner's physician, or the person who first assumes custody of the dead body. This report must contain all the information
required by the state3.
2. Death Certificate, Burial Permit4: It shall be unlawful to inter or cremate any person within the village, or to transport any dead human body
from the village for the purpose of cremation or burial unless a death certificate is first filed and a burial permit issued. (1987 Code)
4-2-2: HEAT CONTROL:
A. Apartment Houses:
1. Minimum Temperature Permitted: It shall be the duty of every person owning or controlling any apartment house, in which the heat is
furnished from a heating plant used in common for the purpose of heating the various rooms and apartments therein and such heating plant
is under the control or supervision of such owner or person in control of such building, to furnish heat to such rooms and apartments from
October 1 of each year to May 1 of the succeeding year, so that occupants thereof may secure, without such undue restriction of ventilation
as to interfere with proper sanitary conditions, a minimum temperature of sixty five degrees Fahrenheit (65F) at six thirty o'clock (6:30) A.M.
and sixty eight degrees Fahrenheit (68F) at seven thirty o'clock (7:30) P.M. and thereafter until six thirty o'clock (6:30) A.M., averaged
throughout the apartment.
2. Procedure Upon Complaint: Written notice of complaint concerning lack of heat in such room or apartment shall first be given to the office of
the building commissioner before any person shall be deemed to have violated this subsection. For the purpose of determining whether or
not the temperature in any such room or apartment is in accordance with the provisions of this subsection, temperature readings shall be
made only by an inspector of the office of the building commissioner by means of a standard Fahrenheit thermometer approved by said
office in no less than two (2) separate rooms in such apartment, or if the apartment consists of only one room, then in two (2) opposite parts
of the room as near the extremes as practicable, such thermometer to be placed at a point three feet (3') from all exterior walls of any such
room or apartment.
3. Violation: Failure to furnish the heat required under the terms of this subsection shall not constitute an offense where it is due to a
breakdown of the heating plant, if diligence is used to have such plant repaired, unless such breakdown has been caused by the violation of
an ordinance relating to the operation of heating plants, or where it is due to strike, to general shortage of fuel, to any act of the tenant who
makes the complaint, or to any cause beyond the owner's control, or unless written notice of such failure to furnish the heat hereby required
shall first have been given to the owner or agent of the building by registered mail by the office of the building commissioner, and the
temperature readings herein provided for shall not be made until after the delivery of written notice to said office.
B. Factories And Workshops: It shall be the duty of every person owning or controlling the heating plant which furnishes heat to any factory or
workshop to maintain a temperature within such factory or workshop of not less than sixty eight degrees Fahrenheit (68F) without such undue
restrictions of ventilation as to interfere with proper sanitary conditions therein; provided, however, that this requirement shall not apply to any
factory or workshop where the business conducted therein is of such a nature that a higher or lower temperature than sixty eight degrees
Fahrenheit (68F) is necessary or expedient for the work, trade, occupation or manufacturing processes of the business so conducted therein;
and provided further, that in all such cases where such higher or lower temperature is necessary or expedient, the moisture content of the air
shall be increased where the temperature is maintained above sixty eight degrees Fahrenheit (68F) in the proper amount to maintain a wet
bulb temperature between fifty four degrees Fahrenheit (54F) and fifty eight degrees Fahrenheit (58F). In the case of special manufacturing
processes where it is necessary or expedient to maintain a wet bulb temperature below or above the extremes herein set forth, the office of
the building commissioner shall prescribe and enforce such reasonable precautions and safeguards as will meet the requirements of such
special manufacturing processes without endangering the health of the occupants of such factory or workshops. The manner of determining
the temperature in all cases where the temperature to be maintained is sixty eight degrees Fahrenheit (68F) shall be the same as in this
subsection, and in all other cases shall be in such practical manner as the office of the building commissioner shall determine. (1987 Code)
4-2-3: MOSQUITO CONTROL:
Every person within the village shall comply with the rules and regulations of the Des Plaines mosquito abatement district. (1987 Code)
4-2-4: CLEAN AIR PROVISIONS:
A. Definitions In This Section:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 92/387
BAR: An establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and that derives no
more than ten percent (10%) of its gross revenue from the sale of food consumed on the premises. "Bar" includes, but is not limited to,
taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges, adult entertainment facilities, and cabarets.
EMPLOYEE: A person who is employed by an employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profits or a person who
volunteers his or her services for a nonprofit entity.
EMPLOYER: A person, business, partnership, association, or corporation, including a municipal corporation, trust, or nonprofit entity, that
employs the services of one or more individual persons.
ENCLOSED AREA: All space between a floor and a ceiling that is enclosed or partially enclosed with: 1) solid walls or windows, exclusive of
doorways, or 2) solid walls with partitions and no windows, exclusive of doorways, that extend from the floor to the ceiling, including, without
limitation, lobbies and corridors.
ENCLOSED OR PARTIALLY ENCLOSED SPORTS ARENA: Any sports pavilion, stadium, gymnasium, health spa, boxing arena, swimming
pool, roller rink, ice rink, bowling alley, or other similar place where members of the general public assemble to engage in physical exercise
or participate in athletic competitions or recreational activities or to witness sports, cultural, recreational, or other events.
GAMING EQUIPMENT OR SUPPLIES: Gaming equipment/supplies as defined in the Illinois gaming board rules of the Illinois
administrative code.
GAMING FACILITY: An establishment utilized primarily for the purposes of gaming and where gaming equipment or supplies are operated
for the purposes of accruing business revenue.
HEALTHCARE FACILITY: An office or institution providing care or treatment of diseases, whether physical, mental, or emotional, or other
medical, physiological, or psychological conditions, including, but not limited to, hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals, weight control clinics,
nursing homes, homes for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories, and offices of surgeons, chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians,
dentists, and all specialists within these professions. "Healthcare facility" includes all waiting rooms, hallways, private rooms, semiprivate
rooms, and wards within healthcare facilities.
PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT: Any area under the control of a public or private employer that employees are required to enter, leave, or pass
through during the course of employment, including, but not limited to, entrances and exits to places of employment, including a minimum
distance, as set forth in subsection H of this section, of fifteen feet (15') from entrances, exits, windows that open, and ventilation intakes
that serve an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited; offices and work areas; restrooms; conference rooms and classrooms; break
rooms and cafeterias; and other common areas. A private residence or home based business, unless used to provide licensed childcare,
foster care, adult care, or other similar social service care on the premises, is not a "place of employment".
PRIVATE CLUB: A not for profit association that: 1) has been in active and continuous existence since at least January 1, 2005, whether
incorporated or not, 2) is the owner, lessee, or occupant of a building or portion thereof used exclusively for club purposes at all times, 3) is
operated solely for a recreational, fraternal, social, patriotic, political, benevolent, or athletic purpose, but not for pecuniary gain, and 4) only
sells alcoholic beverages incidental to its operation. For purposes of this definition, "private club" means an organization that is managed by
a board of directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members at an annual meeting, has established bylaws, a
constitution, or both to govern its activities, and has been granted an exemption from the payment of federal income tax as a club under 26
USC 501.
PRIVATE RESIDENCE: The part of a structure used as a dwelling, including, without limitation: a private home, townhouse, condominium,
apartment, mobile home, vacation home, cabin, or cottage. For the purposes of this definition, a hotel, motel, inn, resort, lodge, bed and
breakfast or other similar public accommodation, hospital, nursing home, or assisted living facility shall not be considered a private
residence.
PUBLIC PLACE: That portion of any building or vehicle used by and open to the public, regardless of whether the building or vehicle is
owned in whole or in part by private persons or entities, the state of Illinois, or any other public entity and regardless of whether a fee is
charged for admission, including a minimum distance, as set forth in subsection H of this section, of fifteen feet (15') from entrances, exits,
windows that open, and ventilation intakes that serve an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited. A "public place" does not include a
private residence unless the private residence is used to provide licensed childcare, foster care, or other similar social service care on the
premises. A "public place" includes, but is not limited to, hospitals, restaurants, retail stores, offices, commercial establishments, elevators,
indoor theaters, libraries, museums, concert halls, public conveyances, educational facilities, nursing homes, auditoriums, enclosed or
partially enclosed sports arenas, meeting rooms, schools, exhibition halls, convention facilities, polling places, private clubs, gaming
facilities, all government owned vehicles and facilities, healthcare facilities or clinics, enclosed shopping centers, retail service
establishments, financial institutions, educational facilities, ticket areas, public hearing facilities, public restrooms, waiting areas, lobbies,
bars, taverns, bowling alleys, skating rinks, reception areas, and no less than seventy five percent (75%) of the sleeping quarters within a
hotel, motel, resort, inn, lodge, bed and breakfast, or other similar public accommodation that are rented to guests, but excludes private
residences.
RESTAURANT: 1. An eating establishment, including, but not limited to, coffee shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands, and private and public
school cafeterias, that gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or employees, and
2. A kitchen or catering facility in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere. "Restaurant" includes a bar area within
the restaurant.
RETAIL TOBACCO STORE: A retail establishment that derives more than eighty percent (80%) of its gross revenue from the sale of loose
tobacco, plants, or herbs and cigars, cigarettes, pipes, and other smoking devices for burning tobacco and related smoking accessories and
in which the sale of other products is merely incidental. "Retail tobacco store" does not include a tobacco department or section of a larger
commercial establishment or any establishment with any type of liquor, food, or restaurant license.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 93/387
SMOKE OR SMOKING: The carrying, smoking, burning, inhaling, or exhaling of any kind of lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette, hookah, weed,
herbs, or any other lighted smoking equipment.
B. Smoking In Public Places, Places Of Employment, And Governmental Vehicles Prohibited: No person shall smoke in a public place or in any
place of employment or within fifteen feet (15') of any entrance to a public place or place of employment. No person may smoke in any vehicle
owned, leased, or operated by the state or a political subdivision of the state. Smoking is prohibited in indoor public places and workplaces
unless specifically exempted in subsection E of this section.
C. Posting Of Signs; Removal Of Ashtrays:
1. "No Smoking" signs or the international "no smoking" symbol, consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red
circle with a red bar across it, shall be clearly and conspicuously posted in each public place and place of employment where smoking is
prohibited by this section by the owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of that place.
2. Each public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this section shall have posted at every entrance a conspicuous
sign clearly stating that smoking is prohibited.
3. All ashtrays shall be removed from any area where smoking is prohibited by this section by the owner, operator, manager, or other person
having control of the area.
D. Designation Of Other Nonsmoking Areas: Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any employer, owner, occupant, lessee,
operator, manager, or other person in control of any public place or place of employment may designate a nonenclosed area of a public place
or place of employment, including outdoor areas, as an area where smoking is also prohibited provided that such employer, owner, lessee or
occupant shall conspicuously post signs prohibiting smoking in the manner described in subsections C1 and C2 of this section.
E. Exemptions: Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, smoking is allowed in the following areas:
1. Private residences or dwelling places, except when used as a childcare, adult daycare, or healthcare facility or any other home based
business open to the public.
2. Retail tobacco stores as defined in subsection A of this section in operation prior to January 1, 2008. The retail tobacco store shall annually
file with the department of public health by January 31 an affidavit stating the percentage of its gross income during the prior calendar year
that was derived from the sale of loose tobacco, plants, or herbs and cigars, cigarettes, pipes, or other smoking devices for smoking
tobacco and related smoking accessories. Any retail tobacco store that begins operation after January 1, 2008, may only qualify for an
exemption if located in a freestanding structure occupied solely by the business and smoke from the business does not migrate into an
enclosed area where smoking is prohibited.
3. Private and semiprivate rooms in nursing homes and long term care facilities that are occupied by one or more persons, all of whom are
smokers and have requested in writing to be placed or to remain in a room where smoking is permitted and the smoke shall not infiltrate
other areas of the nursing home.
4. Hotel and motel sleeping rooms that are rented to guests and are designated as smoking rooms, provided that all smoking rooms on the
same floor must be contiguous and smoke from these rooms must not infiltrate into nonsmoking rooms or other areas where smoking is
prohibited. Not more than twenty five percent (25%) of the rooms rented to guests in a hotel or motel may be designated as rooms where
smoking is allowed. The status of rooms as smoking or nonsmoking may not be changed, except to permanently add additional nonsmoking
rooms.
F. Enforcement: Proceedings to enforce violations of this section may be initiated and conducted in accordance with and pursuant to the
provisions of the code hearing department as stated in title 1, chapter 13 of this code or by any other means provided by law.
G. Violations:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, partnership, association or other entity to fail to comply with this section. Each day that a
violation occurs is a separate violation.
2. A person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited shall be fined in an amount that is not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) and not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). A person who owns, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or place
of employment that violates this section shall be fined: a) not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the first violation, b) not less
than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the second violation within one year after the first violation, and c) seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each additional violation within one year after the first violation.
3. A person who owns, operates or otherwise controls a public place or place of employment who otherwise commits four (4) or more
violations of this section in any twelve (12) month period may also have their business license or liquor license suspended or revoked.
H. Entrances, Exits, Windows, And Ventilation Intakes: Smoking is prohibited within a minimum distance of fifteen feet (15') from entrances, exits,
windows that open, and ventilation intakes that serve an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited under this section so as to ensure that
tobacco smoke does not enter the area through entrances, exits, open windows, or other means.
I. Nonretaliation: No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire or in any manner retaliate against any employee, applicant for employment
or customer because that employer, applicant or customer reports a violation of this section. (Ord. 2008-02, 2-4-2008)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 94/387
Chapter 3
NUISANCES
4-3-1: NUISANCES ENUMERATED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or maintain, or permit the existence of any nuisance on property under his control. The following are
hereby declared nuisances and it shall be unlawful:
A. Acts Detrimental To Public Health: To commit or do any act which endangers or injures the public health or results in annoyance or discomfort
harmful to the public health.
B. Polluting Water: For any person to obstruct or pollute any watercourse or water supply in the Village.
C. Stagnant Pools: For any person to permit any stagnant pool of water to remain or exist on property under his control.
D. Unhealthful And Dangerous Premises1: To permit any building, structure or place to be or remain in a condition in any way dangerous to the
public health.
E. Dense Or Noxious Smoke: To permit the emission of gas or dense smoke within the Village from the smokestack or chimney of any building,
premises locomotive, stationary engine, steam roller, tar kettle or other source, except for a period of six (6) minutes, whether consecutive or
not, within any hour of the day or night, during which the firebox is being cleaned out or new fire being built therein. Such nuisance may be
summarily abated by anyone duly authorized for such purpose, and such abatement is provided in addition to the fine imposed by Section 1-4-
1 of this Code.
The term "dense smoke" as used in this subsection is hereby defined to mean smoke having a density as great as or greater than that
represented by card number two (2) of the standard known as the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, which chart is on file in the office of the Village
Clerk. (1987 Code)
F. Vermin And Rodents2: (Rep. by Ord. 89-6, 6-5-1989)
G. Water Closets: To occupy or use any house in the Village as a residence unless such house is equipped with a water closet or other proper
and adequate facilities for the disposal of human excrement.
H. Noxious Businesses3: To establish or maintain anywhere within the Village or within one mile thereof, any glue factory, oil refining plant or
place or establishment for the reclaiming, refining or rerefining of petroleum or any derivative thereof, any dumping ground for the dumping or
disposal of garbage or refuse4, or any other establishment or business which causes, creates or emits noxious fumes or offensive odors.
(1987 Code)
4-3-2: ABATEMENT BY VILLAGE:
The Chief of Police and the Village Health Officer are hereby authorized to abate any nuisance existing in the Village, whether such nuisance is
one specifically defined as such by ordinance or not. (1987 Code)
4-3-3: PENALTY:
In addition to the remedies provided for in this Chapter, the following penalties may be incurred for violation of this Chapter:
Any person accused of violating any section of this Chapter shall first be issued a written warning to correct the violation within seven (7) days of
the date of the warning.
If upon reinspection, the violation is corrected, no further action will be taken. If, upon reinspection the violation still exists, the Health Inspector or
Building Inspector shall issue a notice of Code violation requiring a court appearance by the violator in thirty (30) days.
Any person may settle or compromise the violation by paying the Village the sum of twenty dollars ($20.00) and showing proof of correction of the
purported violation within seven (7) days after the date of the notice, or by paying to the Village the sum of thirty dollars ($30.00) and showing
proof of correction of the purported violation after said seven (7) day period and prior to the court date set forth in the notice of violation.
In the event the purported violation is not so corrected, settled or compromised, then any person upon being found guilty of a violation of this
Code, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00). Each day that a violation continues, after due notice as provided
herein, shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 87-16, 10-19-1987)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 95/387
Footnote 1: See Title 9, Chapter 6 of this Code.
Footnote 2: See Article A of this Chapter.
Footnote 3: See Chapter 7 of this Title.
Footnote 4: See Chapter 5 of this Title.
ARTICLE A. RODENT CONTROL
4-3A-1: HARBORAGE OF RATS DECLARED TO BE A NUISANCE:
The harborage of rats, rodents or other vermin is hereby declared to be a nuisance and injurious to the public health, safety and welfare.
It shall therefore be unlawful for any person to allow conditions on property under his control to exist which will allow rats, rodents or vermin to
nest, seek shelter or feed. (Ord. 89-6, 6-5-1989)
4-3A-2: PROHIBITED ACTS:
It shall be unlawful to allow the following acts or conditions on the property which will create a harborage for rodents, rats and vermin:
A. The storage of lumber or other building materials, except when construction is in progress on the property;
B. The storage of fixtures, appliances, furniture, scrap materials, old tires and automotive parts;
C. The storage of logs or firewood on the ground or in racks less than eighteen inches (18") above grade level;
D. The accumulation of dog droppings; rubbish or debris such as papers, cartons, and brush; or the improper storage of garbage, compost or
rotting fruit from trees;
E. The storage of an abandoned or inoperable vehicle or boat;
F. The deterioration of an auxiliary structure, concrete slab or other structure. (Ord. 89-6, 6-5-1989)
4-3A-3: NOTICE:
The Building Commissioner shall notify the owner and any other person occupying the property that a condition exists on the property which
allows an unlawful harborage for rats, rodents or other vermin. Said notice shall be by certified mail, return receipt requested.
The owner or other person occupying the property shall have ten (10) days after receipt of said notice within which to correct the unlawful
condition or otherwise abate the nuisance. (Ord. 89-6, 6-5-1989)
4-3A-4: FAILURE TO COMPLY:
In the event the owner or any other person occupying the property fails to comply with the notice within the time specified herein, the owner or
other person shall be subject to a fine of thirty dollars ($30.00) per day for each day violation of this Article exists. (Ord. 89-6, 6-5-1989)
4-3A-5: ABATEMENT BY VILLAGE:
In the event the owner or any person occupying the property fails to comply with the notice within the time specified, the Village, pursuant to 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-20-8, shall abate the condition complained of and provide for the extermination of the rats, rodents or other vermin.
The cost and expense of said abatement and extermination shall be a lien upon the property as provided by said statutes. (Ord. 89-6, 6-5-1989)
Chapter 4
WEEDS
4-4-1: WEEDS DECLARED A NUISANCE, PENALTY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 96/387
Any weeds such as jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistles, cocklebur or other weeds of like kind found growing on any lot, block, tract or parcel of
land situated along any street or avenue in the Village or in the space between the curb line and the sidewalk line of any street, alley or avenue in
front of any such lot, block, tract or parcel of land in the Village are hereby declared to be a nuisance and any owner, occupant or agent of any
such lot, block, tract or parcel of land who shall allow such nuisances to exist shall be subject to a penalty as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this
Code. (1987 Code)
4-4-2: HEIGHT RESTRICTION:
All weeds, grass and other plant growth, other than ornamental shrubbery or trees and flowers, on premises abutting on any public street, alley or
sidewalk in the Village shall be kept trimmed by the owner or occupant of the premises to a height of not to exceed ten inches (10") from the
ground. Any such growth which is in excess of this height shall be considered and is hereby declared to be a nuisance. (1987 Code)
4-4-3: ABATEMENT BY VILLAGE:
In all cases arising under this Chapter where the owner, occupant or agent of any lot, tract or parcel of land shall neglect or refuse to abate such
nuisance within the time and in the manner specified, the Health Officer, by the Chief of Police or other police officer of the Village, shall cause the
abatement of such nuisance and the owner, occupant or agent shall be charged with expenses which may be incurred by the Village in the
removal or abatement thereof, which expenses shall be collected by the Village by suit or otherwise in addition to a fine or penalty. (1987 Code)
Chapter 5
GARBAGE AND REFUSE
4-5-1: COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS:
Compliance with this chapter will be required under the public health and safety regulations of the village. (1987 Code)
4-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
INITIAL VILLAGE PICK UP DATE; MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES OF FOUR UNITS OR MORE: The first date that the village
begins to collect waste following the expiration, avoidance or cancellation of a prior contract, for multi-family residential structures of four (4) units
or more, governing the disposal of waste. For the purpose of this definition, "current contract" shall mean the contract in effect on the date of the
passage hereof. No multi-family residential unit owner shall extend or allow the extension of any such contract by any means including, but not
limited to, renewal, automatic renewal or option so as to delay the initial village pick up from multi-family residential structures of four (4) units or
more.
LANDSCAPE WASTE OR YARD WASTE: All accumulations of grass or shrubbery cuttings, leaves, tree limbs, and other material accumulated as
the result of the care of lawns, shrubbery, vines and trees.
LIGHT RUBBISH: Any inorganic refuse, paper or other items not consisting of recyclables or yard waste.
MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES OF FOUR UNITS OR MORE: All condominiums, apartments and other multi-family development
which contain four (4) units or more.
MUNICIPAL WASTE OR GARBAGE: All garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office waste, and other material resulting from the operation of
residential, municipal or multi-family establishments and from community activities which are not defined as recyclable or landscape waste.
RECYCLABLES: Aluminum cans, metal cans, bimetal cans, glass containers, plastic milk bottles, other plastic containers, chipboard, cardboard,
glossy paper and newsprint/junk mail.
RESIDENTIAL UNITS: All single-family homes, two-family development and multi-family development up to, and including, three (3) units in size,
including townhomes, duplexes, and two-flats. (Ord. 11-13, 5-16-2011)
4-5-3: COLLECTION BY VILLAGE; RESIDENTIAL UNITS:
A. Residential Units:
1. Solid Waste Containers: Residential units shall be responsible to utilize village approved sixty five (65) gallon solid waste containers for the
disposal of municipal waste within the village.
2. Additional Waste: If the residential unit has additional waste, which exceeds the maximum capacity of the sixty five (65) gallon solid waste
container, they may place their own thirty five (35) gallon containers out for collection provided that the residential unit attaches an additional
solid waste sticker to said garbage receptacle.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 97/387
3. Containers: The containers for residential unit village waste or garbage refuse shall be:
a. Of durable plastic material;
b. Of waterproof construction;
c. Equipped with a watertight fitting cover and with handles suitable for mobility by one person;
d. Of a capacity of no more than sixty five (65) gallons.
4. Landscape Waste: Residential unit landscape waste shall be placed in disposable paper bags no smaller than twenty (20) gallons and no
larger than thirty two (32) gallons, and must be used for grass clippings, leaves, weeds and garden waste materials approved by the village.
5. Bulky Landscape Waste: Residential unit landscape waste too bulky for disposal into paper bags, including brush and other branches (3
inches or less in diameter) must be securely tied into bundles not exceeding four feet (4') in length and sixty (60) pounds in weight.
6. Recyclable Materials: Residential unit recyclable materials shall be placed in village approved sixty five (65) gallon solid waste recycling
containers. Additional materials, which do not fit into the designated recycling containers, may be placed directly adjacent to the filled
container. However, junk mail, magazines, and glossy paper must be put in paper bags. Chipboard may be put in paper bags or bundled
and tied with string or twine (except nylon or other synthetic materials).
7. Placement Of Containers: Residential unit garbage and trash containers shall be placed at the edge of the alley or on the parkway between
the hours of six o'clock (6:00) P.M. of the day preceding collection until seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. of the day of collection.
8. Containers Complying With Specifications: Only containers complying with the above specifications for garbage and municipal refuse,
landscape waste and recyclable materials respectively may be utilized.
9. Receptacle Capacity: Residential units shall not exceed the maximum capacity of any waste container within the village. Lids on the sixty
five (65) gallon receptacle must close fully to form a watertight seal. No refuse may protrude above the rim of the receptacle. Residents
must utilize an additional waste container and attach an additional solid waste sticker to said garbage receptacle as specified in subsection
A2 of this section.
10. Location Of Containers: All containers for garbage, ashes and household rubbish shall be stored outside the residence or other building in
an accessible place and at ground level on the owner's private property. No container used for the storage, collection and removal of
garbage or other refuse shall be placed in a thoroughfare or in a manner which constitutes a nuisance to adjacent property or the occupants
thereof or to the public in general. (Ord. 11-13, 5-16-2011)
4-5-3-1: COLLECTION BY VILLAGE; MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES OF FOUR UNITS OR MORE:
A. Multi-Family Residential Structures Of Four Units Or More:
1. Containers For Waste Disposal: Multi-family residential structures of four (4) units or more shall be responsible to utilize village approved
containers for the disposal of municipal waste within the village.
2. Containers: The containers for multi-family residential structures of four (4) units or more municipal waste or garbage refuse shall be:
a. Of durable material;
b. Of waterproof construction;
c. Equipped with a cover and with an approved means of collection.
3. Landscape Waste: Multi-family residential structures of four (4) units or more must arrange for the removal and disposal of its own
landscape waste and shall not be part of the village landscape program.
4. Landscape Waste Prior To Removal: Multi-family residential structures of four (4) units or more landscape waste must be kept orderly and
contained prior to removal.
5. Recyclable Materials: Multi-family residential structures of four (4) units or more must arrange for the removal of its own recyclable materials
and shall not be part of the village recyclable program. However, if a multi-family residential structure of four (4) units or more decides to
institute a recyclable program the contractor providing such a program shall ensure that recyclable material be placed in sixty five (65)
gallon solid waste recycling containers substantially similar to the village approved containers used for residential units. Additional materials,
which do not fit into the designated recycling containers, may be placed directly adjacent to the filled container.
6. Containers Complying With Specifications: Only containers complying with the above specifications for garbage and municipal waste,
landscape waste and recyclable materials respectively may be utilized.
7. Container Capacity: The container for each multi-family residential structure of four (4) units or more shall be properly sized to meet the
municipal waste and garbage needs for each particular multi-family residential structure of four (4) units or more. Lids on the container must
close fully. No refuse may protrude above the rim of the receptacle. If the refuse is protruding above the rim of the container, the owner or
manager of the multi-family residential structure of four (4) units or more shall be obligated to contact the vendor contracted to collect the
municipal waste in the village. The owner of the multi-family residential structures of four (4) units or more shall also ensure that such
garbage is orderly and contained until such time as the garbage vendor completes the pick up.
8. Location Of Containers: All containers for garbage, ashes and household rubbish shall be stored outside of the multi-family residential
structures of four (4) units or more or other building in an accessible place and at ground level on the private property of the multi-family
residential structures of four (4) units or more. No container used for the storage, collection and removal of garbage or other refuse shall be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 98/387
placed in a thoroughfare or in a manner which constitutes a nuisance to adjacent property or the occupants thereof or to the public in
general.
9. Initial Village Pick Up Date: Initial village pick up date for multi-family residential structures of four (4) units or more shall occur within sixty
(60) days of the passage of this chapter. No resident shall extend or allow the extension of any existing contract for the collection of waste,
by any means including, but not limited to, renewal, automatic renewal or option so as to delay the initial village pick up date from multifamily
residential structures of four (4) units or more. All existing contracts for the removal of waste from multi-family residential structures of
four (4) units or more shall be terminated and/or canceled within sixty (60) days of the passage of this chapter. (Ord. 11-13, 5-16-2011)
4-5-3-2: COLLECTION BY VILLAGE; PUBLIC RECEPTACLES:
Village waste containers provided for public use in commercial areas shall be supplied by the village, not exceeding thirty two (32) gallons in
capacity and of wire mesh or enclosed material as approved by the village. (Ord. 11-13, 5-16-2011)
4-5-3-3: COLLECTION BY VILLAGE; COLLECTION FEES:
A. Collection Fees:
1. The village board shall establish a schedule of fees, charges and expenses for the collection of waste and recyclables, stickers for excess
containers of waste, stickers for landscape or yard waste, and penalties for failure to comply with these provisions.
2. The approved schedule of fees shall be filed and posted in the office of the village hall, and may be altered or amended by the village board
from time to time.
3. For the purpose of defraying the cost of collecting containers of garbage and recyclables from either the parkway or the alley of residences
within the village, a charge per month for residential units municipal waste disposal shall be levied against each single-family dwelling, and
for each household unit in a multiple-family dwelling containing three (3) units or fewer. The charges shall be totaled and added to the
monthly water bill and the resulting total bill shall be paid as a unit and shall not be divisible. The ten percent (10%) penalty provided in
subsection 8-4-6A of this code also applies to the portion of the bill designated as a collection fee for garbage.
4. For the purpose of defraying the cost of collecting any container of garbage in excess of the one 65-gallon solid waste container and one
65-gallon solid waste recycling containers covered in the monthly bill, a resident shall purchase a solid waste tag from the village and attach
it to each container in order for the container to be collected. The charge for each solid waste tag shall be posted in the village hall and may
be altered or amended by the village board from time to time.
5. For the purpose of defraying the cost of collecting landscape waste or yard waste, a residential unit shall purchase landscape or yard waste
tags from the village and attach one to each bag or bundle to be collected. The charge for each tag shall be posted in the village hall and
may be altered or amended by the village board from time to time.
6. For the purpose of defraying the cost of collecting containers of garbage from either the parkway or the alley and in the alleys within the
village for multi-family residential structures of four (4) units or more municipal waste disposal, a charge per month shall be levied against
each multi-family residential structure of four (4) units or more. The charges shall be billed separately to each unit in the unit's monthly water
bill. The ten percent (10%) penalty provided in subsection 8-4-6A of this code also applies to the portion of the bill designated as a collection
fee for garbage. (Ord. 11-13, 5-16-2011)
4-5-3-4: COLLECTION BY VILLAGE; SPECIAL PICK UPS:
A. Special Pick Ups For Residential Units: One item per week consisting of miscellaneous waste and bulk items such as discarded furniture,
household appliances (white goods), water tanks (capable of being handled by 1 person), and trash items not exceeding ninety (90) pounds in
weight shall be picked up at no charge upon prior arrangement between the resident and the garbage collection contractor. Other special pick
ups for additional items or items not so designated above shall be provided upon terms agreed to between the resident and the garbage
collection contractor.
B. Special Pick Ups For Multi-Family Residential Structures Of Four Units Or More: There are unlimited pick ups under the multi-family residential
structures of four (4) units or more disposal program. The owner, manager, and tenants of the multi-family residential structure of four (4) units
or more shall be obligated to call the garbage vendor when additional pick ups are necessary. (Ord. 11-13, 5-16-2011)
4-5-4: STORAGE AND REMOVAL FROM BUSINESSES:
A. Nonresidential Buildings: Every person or entity occupying, operating or controlling any building or portion thereof where persons do not reside,
board or lodge, shall provide a separate container for garbage which shall be plainly marked in a conspicuous place "Not For Domestic Use".
Such person or entity shall have the contents of the container removed from the premises at his own expense at such time and in such
manner as the health department may direct. In the buildings described herein, garbage containers of the kind in domestic use are prohibited.
B. Hotels And Restaurants: Every person or entity owning or controlling any hotel, restaurant, cafe or other premises where more than twenty (20)
guests or boarders are fed daily, shall cause all garbage to be placed in a proper metallic container which shall be practically airtight and
watertight and shall cause all substances deposited in such containers to be removed from the premises as frequently as the health
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 99/387
department shall direct. The removal and disposition of such substances shall be done by such person or entity at his or its own expense.
(Ord. 11-13, 5-16-2011)
4-5-5: SCAVENGERS, CATCH BASIN CLEANERS:
4-5-5-1: VILLAGE MAY CONTRACT FOR SERVICE:
The village may contract with private scavengers for the collection of garbage, ashes and rubbish. (1987 Code)
4-5-5-2: LICENSE REQUIRED, FEE:
No person may operate as a waste disposal firm or scavenger for hire, or otherwise shall remove waste from any premises in the village; or
transport waste through the streets, alleys or public ways for the village; or dump, incinerate, or in any other manner dispose of waste originating
in the limits of the village; or contract for, or permit himself to be employed or engaged for any such removal, transportation or disposal, without
first having secured a license for performing such waste disposal service or scavenger service from the village clerk, evidencing the payment to
the village of the license fee provided in section 3-1A-1 of this code. No more than one business license shall be available for municipal waste,
recycling waste and landscape waste removal for residential units of three (3) units or less. No more than one business license shall be available
for municipal waste removal for multi-family residential structures of four (4) units or more. This limitation on licenses shall not apply to roll-off
dumpsters for purposes of construction, remodeling, concrete, and other refuse needs of the community not mentioned herein. (Ord. 11-13, 5-16-
2011)
4-5-5-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE, BOND:
Each application shall be accompanied by a bond in the sum as provided in section 3-1-6 of this code, conditioned on compliance with this code.
(1987 Code)
4-5-5-4: INVESTIGATION, INSPECTION:
A. Investigation Of Applicant: Upon the receipt of any application for a license, the health officer shall investigate the character of the applicant.
No license shall be issued to any person who is not a person of good character.
B. Inspection Of Vehicle: The health officer shall inspect or cause to be inspected all vehicles intended to be used by the applicant and shall not
approve the issuance of a license unless these vehicles comply with the provisions of this code. (1987 Code)
4-5-5-5: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
A. Sanitary Vehicles: All vehicles used for waste disposal or scavenger service must be kept in a sanitary condition. The wagon box must be
waterproof, and each vehicle must be equipped with tight covers.
B. Obey Traffic Regulations1: All persons doing business as scavengers or catch basin cleaners in the village must fully comply with all
ordinances relating to traffic or to the movement of vehicles on the streets.
C. Waste Deposits On Premises: Care must be taken when removing any garbage or offal that no waste material is permitted to fall or remain on
any premises.
D. Employees: It is unlawful to employ any person as a driver on any vehicle or as helper therefor who is not a person of good character. (1987
Code)
4-5-6: PROHIBITED ACTS:
A. Collection Without Permit: To collect and dispose of refuse for hire over the streets of the village without a permit is declared to be a nuisance.
Such business shall be carried on under the conditions of this chapter.
B. Refuse Accumulation:
1. Private Property: The owner of any premises in the village shall remove from the premises or otherwise dispose of all garbage, ashes, tin
cans, metalware, broken glass, crockery, stoneware and all refuse and rubbish of every description whatsoever. Any loose accumulation of
such refuse is prohibited.
2. Public Ways: No person shall leave or suffer to be left, any refuse in or upon any street, alley, parkway or other public place or upon any
vacant or unimproved lot or parcel of land in the village. (1987 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 100/387
4-5-7: FLY DUMPING PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person who is not a resident of the village or who does not own, operate or maintain a business in the village to
deposit, leave or dump any garbage, yard waste or other debris in, on or upon any public alley, street or other publicly owned property in the
village.
It shall be unlawful for any person who is not a resident of the village or who does not own, operate or maintain a business in the village to
deposit, leave or dump any garbage, yard waste or other debris in, on or upon any vacant lot or privately owned property in the village.
It shall be unlawful for any person who is a resident of the village or who owns, operates or maintains a business in the village to deposit, leave or
dump any garbage, yard waste or other debris in or upon any public alley, street or other publicly owned property in the village, except in such
areas adjacent to property owned or occupied by said person and then only at the times and in the receptacles as authorized by the village. (Ord.
90-8, 9-4-1990)
4-5-8: PENALTY:
Any owner or occupant of the premises accused of violating any provision of this chapter regarding garbage and rubbish storage and removal as
contained in this chapter shall be issued a written warning to correct the violation within a specified number of days of the date of the warning, or
shall be issued a notice of code violation requiring a court appearance by the violator in thirty (30) days. Issuance of a warning or a notice of code
violation is entirely within the discretion of the health inspector, building inspector, public works director or their designee(s).
Any violation is subject to the penalty provisions contained in title 1, chapter 4, "General Penalty", of this code, with each day of a continuing
violation constituting a separate offense. (Ord. 11-13, 5-16-2011)
Chapter 6
FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
4-6-1: APPLICABILITY:
The issuance, suspension, and revocation of permits, licenses, or certificates to operate retail food establishments; the prohibiting of the sale of
unsound or mislabeled food or drink; and the enforcement of this chapter shall be regulated in accordance with section 4-6-3 of this chapter
concerning the compliance procedures. (Ord. 97-8, 10-6-1997)
4-6-2: CODES:
The inspection of food service establishments shall be regulated in accordance with the 1993 and all subsequent editions of, or amendments to,
the Illinois Department of Public Health's publication currently titled, "Food Service Sanitation Code", that are on file with the Secretary of State.
The inspection of retail food stores shall be regulated in accordance with the 1992 and all subsequent editions of, or amendments to, the Illinois
Department of Public Health's publication currently titled, "Retail Food Store Sanitation Code", that are on file with the Secretary of State.
Three (3) copies of each of the Illinois Department of Public Health's publications currently titled, "Food Service Sanitation Code", and "Retail
Food Store Sanitation Code", shall be on file at the Village Clerk's Office. (Ord. 97-8, 10-6-1997)
4-6-3: COMPLIANCE PROCEDURES - GENERAL:
No person shall operate a food establishment who does not have a valid permit, license, or certificate issued to them by the Village. Only a
person who complies with the requirements of this chapter shall be entitled to receive or retain such a permit, license, or certificate. Permits,
licenses, or certificates are not transferable. A valid permit, license or certificate shall be posted in every food establishment. (Ord. 97-8, 10-6-
1997)
4-6-4: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT, LICENSE OR CERTIFICATE:
A. Any person desiring to operate a food establishment shall make written application for a permit, license, or certificate on forms provided by the
Village.
Such application shall include the name and address of each applicant, the location and type of the proposed food establishment, and the
signature of each applicant.
B. Prior to approval of an application for a permit, license, or certificate, the Village and the Cook County Department of Public Health shall
inspect the proposed food establishment to determine compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
C. The Village shall issue a permit, license, or certificate to the applicant if its inspection reveals that the proposed food establishment complies
with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 97-8, 10-6-1997)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 101/387
4-6-5: SUSPENSION OF PERMIT, LICENSE OR CERTIFICATE:
A. The Village may, without warning, notice, or hearing suspend any permit, license, or certificate to operate a food establishment if the holder of
the permit, license, or certificate does not comply with the requirements of this Chapter, or if the operation of the establishment does not
comply with the requirements of this Chapter, or if the operation of the food establishment otherwise constitutes a substantial hazard to public
health.
Suspension is effective upon service of the notice required by subsection B of this Section. When a permit, license, or certificate is suspended,
food operations shall immediately cease. Whenever a permit, license, or certificate is suspended, the holder of the permit, license, or
certificate shall be afforded an opportunity for hearing within twenty (20) days of receipt of a request for hearing.
B. Whenever a permit, license, or certificate is suspended, the holder of the permit, license, or certificate, or the person in charge shall be notified
in writing that the permit, license, or certificate is, upon service of the notice, immediately suspended and that an opportunity for hearing will be
provided if a written request for hearing is filed with the Village by the holder of the permit, license, or certificate within ten (10) days. If no
written request for hearing is filed within ten (10) days, the suspension is sustained. The Village may end the suspension at any time if
reasons for suspension no longer exist. (Ord. 97-8, 10-6-1997)
4-6-6: REVOCATION OF PERMIT, LICENSE OR CERTIFICATE:
A. The Village may, after providing opportunity for hearing, revoke the permit, license, or certificate for serious or repeated violations of any of the
requirements of this Chapter or for the interference with the Village or the Cook County Department of Public Health in the performance of
duty.
B. Prior to revocation, the Village shall notify, in writing, the holder of the permit, license, or certificate, or the person in charge, of the specific
reason(s) for which the permit, license, or certificate is to be revoked and that the permit, license, or certificate shall be revoked at the end of
the ten (10) days following service of such notice unless a written request for hearing is filed with the Village by the holder of the permit,
license, or certificate within such ten (10) day period. If no request for hearing is filed within the ten (10) day period, the revocation of the
permit, license or certificate becomes final. (Ord. 97-8, 10-6-1997)
4-6-7: SERVICE OF NOTICES:
A notice provided for in this Chapter is properly served when it is delivered to the holder of the permit, license, or certificate, or the person in
charge, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the holder of the permit, license, or
certificate. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the records of the Village. (Ord. 97-8, 10-6-1997)
4-6-8: HEARINGS:
The hearings provided for in this Chapter shall be conducted by the Village at a time and place designated by it. Any oral testimony given at a
hearing shall be reported verbatim, and the presiding officer shall make provision for sufficient copies of the transcript. The Village shall make a
final finding based upon the complete hearing record and shall sustain, modify or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. A written
report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the holder of the permit, license, or certificate by the Village. (Ord. 97-8, 10-6-1997)
4-6-9: APPLICATION AFTER REVOCATION:
Whenever a revocation of a permit, license, or certificate has become final, the holder of the revoked permit, license, or certificate may make
written application for a new permit, license or certificate. (Ord. 97-8, 10-6-1997)
4-6-10: INSPECTION FREQUENCY:
An inspection of a food establishment shall be performed at a frequency prescribed by the Village.
Additional inspections of the food establishment shall be performed as often as necessary for the enforcement of this Chapter. (Ord. 97-8, 10-6-
1997)
4-6-11: ACCESS:
Duly authorized representatives of the Village or the Cook County Department of Public Health, after proper identification, shall be permitted to
enter any food establishment at any reasonable time for the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with this Chapter. The
representatives shall be permitted to examine the records of the establishment to obtain information pertaining to food and supplies purchased,
received, or used. (Ord. 97-8, 10-6-1997)
4-6-12: REPORT OF INSPECTIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 102/387
Whenever an inspection of a food establishment is made, the findings shall be recorded on the inspection report form on file and available at the
Village office. The inspection report form shall summarize the requirements of this Chapter and shall set forth a weighted point value for each
requirement. Inspectional remarks should be written to reference, by item number, the item violated and should state the correction to be made.
The rating score of the establishment shall be the total of the weighted point values for all violations, subtracted from one hundred (100). A copy
of the completed inspection report form shall be furnished to the person in charge of the establishment at the conclusion of the inspection. The
completed inspection report form is a public document that shall be made available for public disclosure to any person who requests it according
to law. (Ord. 97-8, 10-6-1997)
4-6-13: CORRECTION OF VIOLATIONS:
A. The completed inspection report form shall specify a reasonable period of time for the correction of the violations found; and correction of the
violations shall be accomplished within the period specified, in accordance with the following provisions:
1. If an imminent health hazard exists, such as complete lack of refrigeration or sewage backup into the establishment, the establishment shall
immediately cease food operations. Operations shall not be resumed until authorized by the Cook County Department of Public Health.
2. All violations of four (4) or five (5) point weighted items shall be corrected as soon as possible, but in any event, within ten (10) days
following inspection. A follow-up inspection to confirm correction may be conducted at the discretion of the Cook County Department of
Public Health.
3. All one or two (2) point weighted items shall be corrected as soon as possible, but in any event, by the time of the next routine inspection.
4. When the rating score of the establishment is less than sixty (60), the establishment shall initiate corrective action on all identified violations
within forty eight (48) hours. One or more reinspections may be conducted at reasonable time intervals to assure correction.
5. In the case of temporary food establishments, all violations shall be corrected within twenty four (24) hours. If violations are not corrected
within twenty four (24) hours, the establishment shall immediately cease food operations until authorized to resume by the Cook County
Department of Public Health.
B. The inspection report shall state that failure to comply with any time limits for corrections may result in cessation of food operations. An
opportunity for hearing on the inspection findings or the time limitations or both will be provided if a written request is filed with the Village
within ten (10) days following cessation of operations. If a request for hearing is received, a hearing shall be held within twenty (20) days of
receipt of the request.
C. Whenever a food establishment is required under the provisions of this Section to cease operations, it shall not resume operations until it is
shown on reinspection that conditions responsible for the order to cease operations no longer exist. Opportunity for reinspection shall be
offered within a reasonable time. (Ord. 97-8, 10-6-1997)
4-6-14: EXAMINATION AND CONDEMNATION OF FOOD:
Food may be examined or sampled by the Cook County Department of Public Health as often as necessary for enforcement of this Chapter. The
Cook County Department of Public Health may, upon written notice to the owner or person in charge, specifying with particularity the reasons
therefor, place a hold order on any food which it believes is in violation of sections 750.100, 750.110, 760.100, or 760.110 of the Illinois
Department of Public Health's "Food Service Sanitation Code", or the "Retail Food Store Sanitation Code", respectively, or any other section of
this Chapter. The Cook County Department of Public Health shall tag, label, or otherwise identify any food subject to the hold order. No food
subject to a hold order shall be used, served, or moved from the establishment. The Cook County Department of Public Health shall permit
storage of the food under conditions specified in the hold order, unless storage is not possible without risk to the public health, in which case
immediate destruction shall be ordered and accomplished. The hold order shall state that a request for hearing may be filed within ten (10) days
and that if no hearing is requested the food shall be destroyed. If a request for hearing is received, the hearing shall be held within twenty (20)
days after receipt of the request. On the basis of evidence produced at that hearing, the hold order may be vacated, or the owner or person in
charge of the food may be directed by written order to denature or destroy such food or to bring it into compliance with the provisions of this
Chapter. (Ord. 97-8, 10-6-1997)
4-6-15: SUBMISSION OF PLANS:
Whenever a food establishment is constructed or extensively remodeled and whenever an existing structure is converted to use as a food
establishment, properly prepared plans and specifications for such construction, remodeling, or conversion shall be submitted to the Village and
the Cook County Department of Public Health for review and approval before construction, remodeling, or conversion is begun. The plans and
specifications shall indicate the proposed layout, arrangement, mechanical plans, and construction materials of work areas, and the type and
model of proposed fixed equipment and facilities. The Village and the Cook County Department of Public Health shall approve the plans and
specifications if they meet the requirements of this Chapter. No food establishment shall be constructed, extensively remodeled, or converted
except in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the Village and the Cook County Department of Public Health. (Ord. 97-8, 10-6-
1997)
4-6-16: PREOPERATIONAL INSPECTION:
Whenever plans and specifications are required by Section 4-6-15 of this Chapter to be submitted to the Village and the Cook County Department
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 103/387
of Public Health, the Village and the Cook County Department of Public Health shall inspect the food establishment prior to the start of operations,
to determine compliance with the approved plans and specifications and with the requirements of this Chapter. (Ord. 97-8, 10-6-1997)
4-6-17: PROCEDURE WHEN INFECTION IS SUSPECTED:
When the Cook County Department of Public Health has reasonable cause to suspect possible disease transmission by an employee of a food
establishment, it may secure a morbidity history of the suspected employee or make any other investigation as indicated and shall take
appropriate action. The Cook County Department of Public Health may require any or all of the following measures:
A. The immediate exclusion of the employee from employment in food establishments;
B. The immediate closing of the food establishment concerned until, in the opinion of the Cook County Department of Public Health, no further
danger of disease outbreak exists;
C. Restriction of the employee's services to some area of the establishment where there would be no danger of transmitted disease;
D. Adequate medical and laboratory examination of the employee and of other employees and of his and their body discharges. (Ord. 97-8, 10-6-
1997)
4-6-18: REINSPECTION COSTS:
In the event a reinspection is deemed necessary by the inspector, the cost of any and all subsequent reinspections shall be borne by the holder of
the permit, license, or certificate. (Ord. 97-8, 10-6-1997)
4-6-19: CONDITIONAL PERMIT, LICENSE OR CERTIFICATE:
When structural, plumbing, electrical, ventilation, or similar such defects exist in an established food facility that may require significant
expenditures to correct, but are not considered to be imminent health hazards, a conditional permit, license, or certificate may be granted at the
discretion of the Village. Under no circumstances will a conditional permit, license, or certificate be issued for more than two (2) consecutive
twelve (12) month periods. The purpose of the conditional license or permit is to allow a reasonable period of time for correction of existing
defects. (Ord. 97-8, 10-6-1997)
4-6-20: PENALTIES:
Any person violating the provisions of this Chapter shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and a separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation continues. (Ord. 97-8, 10-6-1997)
4-6-21: INJUNCTIONS:
The Village shall have the right to enjoin any person or establishment in the event violations occur on a continuing basis. (Ord. 97-8, 10-6-1997)
4-6-22: AUTOMATIC FOOD VENDING MACHINES:
A. Application For License: In addition to the requirements of Section 4-6-4 of this Chapter, application for automatic food vending machine
license shall set forth the following:
1. Types of automatic food vending machines intended to be operated;
2. A description of each type;
3. Such further information as may be required by the Village sanitarian in order to inform him fully as to the type of machine and the kind of
food to be dispensed therefrom.
B. Approval Of Machine, Inspection Of Premises: Before any license shall be issued, the type of vending machine intended to be operated shall
be approved by the sanitarian who also shall cause an inspection to be made of the premises of the applicant to determine the character and
fitness of the premises from the standpoint of ensuring protection of the food from improper handling, dust, dirt, flies, vermin or other
contamination.
C. License Emblem: The Village Clerk shall deliver to each person licensed to engage in a business of installing, keeping or maintaining
automatic food vending machines a license emblem. It shall be the duty of each licensee to properly identify each food vending machine which
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 104/387
he installs. Such identification shall contain the name and business address of the licensee and failure to properly affix and maintain such
identification on each food vending machine shall constitute a violation of this section.
D. Prohibited Acts Or Conditions:
1. Location In Toilet Or Washroom: No automatic food vending machine shall be installed or kept for use in any toilet or washroom.
2. License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to install, keep or maintain or use or permit the installation, keeping, maintenance or
use upon his premises of any automatic food vending machine owned or operated by any person who has not obtained a license as
provided herein. (1987 Code; amd. Ord. 97-8, 10-6-1997)
4-6-23: MOBILE FOOD VENDORS:
A. Definitions: For the purposes of this section:
LICENSEE: Shall mean any mobile food vendor or mobile food preparer that has been licensed by the Village of Broadview to serve food from
mobile food vehicle.
MOBILE FOOD PREPARER OR PREPARER: Means any person who, by traveling from place to place upon the public ways, including
highways, alleys, sidewalks, or other public ways, prepares and serves, sells or distributes perishable food items from a mobile food vehicle.
MOBILE FOOD VEHICLE OR VEHICLE: Means a manufactured, motorized mobile food unit, including but not limited to trucks, cars or other
vehicles, as well as motorcycles and bicycles, in which ready-to-eat food is cooked, wrapped, packaged, processed, or portioned for service,
sale or distribution. This definition does not include any trucks, cars, other vehicles, motorcycles, or bicycles used to deliver food ordered from
a restaurant with a fixed place of business.
MOBILE FOOD VENDOR OR VENDOR: Means any person who, by traveling from place to place upon public ways, including highways,
alleys, sidewalks, or other public ways, serves ready-to-eat food which is cooked, wrapped, packaged, processed, or portioned for service,
sale or distribution, including selling food prepared by a mobile food preparer, and shall include the owner of mobile food vehicle or the
owner's agent.
B. License Required:
1. License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to operate within the Village a mobile food vehicle or operate as a mobile food
preparer or mobile food vendor, as defined in this section, without first having obtained a license for that purpose.
2. License Application: Any person desiring to operate a mobile food vehicle shall make a written application for such license to the Building
Commissioner or his/her designee. The application for such license shall be on forms provided by the Building Commissioner or his/her
designee and shall include the following:
a. Name, signature and address of each applicant and each corporate officer, owner, partner, or proprietor;
b. Name and address of the approved commercial supply source;
c. A description of the preparation methods and food products offered for sale, including the intended menu, display and distribution
containers;
d. The anticipated volume of food to be stored, prepared and sold;
e. Plans and specifications for the mobile food vehicle, including the proposed layout, photographs, mechanical schematics, construction
materials, finish schedules, equipment types, manufacturers, model numbers, locations, dimensions, weight of vehicle per wheel,
performance capacities, power source, installation specifications and information on any custom fabricated equipment;
f. Proof of full, unfettered and continuous access during hours of operation to restrooms with a hand sink for use by employees within two
hundred feet (200') of the mobile food vehicle during times when the vehicle is parked in one location for more than two (2) hours. Proof
of access shall be evidenced by written agreement between the mobile food vendor and the party providing said access;
g. A valid copy of all necessary licenses or permits required by State health or transportation authorities. This includes proof of food handler
certification training or valid Illinois Food Service Sanitation Manager Certification as required in the Food Handling Regulation
Enforcement Act, 410 Illinois Compiled Statutes 625/0.01 et seq. During all times of mobile food vehicle operation in the Village, at least
one certified trained food handler or someone holding a food service sanitation manager certificate issued by the Illinois Department of
Public Health must be present on the vehicle;
h. A signed statement that the mobile food vendor shall defend, hold harmless, and indemnify the Village and its officers and employees,
and shall indemnify the Village, its officers and employees for any claims for damage to property or injury to persons which may be
occasioned by any activity carried on under the terms of the permit. Mobile food vendor shall furnish and maintain such public liability,
food products liability, and property damage insurance as will protect the mobile food vendor, property owners, and the Village from all
claims for damage to property or bodily injury, including death, which may arise from the operations under the license or in connection
therewith. Such insurance shall provide coverage of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence. The policy shall
further provide that it may not be cancelled except upon thirty (30) days' written notice served upon the Village President and on the
Building Commissioner. A license issued pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be invalid at any time the insurance required
herein is not maintained and evidence of continuing coverage is not filed with the Building Commissioner and the Village President; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 105/387
i. The proposed location(s) and times of operation for conducting business in accordance with this section. Mobile food vendors shall be
required to provide to the Village a signed statement that the mobile food vendor shall defend, hold harmless, and indemnify the adjacent
property owner(s) for any claims for damage to property or injury to persons which may be occasioned by any activity carried on or under
the permit. No application will be accepted for a permit to operate at a location where a current permit has been issued or a complete
application is pending. If the proposed location is private property, the applicant shall provide to the Village written consent from the
property owner, which shall be duly notarized.
Mobile food vendor shall notify the Building Commissioner or his/her designee within thirty (30) calendar days of any changes to
application information.
It shall be the duty of the Building Commissioner or his/her designee to inspect the vehicle and determine the fitness and suitability of the
vehicle for its intended use. The Building Commissioner may also direct the applicant to have the vehicle inspected by the Cook County
Department of Health, the costs of which shall be paid by the mobile food vendor.
3. License Fees: All mobile food vendors licensed under this section shall pay an annual license fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). The
fee for any such license issued after July 1 in any calendar year shall equal one hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00). One-day license fees
shall also be available for fifty dollars ($50.00) per day. No more than six (6) one-day licenses will be issued to any applicant in a one year
period.
4. Form And Condition Of Permit: In addition to naming the mobile food vendor, the approved operating location site diagram, and other
information deemed appropriate by the Building Commissioner or his/her designee, the mobile food vehicle vending permit shall contain the
following conditions:
a. Each mobile food vehicle vending license shall expire on December 31 of each year.
b. The license shall not be transferrable from person to person or from place to place without the written approval of the Building
Commissioner or his/her designee.
c. The approved operational location may be changed, either temporarily or permanently, by written notice of the Building Commissioner or
his/her designee.
d. The license is valid for one mobile food vehicle only.
e. There shall be issued to each mobile food vendor a suitable decal that shall be permanently and prominently affixed to the vehicle.
5. Refusal To Issue; Suspension; Revocation: Licenses authorized to be issued pursuant to this section may be suspended, revoked or
refused to be issued upon good cause shown. The Village may refuse to issue, revoke, or suspend a license if any applicant or agent
thereof refuses to comply with any requirement of this section or has a debt that is in arrears to the Village.
C. Location Review And Restrictions:
1. The license shall be referred to the Building Commissioner or his/her designee for approval or disapproval. In the course of his or her
review, the Building Commissioner may, but is not required to, consult with the Director of Public Works, the Police Chief, and the Fire Chief
related to the application for a license and the location(s) at which the license may be used. The use of the licensed operating location for
mobile food vending must be compatible with the public interest in use of the public right-of-way. In making such determination, the Building
Commissioner, in consultation with the Director of Public Works, the Police Chief, and the Fire Chief or their designee shall consider the
width of the public way, parking issues and traffic congestion, the weight that can be supported by the paving or street surface at the
proposed location, the proximity and location of existing street furniture, including, but not limited to, utility poles, parking meters, bus
shelters, benches, street trees, news racks, as well as the presence of bus stops, truck loading zones, taxi stands, valet parking zones, fire
hydrants, or other businesses or approved mobile food vehicles to determine whether the requested location would result in pedestrian or
street congestion.
2. The Building Commissioner or his/her designee shall not approve a location where a mobile food vehicle would substantially obstruct
highways, alleys, sidewalks, or other public ways, impair the movement of pedestrians or vehicles, or pose a hazard to public safety. The
Building Commissioner or his/her designee shall not approve any location which is adjacent to a bus stop, taxi stand, or handicap loading
zone, within thirty feet (30') of an intersection, within three feet (3') of a curb, within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant, within twenty feet (20')
of a fire station or police station, or directly in front of a property entryway. Pedestrian walkways of no less than six feet (6') must be
maintained around the mobile food vehicle.
3. It shall be unlawful for a mobile food vehicle vendor to park, stand, or operate in a location which is adjacent to or within one hundred feet
(100') of the address point of a licensed restaurant. This requirement may be waived if the application is submitted with the duly notarized
written consent of the proprietor of the adjacent restaurant. No person or entity shall either pay or accept payment for the written consent
provided herein. If applicable, this requirement shall not apply to a licensed restaurant affiliated with the mobile food vehicle vendor provided
that satisfactory written proof as determined by the Building Commissioner is provided.
4. The Village shall not approve more than one mobile food vehicle per private parking lot, which must remain in compliance with this Code.
5. Mobile food vendor shall not operate a mobile food vehicle within five hundred feet (500') of the address point of any fair, carnival, circus,
festival, special event, or civic event that is licensed or sanctioned by the Village except when mobile food vendor has obtained a one-day
food permit from the Village.
6. On days when school is in session at elementary, middle, and secondary schools (public or private), it shall be unlawful for any mobile food
vendor to operate a mobile food vehicle within five hundred feet (500') of the address point of property of a school. During summer school
sessions, this restriction shall apply only to those individual schools which are in operation.
7. A mobile food vendor shall not operate on private property within the corporate limits of Village without first obtaining written consent to
operate from the affected private property owner to operate.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 106/387
8. The Building Commissioner, the Director of Public Works, the Police Chief, and the Fire Chief, or their designees, shall work cooperatively
to review and determine location restrictions related to the parking and operation of mobile food vehicles and shall consider public safety
and right-of-way safety issues.
9. Mobile food vehicle vendors may be permitted to operate and locate within locations and times approved by the Building Commissioner.
The license must be prominently displayed on the mobile food vehicle at all times. The mobile food vehicle vendors must pay any and all
parking meter fees for the time and usage of any and all Village parking spaces, including paving parking meter fees for the usage of
multiple parking spaces during operation of the vehicle and must obey all parking and traffic regulations.
D. Sanitation And Inspections:
1. All mobile food vehicles shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. It shall be the duty of the Building Commissioner or his/her
designee, which may include the Cook County Health Department, to make or cause to be made such inspections as may be necessary to
ensure all mobile food vehicles are kept in a clean and sanitary condition. The Building Commissioner or his/her designee, which may
include the Cook County Health Department or his/her designee, bearing proper identification, shall be permitted to enter or access any
mobile food vehicle at any reasonable time for the purpose of inspecting to determine whether the mobile food vendor has complied with the
terms of this section. Additionally, the mobile food vendor shall, on request, provide the Building Commissioner or his/her designee, which
may include the Cook County Health Department, with the records of the mobile food vehicle to obtain information pertaining to food and
supplies purchased, received or used. Denial of access to the mobile food vehicle or to said records shall be deemed an interference with
the Building Commissioner or his/her designee, which may include the Cook County Health Department, in the performance of his/her
duties and may result in an immediate suspension of the mobile food vendor's license.
2. All food storage, preparation and distribution of food, and vehicle equipment must meet applicable Illinois Department of Public Health and
the Cook County Department of Health standards and requirements, as well as standards to be determined by the Building Commissioner
or his/her designee.
3. All food, beverages, ice and other materials sold or used in preparation of goods to be sold must be obtained from an approved commercial
supply source. The Building Commissioner shall be responsible for approving commercial supply sources and shall keep a list of approved
commercial supply sources in a conveniently accessible location.
4. All off-site food preparation and food storage must be done either at a Village of Broadview licensed food establishment or if the mobile food
vehicle vendor is outside the jurisdiction of the Village, it must comply with the applicable requirements of this Code as well as all
requirements of the Cook County Department of Health and the State of Illinois. All mobile food vendors or applicants that intend to
dispense foods that are prepared and wrapped in a commissary, must conduct their operations under the supervision of a State and/or local
health authority. All mobile food vehicle vendors and the mobile food preparers must prepare food in compliance with any and all rules and
regulations of the Illinois Department of Health and the Cook County Department of Health and conducts its operations under the
supervision of a State or local health authority. The mobile food vehicle vendor shall, in addition to the application, if requested, provide
reports including inspection reports and laboratory results from the State and local health authority in the jurisdiction where the food source
or commissary is located, indicating compliance with such approval. Food cannot be prepared in a home, apartment, other living space or
garage.
5. All waste liquids, garbage, litter and refuse shall be kept in leak-proof, nonabsorbent containers which shall be kept covered with tight-fitting
lids and properly disposed of either at an affiliated licensed restaurant or alternative location(s) as disclosed and agreed to with the Building
Commissioner or his/her designee. No waste liquids, garbage, litter or refuse shall be dumped or drained into sidewalks, streets, gutters,
drains, trash receptacles, other than the agreed locations with Village staff. A garbage receptacle shall be easily accessible for customer
use. Mobile food vendors shall be responsible for all litter and garbage left by customers.
E. Restrictions On Use:
1. Hours of operation for mobile food vendors shall be limited to the hours between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M.
The hours of operation for mobile food vehicles located within three hundred feet (300') of a residential building or a mixed use building with
a residential component shall be limited to the hours between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. No mobile food vehicle
shall be left unattended on highways, alleys, sidewalks, or other public ways, nor remain on highways, alleys, sidewalks, or other public
ways outside of these allowed hours of operation.
2. No mobile food vehicle vendor shall use or maintain any outside sound amplifying equipment, lights, or noisemakers, such as bells, horns
or whistles to attract attention or customers, except that the vehicle may maintain standard issued vehicle equipment without modifications
to said equipment.
3. No mobile food vehicle shall use external signage, bollards, seating, or any other equipment not contained within the vehicle except that a
retractable awning may be used at the exterior food service and food sales area.
4. The mobile food vehicle shall not have a drive-through.
5. Mobile food vendor shall obey all State, local, and Village laws as well as any lawful order of a police officer to move to a different permitted
location to avoid congestion or obstruction of a public way or remove the vehicle entirely from the public way if necessary to avoid such
congestion or obstruction.
6. The mobile food vehicle must prominently display the name, address, and phone number of the owner.
7. The mobile food vehicle shall display its permit/decal prominently on the vehicle's windshield in the lower right hand corner (passenger's
side) of the windshield.
8. Any power required for the mobile food vehicle located on a public way shall be self-contained and shall not use utilities drawn from the
public right-of-way. Mobile food vehicles on private property may use electrical power from an adjacent property only when the property
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 107/387
owner provides written consent. All other power sources must be self-contained. No power cable or equipment shall be extended at grade
across any Village street, alley or sidewalk.
9. All identifying information, logos, advertising, decorations, or other displays on the exterior of a mobile food vehicle shall conform to this
Code related to regulating commercial signage, to the extent applicable. In particular, exterior displays shall be designed to minimize
confusion or distraction that jeopardizes vehicular and pedestrian safety and shall be harmonious with the surroundings and consistent with
the character of the community in which the mobile food vehicle operates.
F. License Adverse Action:
1. An application or approved license may be denied, revoked, suspended, or not renewed for any of the following reasons listed herein,
however, this list is not exhaustive and licenses could be denied, revoked, suspended or not renewed for other reasons provided good
cause is shown. Some of the reasons that licenses may be denied, revoked, suspended, or not renewed, include but are not limited to:
a. The application contains material omissions or false, fraudulent, or deceptive statements.
b. The vehicle is operated in such a manner as constituting a public nuisance per the Village of Broadview Code of ordinances or State
Statutes.
c. The applicant or mobile food vendor's operation has or likely would endanger the health, safety, and welfare of the residents, businessowners,
and visitors to the Village.
d. The proposed operation is in violation of any Federal, State, or local laws including, but not limited to, the provisions of this Code and the
Cook County Code of Ordinances pertaining to food, fire prevention, public health or safety.
2. The provisions of this section are not exclusive. This section shall not preclude the enforcement of any other provisions of this Code or
County, State and Federal laws, regulations, rules, and ordinances.
G. Appeal Rights:
1. A licensee or mobile food vendor applicant shall have the option to appeal an adverse decision of the Building Commissioner to the
Corporate Authorities. Such appeals must be in writing with a copy of the adverse decision attached thereto and the licensee or the mobile
food vendor applicant must state the reason he or she believes this decision to be in error. The appeal shall be filed with the Village of
Broadview - Village Clerk's Office no later than fourteen (14) calendar days after the issuance of the adverse decision. A failure to timely
appeal and attach a copy of the decision shall be grounds for the appeal to be dismissed with prejudice. The decision of the Corporate
Authorities is final.
H. Violations:
1. Any mobile food vendor or mobile food preparer shall be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) and not more
than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each violation.
2. Each day of a continuing violation shall constitute a separate violation and a penalty of not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00)
per day may be assessed for each day the violation continues.
3. Pending a hearing pursuant to title 1, chapter 13 of this Code, the Building Commissioner shall be authorized to suspend the license of the
mobile food vendor and the mobile food vendor shall cease its operations pending the outcome of the hearing. (Ord. 2017-133, 9-18-2017)
Chapter 7
OFFENSIVE, UNWHOLESOME BUSINESSES AND ESTABLISHMENTS
4-7-1: UNWHOLESOME BUSINESSES PROHIBITED1:
It shall be unlawful to establish any unwholesome business, or any business or factory causing noxious odors within the Village or within one mile
of the Village limits. (1987 Code)
4-7-2: TREATMENT OF METALS:
4-7-2-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to engage in any business in which nitric acid, muriatic acid, sulfuric acid or similar chemicals are used in the treatment of
metals without having first secured a license therefor. (1987 Code)
4-7-2-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE2:
Application for license shall be made in full compliance with the general provisions of Title 3, Chapter 1 of this Code and shall designate the kinds
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 108/387
and quantities of such chemicals to be stored on the premises. (1987 Code)
4-7-2-3: REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS:
A. Storage And Ventilation: All chemicals referred to herein shall be safely stored in adequate containers labeled and used only for such
chemicals, and all rooms in which such chemicals are stored or used shall be properly vented and ventilated so that an adequate supply of
fresh air is present at all working hours.
B. Excessive Fumes: It shall be unlawful to permit the escape of sulfuric acid fumes or of any harmful fumes, in quantities sufficient to be
noticeable or an annoyance to the inhabitants of any building in the Village. (1987 Code)
4-7-2-4: INSPECTION OF PREMISES:
The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall make or cause to be made all inspections necessary to see to the enforcement of the provisions of this
Section 4-7-2. (1987 Code)
4-7-3: FOUNDRIES, RENDERIES, SLAUGHTERHOUSES:
4-7-3-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to operate or maintain any foundry within the Village or any rendery, tallow chandlery, soap factory, tannery, packing plant or
slaughterhouse within the Village or within one mile of the Village limits without having secured a license therefor. (1987 Code)
4-7-3-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE, ISSUANCE:
Application for license shall be made in writing to the Village Clerk, but no such license shall be issued except upon the express order of the
Village Board of Trustees. (1987 Code)
4-7-3-3: LOCATION:
A. Frontage Consents Required In Residential District: It shall be unlawful to establish any factory or establishment mentioned herein in any place
where a majority of the premises within a radius of five hundred feet (500') are used for residence purposes without the consent of the owners
of two-thirds (2/3) of all the premises within such radius. Such frontage consents must be obtained and filed with the Clerk before a license will
be issued.
B. Zoning Requirements Take Precedence: The provisions of this Section shall not be construed to permit the establishment of any factory or
place of business in any location where such factory or place of business is prohibited by the zoning regulations3. (1987 Code)
4-7-4: PAINT SPRAYING:
4-7-4-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to operate any manufacturing or other business in which paint spraying is done or paint spraying equipment is used without
having first secured a license therefor. (1987 Code)
4-7-4-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
All applications for the licenses required herein shall be made in writing to the Village Clerk and shall contain in addition to the information
required by the general provisions of Title 3, Chapter 1 of this Code, a statement of the paint spraying equipment and the location thereof. (1987
Code)
4-7-4-3: FIRE REGULATIONS:
A. Use In Fireproof Room Required: No paint spraying equipment shall be maintained or used in any frame building or in any nonfireproof building
unless such equipment is maintained and used only in a fireproof room equipped with automatic fire doors.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 109/387
B. Refuse And Rubbish: No rubbish or refuse shall be allowed to accumulate upon the premises, and all such rubbish or refuse shall be collected
not less frequently than once every twenty four (24) hours, and either removed from the premises and disposed of in a manner complying with
the law or stored in fireproof containers with an adequate fireproof cover. Such cover shall always be kept closed unless when necessary to
take out to dispose of such refuse. (1987 Code)
4-7-4-4: INSPECTION OF PREMISES:
The Fire Chief shall make or cause to be made such inspections as may be necessary to see to the enforcement of this Section 4-7-4. (1987
Code)
4-7-5: RECLAIMING INDUSTRIAL SOLVENTS:
4-7-5-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in the business of reclaiming industrial solvents including carbon tetrachloride, naphtha, toluol, trichlorethylene, acetone,
butyl acetate and mixtures of the above or other coal tar and petroleum hydrocarbons, without first having obtained a license so to do. (1987
Code)
4-7-5-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Any person who desires to engage in the business set forth herein within the corporate limits, shall make application therefor in writing to the
Village Clerk who shall refer such application to the Fire Chief for investigation. (1987 Code)
4-7-5-3: INVESTIGATION, ISSUANCE OF LICENSE, LICENSE FEE:
The Fire Chief, upon receipt of the application, shall investigate the person requesting the license, and if after such investigation, no good cause
for refusing its issuance is shown, it shall be issued by the President and Board of Trustees upon the payment by the applicant of the license fee
as set forth in Section 3-1A-1 of this Code. (1987 Code)
Footnote 1: See Section 3-1-10 of this Code, and Section 4-3-1 of this Title.
Footnote 2: See Section 3-1A-2 of this Code.
Footnote 3: See Title 10 of this Code.
Chapter 8
PET SHOPS
4-8-1: LICENSE REQUIRED, APPLICATION1:
It shall be unlawful to engage in the business of dealer in birds, cats, dogs or other household pets in the village without first having obtained a
license therefor. Application for such license shall be made to the village clerk. (1987 Code)
4-8-2: PREMISES REQUIREMENTS:
Premises used for the purposes enumerated herein shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be thoroughly cleaned at least once
each day and shall be kept well ventilated. No refuse shall be allowed to accumulate thereon for a longer period than twenty four (24) hours.
(1987 Code)
4-8-3: DISEASED ANIMALS:
Any diseased animal on such premises shall be kept in separate quarters so that there shall be no danger of a spread of any disease from one
animal to another. (1987 Code)
4-8-4: INSPECTIONS:
The village sanitarian shall make or cause to be made such inspections as may be necessary to see to the enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter. (1987 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 110/387
Chapter 9
HOMES AND INSTITUTIONS1
4-9-1: DEFINITION:
The word "home" is hereby defined to be any institution, place or facility used for the reception or care of three (3) or more infants or children,
apart from their parents; and any institution used for the care of persons who are dependent or not capable of properly caring for themselves. The
term "home" shall be understood to include homes for the aged or infirm, orphan asylums, half orphan asylums, refuges and shelters. (1987
Code)
4-9-2: LICENSE REQUIRED2:
It shall be unlawful for any person other than the regularly constituted authorities of the United States, the County or any association or institution
which has been accredited, certified or licensed by the State pursuant to an act of the legislature to regulate the treatment and control of
dependent, neglected and delinquent children, to conduct or operate any home within the Village without first obtaining a license therefor. (1987
Code)
4-9-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
The applicant shall file an application with the Village Clerk stating the following:
A. The proposed location of the home;
B. The purpose for which it is to be conducted or operated;
C. The accommodations for the inmates thereof;
D. The nature and kind of care;
E. Instructions or benefits given or proposed to be given;
F. The name and address of the party or parties conducting, managing or maintaining the home;
G. The name of the superintendent or person in charge of the home; and
H. The name and address of the attending physician. (1987 Code)
4-9-4: INVESTIGATION, INSPECTION:
A. Investigation Of Applicant: The application must be filed with the Chief of Police who shall make or cause to be made, a strict inquiry into the
facts set out in such application to determine whether such home is or is intended to be so conducted as to afford proper accommodations for
the care of the persons received or proposed to be received, and that the superintendent in charge thereof is a person of good moral
character and has sufficient experience to conduct such home.
B. Building Inspection: Every home shall at all times be opened to inspection by the Chief of Police, the Fire Chief and the Building Commissioner
whenever and as often as they shall deem proper. (1987 Code)
4-9-5: LICENSE FEE EXEMPTION:
Homes which are operated without charge being made for care of inmates shall be exempt from the payment of a license fee. Operators of such
homes shall file an affidavit with application stating that no charge is to be made for the care of inmates. This affidavit shall be investigated as to
its credibility by the Chief of Police and upon his recommendation to the Village Trustees, the license will be issued without charge. Such
exemption shall continue only for the duration of the license period. (1987 Code)
4-9-6: FRONTAGE CONSENTS REQUIRED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 111/387
No license shall be issued to any person to operate or conduct a home in any block in which two-thirds (2/3) of the buildings on the street are
devoted exclusively to residential purposes unless a majority of the property owners on both sides of the street in such block consent in writing of
the operation of such home. (1987 Code)
4-9-7: RECORDS:
Every home shall keep a complete record of each inmate showing the date admitted to the home, name, address, sex, social status, date of
discharge, name and address of persons from whom received. (1987 Code)
4-9-8: BUILDING REQUIREMENTS:
A. Compliance With Building And Fire Regulations: Any building used as a home shall comply with the building code3 and fire regulations of the
Village4.
B. Isolation Room For Contagious Diseases: Every home shall be provided with a suitable room or rooms, to be used for the isolation of cases of
contagious, infectious, epidemic or communicable diseases that may be found in the home, until such time as the person suffering from such
contagious disease is removed. This room shall have separate toilet facilities and washstands. (1987 Code)
4-9-9: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be subject to a fine as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code; that in the event of
conviction of any such person for a violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter relating to the safety and accommodations of the inmates, it
shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to close such home and to cause its vacation pending the repairs, alterations or additions necessary to
make it safe and proper for the occupancy of its inmates. (1987 Code)
Chapter 10
DAY NURSERIES1
4-10-1: DEFINITION:
For the purpose of this Chapter the term "day nursery" shall mean any childcare facility receiving one or more children for care during part or all of
a day between six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and shall include facilities commonly called "childcare centers", "day nurseries",
"nursery schools", kindergartens", and "playgroups", with or without stated educational purposes. The term "day nursery" does not include:
A. Bona fide kindergartens or nursery schools operating under the auspices of established public or private boards of education;
B. Bona fide kindergartens or nursery schools approved by the superintendent of public instruction or the school districts in which such
kindergartens or nursery schools are located; or
C. Those facilities operated in connection with a shopping center or shopping service where transient children are received while parents are
shopping on the premises. (1987 Code)
4-10-2: PERMIT REQUIRED, APPLICATION:
Every person desiring to operate a day nursery in the Village shall obtain a permit therefor before commencing operation and shall make
application therefor to the Village Clerk on forms furnished by him. The application shall contain such information as may be required by the
Clerk. (1987 Code)
4-10-3: INVESTIGATION, INSPECTIONS:
Upon receipt of an application for a permit required herein, the Village Clerk shall refer it to the Health Department for investigation. The Health
Department shall inspect the premises where in the day nursery is proposed as to the following conditions:
A. The operation and conduct of the facility and the responsibility it assumes for childcare;
B. The character, suitability and qualifications of the applicant and other persons directly responsible for the care and welfare of children served;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 112/387
C. The general financial ability and competence of the applicant to provide necessary care for children and to maintain prescribed standards;
D. The adequacy of the number of individuals required to ensure adequate supervision and care of the children;
E. The appropriateness, safety, cleanliness and general adequacy of the premises, including maintenance of adequate fire prevention and health
standards in conformance to State laws;
F. Provisions for food, clothing, education opportunities, program, equipment and individual supplies to assure the healthy physical, mental and
spiritual development of the children served; and
G. Discipline of the children.
The Health Department and the Fire Chief shall make periodic inspections of all premises used as day nurseries and shall issue such orders
as they deem necessary to maintain health standards and fire protection. (1987 Code)
4-10-4: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT, TERM, APPEALS:
If, after investigation, the Health Department recommends the issuance of the permit, the Village Clerk shall issue such permit which shall be
valid for the Village license year.
Any person aggrieved by the failure of the Health Department to approve the issuance of a day nursery permit may appeal to the Board of
Trustees whose decision shall be final. (1987 Code)
4-10-5: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
Any permit issued under the terms of this Chapter may be revoked for the following reasons:
A. Consistent failure to maintain health standards prescribed.
B. Violation of the terms of the license.
C. Furnishing or making false or misleading information in the application. (1987 Code)
4-10-6: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The Health Department of the Village shall prescribe rules and regulations pertaining to the operation and standards of day nurseries. (1987
Code)
Footnote 1: See Title 3, Chapter 1 of this Code and Chapter 9 of this Title.
Chapter 11
CEMETERIES
4-11-1: BOUNDARIES OF EXISTING CEMETERIES ESTABLISHED:
The boundaries of all cemeteries within the limits of the Village are hereby fixed at the enclosures now surrounding such cemeteries; and the
boundaries of such cemeteries as are now enclosed shall be the same as now appear on record in the maps, plats, deeds or in the letter of
application of such cemeteries. (1987 Code)
4-11-2: INTERMENT RULES AND REGULATIONS1:
No corpse shall be interred in any place within the limits of the Village not actually used as a cemetery on September 17, 1934, or lying within the
enclosure of a cemetery not established on or before that day, except as hereinafter provided.
It shall be lawful to inter dead bodies within the limits of any cemetery established and used as a cemetery on September 17, 1934, under such
rules and regulations as may, from time to time, be made by the President and the Board of Trustees; but the burial of any corpse outside of such
limits and within the Village shall be deemed a violation of this Section. (1987 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 113/387
Chapter 12
GARAGE SALES
4-12-1: DEFINED:
"Garage Sale" means an occasional sale of used or surplus household goods, furnishings, wares and other items of personal property owned by
the occupier of the residence where such sale is held, and includes sales commonly known as basement sales, house sales, yard sales, attic
sales, rummage sales, estate sales or other similar occasional sales from residentially zoned premises. (Ord. 2001-20, 9-10-2001)
4-12-2: ITEMS PROHIBITED:
The sale of the following items is prohibited at a garage sale: food; drink; animals; bulk sales of any item; multiple new items of the same
description; consigned merchandise; junk or antique items sold as a business activity by a person involved therein as a junk or antique dealer.
Items purchased for intentional sale or resale may not be sold at such a sale. (Ord. 2001-20, 9-10-2001)
4-12-3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or allow a "garage sale" as defined herein on premises zoned or used for residential purposes
without first obtaining a permit to conduct such sale. The applicant must be the owner or occupant of the residence where the sale is to be held,
and the applicant shall apply for and obtain such a permit from the village clerk at least seventy two (72) hours in advance of the date of such
sale. There shall be a ten dollar ($10.00) fee for such permit. The permit shall list the name of the applicant and the address at which the sale is
to be held. Each permit shall be prominently displayed on the premises covered by the permit in such a manner as to be easily visible to persons
passing by the premises on a public street. (Ord. 2001-20, 9-10-2001)
4-12-4: LENGTH AND FREQUENCY OF SALES:
Garage sales shall be permitted for not more than three (3) consecutive days between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00)
P.M. of each day. Not more than three (3) garage sales shall be conducted on the same premises within any calendar year. (Ord. 2001-20, 9-10-
2001)
4-12-5: LOCATION OF SALE:
All activity associated with the garage sale shall be limited to the property specified on the permit. Additionally, no garage, no sidewalk, street,
alley, or parkway may be hindered, obstructed, or occupied by any items for sale or any related garage sale activity. (Ord. 2001-20, 9-10-2001)
4-12-6: SIGNS:
No more than two (2) signs advertising the garage/yard sale may be posted on the lot where the sale is being held, and the size of such signs
shall not exceed two feet by three feet (2' x 3'). Such signs shall not be posted for more than four (4) days. (Ord. 2002-02, 1-14-2002)
4-12-7: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense. Each day that such a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 2001-20, 9-10-2001)
Chapter 13
VACANT PROPERTY
4-13-1: DECLARATION OF POLICY:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety, and welfare by:
A. Establishing a program for identification, registration, and maintenance of buildings which are or become vacant on and after the effective date
of this chapter.
B. Determining the responsibilities of the owners of record of vacant buildings.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 114/387
C. Providing for administration, enforcement, including the abatement of public nuisances, and imposition of penalties. (Ord. 10-28, 5-3-2010)
4-13-2: OTHER ORDINANCES:
This chapter shall not be construed to prevent the enforcement of other applicable ordinances, codes, legislation, and regulations prescribing
standards other than are provided herein, and in the event of conflict, the most restrictive shall apply. (Ord. 10-28, 5-3-2010)
4-13-3: DEFINITIONS:
Unless otherwise expressly stated or clearly indicated by context, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the meanings
indicated in this section:
BOARDED BUILDING: A building which has had in a manner intended to be temporary or permanent, any or all openings, which openings are
windows or doors which were present for the purpose of light, ventilation or egress, some material whether opaque, solid or transparent, affixed to
such openings, from the interior or exterior of the building, for the purpose of securing or preventing access or damage to the building or its
components.
BUILDING: Any structure occupied or intended for supporting or sheltering any occupancy.
DANGEROUS OR UNSAFE BUILDING: All buildings or structures that are found to pose a danger to the life, health, property or safety of the
public by not providing minimum safeguards to protect or warn the public in the event of a fire, or because such structure contains unsafe
equipment, or is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe or of such faulty or incomplete construction or unstable, that partial or
complete collapse or systems failures are possible.
DIRECTOR: The building commissioner, or his/her designee.
OWNER: Any person, agent, operator, firm, or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property, including lienholders of record; or
recorded in the official records of the state, county, or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the property,
including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take
possession of real property by a court.
PERSON: Includes a corporation, a partnership, or other entity, as well as an individual.
PREMISES: A lot, plot or parcel of land including any structure thereon.
UNOCCUPIED BUILDING: A building or portion thereof which lacks the habitual presence of human beings who have a legal right to be on the
premises, including buildings ordered vacated by the director pursuant to authority granted by this code. This definition does not include a building
that is actively for sale, lease or rent, as evidenced by a contractual agreement between the homeowner of record and a licensed real estate
agent or brokerage, and performance of sufficient maintenance that the building or the property on which it sits does not become a nuisance.
VACANT BUILDINGS: Any building that has not been legally occupied for a consecutive period of one month unless one of the following is true:
A. The building is the subject of an active building permit for repair or rehabilitation and the owner is progressing diligently to complete the
repair or rehabilitation.
B. The building meets all codes, is not in a state of disrepair or deterioration, is ready for occupancy, and is actively being offered for sale,
lease or rent and is actively being maintained and monitored by the owner.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the building is still not legally occupied within thirty (30) days after completion of the repairs as specified in
subsection A of this definition or within sixty (60) days after the director has determined that the building has met all codes as specified in
subsection B of this definition, the director may declare the building a vacant building. (Ord. 10-28, 5-3-2010)
4-13-4: DETERMINATION:
A. After the effective date of this chapter, the director shall evaluate all buildings in the village believed to be unoccupied on the effective date of
this chapter and make a determination for each as to whether the building is a "vacant building" within the meaning of section 4-13-3 of this
chapter. The director may determine that a building which meets any of the criteria set forth in this chapter is not to be regulated under this
chapter for a stated period, if upon consideration of reliable, substantiated and sufficient evidence, the director determines that regulation of
the building under this chapter would not serve the public health, welfare, and safety and makes written findings in support of this decision.
The determination shall be in writing and shall state the factual basis for the determination.
B. For buildings the director determines to be "vacant buildings", the director shall send notice of this written determination with the factual
findings to the last taxpayer of record listed on the most recent Cook County tax roll and if notice is to a lienholder then to the address of the
lienholder. Said notice of determination shall be sent first class United States mail, with proper postage prepaid. Failure of delivery shall not
excuse a person from complying with this chapter. The director may also personally serve or cause personal service of the notice of
determination. Any person making such service shall execute an affidavit attesting to the facts of service. The director shall maintain an
affidavit of such mailing for each notice of determination sent.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 115/387
C. The notice shall specify a date and time on which the owner may voluntarily allow for a code compliance inspection of the interior of the vacant
building and surrounding yards and property to determine the extent of compliance with village property, building, health, fire, and plumbing
codes.
D. For residential buildings, if a voluntary code compliance inspection is scheduled by the owner and a plan to maintain the structure, yards and
property is submitted by the owner to and approved by the village, no costs for the code compliance inspection will be assessed by the village.
E. For all residential buildings in which a voluntary code compliance inspection is not scheduled by the owner and for all commercial and
industrial buildings, all village inspection fees and any costs and fees associated with all actions to gain entry to the structure, yards and
property and any costs and fees associated in correcting code violations will be the responsibility of the owner. Any unpaid costs and fees
shall be recaptured by a lien upon the premises.
F. The notice shall contain a statement of the obligations of the owner of a building determined to be vacant, a copy of the registration form the
owner is required to file pursuant to this chapter, and a notice of the owner's right to appeal the director's determination. (Ord. 10-28, 5-3-
2010)
4-13-5: APPEAL OF DETERMINATION:
A. An owner of a building determined by the director to be a vacant building as provided for in this chapter may appeal that determination to the
village president. Such appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the village president within fifteen (15) days of the date of mailing of the
notice of determination. The filing of an appeal stays the owner's obligation to register his building as required by this chapter. The appeal
shall contain a complete statement of the reasons the owner disputes the director's determination, shall set forth specific facts in support
thereof, and shall include all evidence the owner relies upon to support the appeal. The village president or the village president's designee
shall decide the appeal on the basis of facts presented by the owner in his or her written appeal and the director's written determination.
B. The burden is upon the owner to present sufficient evidence to persuade the village president that had the evidence been known to the director
at the time the director made the determination, the director would more likely than not have determined that the subject building was not a
"vacant building" within the meaning of this chapter.
C. The village president or his designee shall send written notice of a decision to the owner within thirty (30) days of his or her receipt of the
appeal. The village president may, but is not required to, seek additional information from the owner. The village president may, upon written
notice thereof to the owner, take no more than ten (10) additional days, to decide the appeal if he or she determines that such additional time
is required for consideration of the appeal. (Ord. 10-28, 5-3-2010)
4-13-6: REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
The owner of a building who knows, or from all the facts and circumstances should know, that his or her building is or has become a "vacant
building" within the meaning of this chapter after the effective date of this chapter, or the owner of a building, which the director determines at any
time to be a "vacant building", or the owner of a building whose appeal from the director's determination has been denied by the village president
shall take the actions provided for in this section within fifteen (15) days after either the date of director's notice of determination or occurrence of
the facts that would cause a reasonable person to believe that the building was a "vacant building", or denial of the appeal, whichever is
applicable. Registration does not exonerate the owner from compliance with all applicable codes and ordinances, including this chapter, nor does
it preclude any of the actions the village is authorized to take pursuant to this chapter or elsewhere in this code or as allowable by Illinois or
federal law. In such case, the owner shall do the following:
A. Register the building with the director, on a form provided by the director and pay the annual nonprorated vacant building registration fee as
provided in this chapter. The form shall include, as a minimum, the name, street address, and telephone number of the owner; the case name
and number of any litigation pending concerning or affecting the building, including, but not limited to, bankruptcy, foreclosure and other cases;
and the name, street address, and telephone number of all persons with any legal interest, including lienholders, in the building or the
premises. The form shall require the owner to identify a natural person twenty one (21) years of age or older who maintains a permanent
address in Cook County, Illinois, to accept service on behalf of the owner with respect to any notices the director sends pursuant to this
chapter or service of process in any proceeding commenced to enforce any provision of this chapter, and file with the director on the
registration form, the name, address, telephone number, of said person. A street address is required. A post office box is not an acceptable
address; and
B. Renew the vacant building registration each year on the anniversary date of the first filing for the time the building remains vacant and pay the
annual fee as provided in this chapter; and
C. File an amended registration within fifteen (15) days of any change in the information contained in the annual registration. A new registration is
required for any change in ownership whatsoever.
D. The owner executing a form to indicate his or her "acceptance of notice by posting" consenting to service of notices sent or required to be sent,
pursuant to this chapter, by posting on the building if the owner fails to renew the registration, if required, or maintain as current with the
director the information required regarding the person designated to accept notice and service of process.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 116/387
E. The owner shall allow for a code compliance inspection of the interior of the vacant building and shall be subject to village costs and fees
outlined in this chapter within fifteen (15) days of the registration or renewal registration. Such inspection will determine the extent of
compliance with all applicable village property, building, electrical, plumbing, fire and similar codes.
F. Obtain liability insurance and maintain such insurance for as long as the building is vacant, and file evidence of such insurance with the
director, as follows:
For a vacant residential building of:
1 to 3 units $ 500,000.00
4 to 11 units 750,000.00
12 to 48 units 1,000,000.00
More than 48 units 2,000,000.00
For a vacant manufacturing, industrial, storage, or nonresidential commercial building 2,000,000.00
The director may waive or reduce the required amount of liability insurance in the director's discretion. (Ord. 10-28, 5-3-2010)
4-13-7: VACANT BUILDING PLAN:
At the time a building is registered as required herein, the owner shall submit a vacant building plan. The director may prescribe a form for the
plan. If the owner fails to submit the plan as provided for by this section, the director may determine the plan. The plan shall contain the following
as a minimum:
A. A plan of action to repair any doors, windows, or other openings which are boarded up or otherwise secured by any means other than
conventional methods used in the design of the building or permitted for new construction or similar type. The proposed repair shall result in
openings being secured by conventional methods used in the design of the building or by methods permitted for new construction of similar
type with board removed. The owner shall maintain the building in an enclosed and secure state until the building is reoccupied or made
available for immediate occupancy. If the owner demonstrates that securing of the building will provide adequate protection to the public, the
director may waive the requirement of an enclosure.
B. For buildings and premises thereof that the director determines as being or containing public nuisances, as defined in this code, then the
vacant building plan shall contain a plan of action to remedy such public nuisance(s).
C. A time schedule identifying a date of commencement of repair and date of completion of repair for each improperly secured opening and
nuisance identified by the director.
D. When the owner proposes to demolish the vacant building, then the owner shall submit a plan and time schedule for such demolition.
E. A plan of action to maintain the building and premises thereof in conformance with this chapter.
F. A plan of action, with a time schedule, identifying the date the building will be habitable and occupied or offered for occupancy or sale. The time
schedule shall include date(s) of commencement and completion of all action required to achieve habitability and shall be based on the time
period as determined by the director, to achieve such compliance.
G. All premises upon which unoccupied or vacant buildings are located and the exteriors shall at all times be maintained in compliance with this
code.
H. Exterior lighting according to standards established by the director.
I. On written notice of the director, provide bonded, licensed, and insured security guard service at the building between the hours of three o'clock
(3:00) P.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. Such service to remain in place until the director gives written notice that the service is no longer
required. Such service shall be required when the director makes a written determination that the vacant building constitutes a fire hazard, is
otherwise dangerous to human life or the public welfare, involves illegal or improper use, occupancy, or maintenance, under such conditions
that boarding and securing the building are insufficient to prevent the actual or threatened harm.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 117/387
J. Affixed to any building which is boarded, a sign, no smaller than two feet by two feet (2' x 2') and compliant with the village's sign ordinance,
title 9, chapter 8A of this code, and providing the following information: the name, address, and telephone number of the owner, and in
addition, for buildings that are the subject of a foreclosure action, the name, address, and telephone number of the plaintiff and the plaintiff's
attorney, if any, in the foreclosure action. The sign must be placed so that its message is legible from the public way. (Ord. 10-28, 5-3-2010)
4-13-8: APPROVAL OF PLAN:
A. The director shall review the proposed vacant building plan in accordance with the standards below. The director shall send notice to the owner
of the vacant building of the director's determination.
B. In considering the appropriateness of a vacant building plan, the director shall include the following standards in his or her consideration and
shall make written findings as to each:
1. The purposes of this chapter and intent of the village board to minimize the time a building is boarded or otherwise vacant.
2. The effect of the building and the proposed plan on adjoining property.
3. The length of time the building has been vacant.
4. The presence of any public nuisances on the property.
5. The likelihood that the plan or portion(s) thereof will prevent or ameliorate the condition it is designed to address. (Ord. 10-28, 5-3-2010)
4-13-9: MODIFY VACANT BUILDING PLAN:
The director shall, upon notice to the vacant building owner, have the right to modify the vacant building plan by modifying the dates of
performance, the proposed methods of action, or by imposing additional requirements consistent with this chapter that the director deems
necessary to protect the public health, safety, or welfare. (Ord. 10-28, 5-3-2010)
4-13-10: FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH PLAN:
Failure to have an approved plan within thirty (30) days of filing the registration form or failure to comply with the approved plan shall constitute a
violation of this chapter subjecting the owner of the building to penalties as provided in this chapter and to any remedies the village may avail
itself of as provided for herein and elsewhere in this code or by Illinois law, including, but limited to, an action to compel correction of property
maintenance violations and/or the correction of property maintenance violations by the village, and/or its designees, with the owner being liable
for any and all fees for such action. (Ord. 10-28, 5-3-2010)
4-13-11: OTHER ENFORCEMENT:
The registration of a vacant building shall not preclude action by the village to demolish or to take other action against the building pursuant to
other provisions of this chapter, this code or 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-31-1. This shall also include the right of the village to secure and
take remedial actions to the building and the premises when it is in the best interest of the public safety and welfare. (Ord. 10-28, 5-3-2010)
4-13-12: CERTIFICATION:
A certificate of code compliance for vacant buildings issued by the building department, and payment in full of all fines and fees imposed pursuant
to this chapter are required prior to any occupancy of a vacant building. (Ord. 10-28, 5-3-2010)
4-13-13: TIME RESTRICTIONS:
It is the policy of the village that boarding is a temporary solution to prevent unauthorized entry into a vacant building and that boarded buildings
are a public nuisance. A vacant building may not remain boarded longer than fourteen (14) days unless an extension of that time is part of a plan
approved by the director. (Ord. 10-28, 5-3-2010)
4-13-14: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
A. Any person found to have violated any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the general penalty of this code, in addition to any other
legal or equitable remedies available to the village. Such other remedies include, but are not limited to, injunctive relief, application to a court
of competent jurisdiction for a receiver, demolition, or condemnation, contracting for the repair or purchase of the premises, or foreclosure of
any lien the village may have thereon. Any expenses incurred by the village as enumerated above shall be assessed against the building, and
shall serve as a lien on the property.
B. A separate and distinct offense shall be committed each day on which such person or persons shall violate the provisions of this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 118/387
C. The village may enforce this chapter in a system of administrative adjudication or through the circuit court of Cook County.
D. Nothing herein contained shall prohibit the village from immediately condemning, as provided for in this code, a building, or taking other
immediate action upon a determination that the building is a public nuisance or poses an imminent danger to the occupants of the building, or
the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 10-28, 5-3-2010)
4-13-15: SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL; REGISTRATION AND RENEWAL FEE:
The registration and renewal fee for each registered single-family residential building shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), the "base
registration fee". Provided however that the owner shall be charged a fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) on the subsequent renewal periods in
which any vacant residential, single-family building is in violation of any provision of this code. However, if the owner of a single-family residential
building can show to the satisfaction of the director at the time of renewal that the building is in full compliance with this code then such renewal
shall revert to the base registration fee. (Ord. 10-28, 5-3-2010)
4-13-16: MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL OR COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS; REGISTRATION AND RENEWAL FEE:
The registration and renewal fee for each registered multi-family residential or commercial building shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00), the
"base registration fee". Provided however that the owner shall be charged a fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) on the subsequent renewal
periods in which any vacant multi-family residential or commercial building is in violation of any provision of this code. However, if the owner of a
multi-family residential or commercial building can show to the satisfaction of the director at the time of renewal that the building is in full
compliance with this code then such renewal shall revert to the base registration fee. (Ord. 10-28, 5-3-2010)
4-13-17: INDUSTRIAL BUILDINGS; REGISTRATION AND RENEWAL FEE:
The registration and renewal fee for each registered industrial building shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), the "base registration fee".
Provided however that the owner shall be charged a fee of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) on the subsequent renewal periods in which any
vacant industrial building is in violation of any provision of this code. If the owner of an industrial building can show to the satisfaction of the
director at the time renewal is required that the building is in full compliance with this code then such renewal shall revert to the base registration
fee. (Ord. 10-28, 5-3-2010)
Chapter 14
LIENS
4-14-1: NOTICE OF LIEN:
A. Removal Cost: If the village elects to incur a removal cost under this title, then that cost is a lien upon the underlying parcel. To perfect such a
lien, the village must, within one year after the removal cost is incurred, file notice of lien in the office of the recorder in Cook County. The
notice must consist of a sworn statement setting out: 1) a description of the underlying parcel that sufficiently identifies the parcel; 2) the
amount of the removal cost; and 3) the date or dates when the removal cost was incurred by the village. If, for any one parcel, the village
engaged in any removal activity on more than one occasion during the course of one year, then the village may combine any or all of the costs
of each of those activities into a single notice of lien.
B. Notice: The removal cost is not a lien on the underlying parcel unless a notice is personally served on, or sent by certified mail to, the person to
whom was sent the tax bill for the general taxes on the property for the taxable year immediately preceding the removal activities. The notice
must be delivered or sent after the removal activities have been performed, and it must: 1) state the substance of this chapter; and 2) identify
the underlying parcel, by common description; and 3) describe the removal activity.
C. Payment Of The Lien Cost: Upon payment of the lien cost by the owner of the underlying parcel, after notice of lien has been filed, the village
(or its agent) shall release the lien, and the release may be filed of record by the owner at his or her sole expense as in the case of filing notice
of lien.
D. Illinois Municipal Code: The provisions of the Illinois municipal code, specifically section 11-20-15, shall be followed and shall apply to all liens
filed hereunder.
E. Foreclosure Of Lien: Subsequent to the filing of the above described lien, the village may cause to be filed a complaint for foreclosure of such
lien, or upon becoming a defendant in a pending lawsuit affecting the premises or real estate, by answer to the complaint or in the nature of an
intervening petition or cross complaint, the village may proceed in its corporate name to foreclose such lien. An action to foreclose a lien under
this title must be commenced within two (2) years after the date of filing notice of lien. The property subject to a lien arising under this chapter
shall be sold for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of such sale shall be applied to pay the monies owing the village. (Ord. 13-36, 5-
20-2013)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 119/387
4-14-2: PRIORITY LIEN:
A. Priority Lien: The priority lien procedure described in this section shall apply only to costs incurred for activities performed on abandoned
residential properties, as defined in chapter 13, "Vacant Property", of this title and is an alternative to the traditional lien authorized by section
4-14-1 of this chapter. If a bill sent pursuant to section 4-14-1 of this chapter is not paid in full within thirty (30) days of the date of the bill, the
village shall have the authority to file and record a priority lien against the property, pursuant to section 11-20-15.1 of the Illinois municipal
code, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-20-15.1, in the following manner:
1. Notice Of Lien: The village or the person performing the service by authority of the village, in its, his or her own name, may file a notice of a
priority lien in the office of the recorder of deeds in the county in which the real estate is located. The notice of lien shall be filed within one
year after the cost and expense is incurred. If, for any one property, the village engaged in any nuisance abatement activity described in
section 98.03 on more than one occasion during the course of one year, then the village may combine any or all of the costs of those
activities into a single notice of lien.
The notice of lien shall consist of a sworn statement setting forth:
a. A description of the abandoned residential property that sufficiently describes the parcel;
b. The amount of the cost incurred or payable for the activities;
c. The date or dates when such cost was incurred by the village or someone working on behalf of the village; and
d. A statement that the lien has been filed pursuant to one or more of the property maintenance activities described in section 98.03 and
authorized by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-20-7(d), 5/11-20-8(d), 5/11-20-12(d), 5/11-20-13(e), 5/11-31-1.01, as applicable.
2. Sent By Certified Mail: After recording, the notice of lien shall be sent by certified mail to the property owner, his agent or legal
representative or occupant in legal possession or control of the premises and, if different, to the person who received the tax bill for the
preceding year.
3. Remedial Actions: The village may not file a lien if the lender has provided notice to the village that the lender has performed, or will
perform, remedial actions; provided, however, that the remedial actions must be performed or initiated in good faith, within thirty (30) days of
the lender's notice to the village.
B. Recordkeeping: To enforce a lien pursuant to this section, the village must maintain contemporaneous records that include, at a minimum:
1. Dated statement of a finding by the village that the property has become abandoned residential property;
2. The date when the property was first observed to be unoccupied by any lawful occupant;
3. A description of the actions taken by the village to contact the legal owner of the property, or if known, any agent of the owner;
4. A statement that no contacts were made with the legal owner or, if known, any agent of the owner;
5. A dated certification by a village official of the necessity and specific nature of the work performed;
6. A copy of the agreement with the person or company performing the work and the rates and estimated cost of the work, if applicable;
7. Detailed invoices and payment vouchers for the work;
8. A statement whether the work was competitively bid, and if so, a copy of all proposals submitted by the bidders.
C. Release Of Lien: Upon payment of the cost after the notice of lien has been filed as provided herein, the lien shall be released by the village or
person in whose name the lien has been filed, and the release shall be recorded of record in the same manner as recording the notice of lien.
D. Enforcement Of Lien: A lien under this section is enforceable by the village, or entity or person who performs work on behalf of the village, at
the hearing for confirmation of the foreclosure sale of the abandoned residential property and is limited to a claim of interest in the proceeds of
the sale. The priority lien is superior to all other liens and encumbrances, except tax liens. (Ord. 13-36, 5-20-2013)
Title 5
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Chapter 1
FIRE DEPARTMENT
5-1-1: DEPARTMENT CREATED:
A department to be hereafter known as the Broadview Fire Department, the object of which shall be the prevention and extinguishment of fire and
the protection of life and property within the limits of the Village, is hereby created. (1987 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 120/387
5-1-2: FIRE CHIEF:
A. Chief: The Fire Department shall be headed by a Chief, who shall be the Administrator, and shall be appointed by the President with the advice
and consent of the Board of Trustees. The Chief shall be technically qualified by training and experience and shall have the ability to
command men and hold their respect and confidence. The Chief shall reside in the Village. He may be removed from office by the President
as provided by statute. (Ord. 87-5, 7-20-1987)
B. Powers And Duties:
1. Generally: The Fire Chief shall have control, subject to the order and direction of the Board of Trustees, of the Fire Department and of all
fire apparatus belonging to the Village. Whenever any fire apparatus needs repairing, the Fire Chief shall cause same to be done without
delay. The Chief shall be held accountable to the President and Board of Trustees only and shall make written and verbal reports thereto as
the President and Board of Trustees may require. All other department companies and officers shall be accountable to the Chief.
2. Formulate Rules And Regulations: The Chief shall formulate a set of rules and regulations to govern the department, which rules and
regulations shall be in conformity with the rules and regulations of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners1, and shall be responsible to
the President and Board of Trustees for the personnel, morale and general efficiency of the department.
3. Determine Department Composition: The Fire Chief shall determine the number and kind of divisions, platoons and companies of which the
Fire Department is to be composed and shall determine the response of such platoons and companies.
4. Conduct Monthly Drills: The Fire Chief shall, at least once a month, conduct suitable drills or instructions in the operation and handling of
equipment, first aid, rescue work, salvage, a study of buildings in the Village, fire prevention, water supplies and all other matters considered
essential to good firemanship and safety of life and property from fire.
5. Records: The Fire Chief shall see that complete records are kept on all fires, inspections, apparatus and minor equipment, personnel and
other information about the work of the department.
6. Reports:
a. The Fire Chief shall submit a monthly report to the President and Board of Trustees containing a statistical analysis of the activities of the
firefighting division, training division, Fire Prevention Bureau, mechanical division and personnel division of the Department.
b. The Fire Chief shall make a complete annual report to the President and Board of Trustees within one month after the close of the fiscal
year. Such report shall include the information specified in subsection B6a of this Section together with comparative data for previous
years and recommendations for improving the effectiveness of the Department. (1987 Code)
5-1-3: COMPOSITION OF DEPARTMENT:
A. Officers And Members:
1. A Deputy Chief, three (3) captains, three (3) lieutenants and such additional members of the Fire Department as may from time to time be
prescribed by the Chief and approved by the President and Board of Trustees shall constitute the remainder of the Department and they
shall function as provided by the rules and regulations of the Fire Department.
2. Paid On-Call Firefighter:
a. Number Recommended By Chief: The Department may be supplemented by "paid on-call firefighters", the number of which may be
recommended by the Chief with the approval of the President and Board of Trustees.
b. Membership; Appointment; Removal; Obedience To Orders: The membership of the "paid on-call firefighters" shall consist of such
persons as may be appointed by the Chief with the approval of the President and Board of Trustees. Appointments shall be made by the
Chief only after a medical and physical examination and such other examination as prescribed by the Chief and President and Board of
Trustees. Any member of the Department who is a "paid on-call firefighter" may be suspended or discharged from the Department by the
Chief at any time he may deem such action necessary for the good of the Department. Any member of the Department who is a "paid oncall
firefighter" in attendance at a fire and who shall neglect or refuse to obey the orders of the officer in command at the fire, shall be
subject to immediate dismissal. (Ord. 87-5, 7-20-1987)
B. Inspectors: The Fire Chief may detail such members of the Fire Department as inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary only after
the approval of the President. The Fire Chief shall recommend to the Village the employment of technical inspectors who, when such
authorization is made, shall be selected through an examination to determine their fitness for the position. The examination shall be open to
members and nonmembers of the Fire Department, and appointments made after examination shall be for an indefinite term with removal only
for cause. (1987 Code)
C. Fire Department Organization: The Fire Department may have a social organization approved by the Fire Chief and the President and Board of
Trustees and may hold such meetings and engage in such social functions and community activities as the rules provide. Officers of the
organization may be elected by members of the Department, and shall include a secretary and treasurer and the officers shall make such
rules and regulations as may be necessary. In the event foreign fire insurance sums are received by the Fire Department, the treasurer shall
give a sufficient bond to the Village. Any monies so received shall be used only as provided by statute. (Ord. 87-5, 7-20-1987)
5-1-4: BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 121/387
A. Bureau Established: The Bureau of Fire Prevention in the Fire Department is hereby established and shall be operated under the supervision
of the Chief of the Fire Department.
B. Annual Report: A report of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be made annually and transmitted to the chief executive officer of the
Municipality. It shall contain all proceedings under the fire prevention code2, with such statistics as the Chief of the Fire Department may wish
to include therein. (1987 Code)
C. Chief Enforcement Officer: The Chief Enforcement Officer of the fire prevention code shall be a current sworn member of the Fire Department
who shall be appointed by the Fire Chief and who shall serve until a successor is appointed.
The Chief Enforcement Officer shall be under the supervision and control of the Fire Chief and shall perform, in addition to the regular
firefighting duties which may be assigned, all duties required of the officer under the provisions of the fire prevention code and the ordinances
of the Village. (Ord. 89-11, 8-7-1989)
5-1-5: FIRE PROTECTION TRAINING:
A. Village To Participate In State Programs: The Village hereby elects to participate in the programs provided for in the Illinois Fire Protection
Training Act3.
B. Certification Required: Before an individual may commence regular full-time employment as a firefighter, he must have been certified by the
Illinois State Fire Marshal as a Firefighter II and as having successfully completed an approved training course as provided in said Act. Except
for part-time personnel, the Firefighter II training must be completed by the trainee within his probationary period.
C. Incorporation Into Rules And Regulations: The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners is hereby instructed and directed to make the
necessary amendments to the Personnel Rules, the Manual of Rules of the Broadview Fire Department and Rules of said Board of Fire and
Police Commissioners in order to require that any person appointed to the Fire Department of the Village shall not become a regular member
of the said Department unless and until he shall complete, pursuant to said Illinois Fire Protection and Training Act, the approved training
course within twelve (12) months of the date of his initial employment. (1987 Code)
5-1-6: POWERS AND DUTIES OF MEMBERS:
A. Fire Prevention Duties: It shall be the function and duty of the Fire Department and every member thereof to extinguish accidental or
destructive fires and to prevent the occurrence or spread of such fires.
B. Police Powers: All regularly appointed members of the Department are hereby given the necessary special police powers for the purpose of
enforcing the provisions of this Title. (1987 Code)
5-1-7: COMPENSATION:
The compensation of the officers and members of the Fire Department shall be prescribed from time to time by the President and Board of
Trustees of the Village. (1987 Code)
5-1-8: FIREFIGHTERS' PENSION FUND4:
There shall be a Firefighters' Pension Fund established in the Village as provided by statute5. (Ord. 87-5, 7-20-1987)
5-1-9: BADGE ISSUED:
Each member of the Fire Department shall be issued a badge designating his rank. (1987 Code)
5-1-10: FIREFIGHTER TO OBEY ORDERS:
Any firefighter in attendance at a fire who shall neglect or refuse to obey the orders of the officer in command at such fire shall, upon conviction,
be fined in accordance with the rules and regulations as set forth by the Fire Department and the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners. (Ord.
87-5, 7-20-1987)
5-1-11: EQUIPMENT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 122/387
The Fire Department shall be equipped with such apparatus and other equipment as may be required from time to time to maintain its efficiency
and properly protect life and property from fire.
A. Purchases: Recommendations for the apparatus and equipment needed pursuant to this Section shall be made by the Fire Chief. Said
recommendations shall be approved by, and after approval, shall be purchased in such manner as may be designated by the President and
Board of Trustees.
B. Storage Locations: All equipment of the fire department shall be safely and conveniently housed in such place as may be designated by the
president and board of trustees.
C. Prohibited Acts:
1. Improper Use: No person shall use any fire apparatus or equipment for any private purpose.
2. Injury To, Interference With Equipment: No person shall wilfully or negligently break, deface or in any manner injure any fire engine, hose
equipment or other fire apparatus belonging to the fire department, or shall remove any screw, bolt, nut or any part of such engine or fire
apparatus or in any manner interfere with the same when being used by the proper person or authority.
3. Entering Firehouse: It shall be unlawful for any person to enter the firehouse or any place where fire equipment and apparatus is stored, or
handle any apparatus or equipment belonging to the fire department, at any time except on business pertaining to said department or
accompanied by and having the special permission of an officer or authorized member of the department. (1987 Code)
5-1-11-1: RESCUE TRUCKS:
A. Transport To Specific Locations: The rescue trucks of the fire department shall be used to transport persons in emergency situations to the
following hospitals and clinics only:
1. Any hospital or clinic within the village of Broadview.
2. Loyola - Foster G. McGaw hospital, Maywood, IL.
3. Hines hospital, Hines, IL.
4. Westlake hospital, Melrose Park, IL.
5. Oak Park hospital, Oak Park, IL.
6. Gottlieb hospital, Melrose Park, IL.
7. Riveredge hospital, Forest Park, IL.
8. John J. Madden clinic, Maywood, IL.
9. LaGrange community hospital, LaGrange, IL.
10. MacNeal hospital, Berwyn, IL.
11. Elmhurst hospital, Elmhurst, IL.
12. Hinsdale hospital, Hinsdale, IL.
Deviation from the above is allowed only when operating on a mutual aid call6. (Ord. 2001-09, 4-16-2001)
B. Calls Answered: Rescue squad 213 and/or rescue squad 218 will answer all the following calls:
1. Persons trapped, caught, etc., which would require the tools that are carried on the rescue squads to remove or free them.
2. Persons who have been injured and require immediate first-aid treatment or hospitalization.
3. Persons injured in an accident who require medical examination to determine if serious injury exists.
4. Automotive accidents.
5. Pedestrian accidents.
6. Train accidents.
7. Airplane accidents.
8. Childbirth.
9. Persons with fractures.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 123/387
10. Victims of poisoning.
11. Victims of electrical shock.
12. Drowning.
13. Cave-ins where victim is trapped.
14. Industrial accidents.
15. Victims having difficulty breathing.
16. Cardiac victims.
17. All fire calls.
C. Authority Of Officer In Charge: When the service of rescue squad 213 and/or rescue squad 218 is called for, the officer of the rescue squad
shall be in charge of the emergency and will be responsible for all orders given and action taken. When the situation demands that the police
at the time of emergency lend assistance, they shall follow the orders of the officer in charge of the rescue squad. The authority of the Fire
Department officer extends only to the well being of the injured and not to the administrative police matters in connection with the emergency
calls not involving fire.
D. Provisions Applicable To Both Fire And Police Departments7: This section shall be written into the rules and regulations of the Fire and Police
Departments in its entirety.
E. Penalty: Any members of the Fire Department or the Police Department violating any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to
disciplinary action by either the Chief of the various departments or by the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners by order of the Village
Board of Trustees. (1987 Code)
5-1-11-2: AMBULANCE USER FEE:
A. The Fire Chief shall collect the following fees for ambulance services:
Basic Life Support
Advanced Life Support
Level 1 Level 2
Resident $ 900.00 $1,200.00 $1,400.00
Non-resident 1,050.00 1,350.00 1,600.00
B. The Village shall impose a mileage fee of fourteen dollars ($14.00) per mile for all ambulance transports regardless of the type of ambulance
service provided.
C. Payment for ambulance services shall be the responsibility of the recipient of said services. (Ord. 2017-136, 9-5-2017)
5-1-11-3: RESERVED:
(Ord. 13-68, 10-21-2013)
5-1-11-4: RESPONSIBILITY FOR PAYMENT:
The person transported shall be responsible for payment of the charge to the Village.
If such transportation is provided to a person who is a minor or who is under legal disability, then such charge shall be paid by the person's
parents, custodian or legal guardian.
Any charge levied shall also be the responsibility of the transported person's estate, executor, beneficiaries, heirs or assigns. (Ord. 92-2, 2-3-
1992)
5-1-11-5: MUTUAL AID CALLS:
Pursuant to chapter 4 of this title, the Village participates in the Mutual Fire Aid Program with neighboring municipalities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 124/387
In the event that the Village Fire Department ambulance responds to a mutual aid call in a neighboring municipality, the Village will charge an
ambulance user fee on a reciprocal basis; that is, if the neighboring municipality has enacted a user fee for ambulance services, the Village will
reciprocally charge that fee; however, if the neighboring municipality has not enacted a user fee, the Village will reciprocally not charge a fee.
(Ord. 92-2, 2-3-1992; amd. Ord. 98-04, 3-16-1998)
5-1-11-6: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and publication in accordance with law. (Ord. 92-2, 2-3-1992)
5-1-11-7: ENGINE AND CREW FEES:
Any person, firm or corporation receiving emergency fire service of an engine and crew from the Village shall be charged the following fees: two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per engine and thirty five dollars ($35.00) per crew member, per hour or any part thereof, payable to the Village.
(Ord. 98-04, 3-16-1998; amd. Ord. 13-68, 10-21-2013)
5-1-12: APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS:
The Chief, Deputy Chief, Captain, Lieutenant, Engineer and such additional members as may be from time to time provided for in the annual
appropriation ordinance, shall be subject to the rules and regulations as provided by this chapter. (1987 Code)
5-1-13: NOTICE OF PRIVACY PRACTICES:
Broadview's Fire Department is obligated to obtain signatures of acknowledgement confirming receipt of the Notice of Privacy Practices from
each person to whom it provides emergency services. (Ord. 2014-58, 10-6-2014)
Chapter 2
FIRE PREVENTION CODE
5-2-1: FIRE PREVENTION CODE ADOPTED:
There is hereby adopted for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion,
those certain codes known as the BOCA National Fire Prevention Code, latest edition, as published by the Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc., and the Life Safety Code, NFPA 101, latest edition, as published by the National Fire Protection Association,
save and except those portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended, of which codes not less than three (3) copies have been for at
least thirty (30) days and now are on file in the office of the Village Clerk and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as if fully set forth
herein, and from the effective date hereof, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the Village. (Ord. 98-03, 3-16-1998)
5-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following words and phrases, when used in the fire prevention code, shall have the meanings respectively
ascribed to them by this Section:
CHIEF OF THE BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION: Chief Enforcement Officer.
CORPORATION COUNSEL: The Attorney for the Village.
MUNICIPALITY: The Village of Broadview, Illinois. (Ord. 92-4, 2-17-1992; amd. Ord. 92-20, 7-6-1992)
5-2-3: AMENDMENTS TO FIRE PREVENTION CODE:
The section numbers hereinafter set forth refer to sections of the BOCA National Fire Prevention Code to be amended as aforesaid. The following
sections of the BOCA National Fire Prevention Code are amended as follows:
Section F-112.0 - Means of Appeal:
Sections F-112.2 through F-112.7 shall be deleted and amended as follows: (Ord. 92-4, 2-17-1992)
Decisions: The Village President, Fire Chief and the Chief Enforcement Officer shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after
giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies which shall require permits, in addition to
those now enumerated in such Code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 125/387
(Ord. 92-20, 7-6-1992)
Section F-306.0 - Decorative Materials:
Add section F-306.4 Christmas Fire Safety Regulations to read as follows:
All holiday decorative material used in all use groups, with the exception of Use Group R, (Residential) shall be made of noncombustible
material wherever possible. When other materials must be used they are to be flame proofed.
Section F-317.0 - Cellulose Nitrate (Pyroxylin) Plastics:
Section F-317.1 - General.
Delete "shall comply with NFPA 40E listed in Appendix A" and add "shall be prohibited within the Municipality limits".
Sections F-317.2 through F-317.4 - delete in its entirety.
Section F-404.0 - Fire Protection Systems:
Section F-404.3 - Fire Standpipes:
Delete "six" stories and change to "three" stories.
Section F-404.4 - Single and multiple station smoke detectors:
Add: In any and all multiple family dwellings, all common areas, such as hallways, stairways, basements and laundry/storage areas are
required to have smoke detectors that provide an alarm suitable to warn the occupants of the building.
Section F-406.0 - Mechanical Equipment Control:
Section F-406.1 - Delete "six" stories and change to "three" stories.
Section F-500.0 - General:
Add Section F-500.7 - Supervision of Fire Alarm Systems.
All fire alarm systems and fire suppression systems shall be supervised by the municipal fire dispatch center or other authorized agency as
approved by the Fire Prevention Bureau.
(Ord. 92-4, 2-17-1992)
Section F-700.0 - General:
Add Section F-700.2 - Access Key Boxes.
Where access to or within a structure, space or area is not provided twenty four (24) hours per day, all days of the year because of secured
openings, or where immediate access is necessary for life or firefighting purposes, an approved key box shall be of a type approved by the
Fire Prevention Bureau and shall contain keys necessary to gain access as required by the Fire Prevention Bureau.
Where access to or within a structure, space or area is not provided twenty four (24) hours per day, all days of the year because of secured
openings, or where immediate entry into buildings and property without forced entry damage or delay is necessary for life or firefighting
purposes, a key box shall be installed of a type approved by the Fire Prevention Bureau. Each Key Box is keyed for master key controlled
by the Broadview Fire Department. Property owners will purchase and store their master keys, access cards, door codes, gate keys, etc.
necessary to gain access to building. Security Keyed-Boxes will be mounted near building entrances at approved locations as determined
by the Authority Having Jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2016-30, 8-1-2016)
Section 809.0 - Number of Exits:
Section 809.3 - Delete and amend as follows:
All use group occupancies within the municipality limits are required to have a minimum of two (2) exits per floor, which shall include above
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 126/387
and/or below grade level.
Section 1016.0 - Fire Protective Signaling Systems:
Section 1016.4 - Where Required: Add:
Use Groups F, H, M, S,: A fire protective signaling system shall be installed in each of these occupancies and shall include manual fire
alarm boxes and visible and audible alarms installed at each exit of each occupancy.
(Ord. 94-5, 4-18-1994)
Section F-2400.0 - General:
Section F-2400.1 - Scope.
The limits referred to in this article on storage of flammable compressed gas shall be deleted and read as follows: No bulk storage of
Liquefied Petroleum Gases (LPG) or any other flammable compressed gases shall be prohibited to be stored above ground within the
municipality limited.
Section F-2600.0 - General:
Section F-2600.1 - Scope.
The limits referred to in this article for the storage, manufacturing, possession, sale and transportation of explosives, ammunition and
blasting agents shall be deleted and read as follows: Storage, sale, possession, manufacturing and transportation of explosives, ammunition
and blasting agents is prohibited within the Municipality limits.
Exception:
Where small arms ammunition is for sale for the use of sport or other use in an official capacity as deemed appropriate by the Fire
Prevention Bureau.
Section F-2805.0 - Above-Ground Tank Storage:
Sections F-2805.1 through F-2805.4:
Delete and amend as follows: Above-ground storage of flammable and/or combustible liquids is prohibited within the municipality limits.
Exceptions:
A. Class III B combustible liquid having a flash point at or above 350 degrees Fahrenheit.
B. All other limited quantities of flammable and/or combustible liquids allowed above ground as permitted by the Fire Prevention Bureau
shall be stored in approved flammable liquids cabinets and/or storage rooms designed for such purposes.
Section F-3000.0 - General:
Section F-3001.1 - Above Ground:
Delete section pertaining to above ground storage and amend as follows: Above ground bulk storage of Liquefied Petroleum Gases is
prohibited within the municipality limits.
(Ord. 92-4, 2-17-1992)
5-2-4: AMENDMENTS TO LIFE SAFETY CODE:
The section numbers hereinafter set forth refer to sections of the Life Safety Code, NFPA 101, latest edition, as published by the National Fire
Protection Association, and are amended and modified as follows: (Ord. 92-4, 2-17-1992; amd. Ord. 98-03, 3-16-1998)
Section 1002.0 - Fire Suppression Systems:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 127/387
Sections 1002.1 through 1002.11 - Delete and amend as follows:
Section 1002.1 - Where Required: Automatic fire suppression systems (sprinklers) shall be installed in all of the following types of
occupancies: (A) Assembly, (B) Business, (E) Educational, (F) Factory and Industrial, (H) High Hazard, (I) Institutional, (M) Mercantile, (R)
Residential, (S) Storage and (U) Utility and Miscellaneous, except as provided for in the following sections:
Exceptions:
Section 1002.2 - Use Group A-4:
All buildings used as churches and for similar religion purposes, providing they have a full fire detection system of heat and smoke
detectors installed throughout.
Section 1002.3 - Use Group B:
Where square footage is 7,000 square feet or less.
Section 1002.4 - Use Group E:
All buildings used for the purpose of education through the 12th grade and have 2 or less stories in height, providing they have a full fire
detection system of heat and smoke detectors installed throughout.
Section 1002.5 - Use Group M:
Where square footage is 7,000 square feet or less.
Section 1002.6 - Use Group R:
All single-family dwelling units and multiple family units of 3 stories or less and having no more than 6 individual dwelling units per
building.
(Ord. 92-4, 2-17-1992)
5-2-5: NEW CONSTRUCTION:
Any and all new construction within the Municipality limits, regardless of use group, is required to install a fully automatic fire sprinkler system as
of the passing of this Chapter.
Exceptions:
A. Single-family dwelling units.
B. Multiple-family dwelling units of three (3) stories or less and having no more than six (6) individual dwelling units per building, provided full
heat and smoke detection is installed. (Ord. 92-4, 2-17-1992)
5-2-6: SKYLIGHTS - ROOF OPENINGS:
Delete 2204.6.3 and 2204.6.4 and amend as follows:
For the purpose of removing smoke, super-heated air, toxic fumes and to assist in more efficient and effective extinguishment of fire
skylights and/or other types of automatic roof openings are required in all Use Groups F, H, M, and S. Minimum required sizes shall be as
follows: In high hazard occupancies, one (1) square foot of roof opening for every hundred (100) square feet of floor space. In factory,
mercantile and storage occupancies, one (1) square foot of roof opening for every two hundred fifty (250) square feet of floor space.
(Ord. 93-7, 4-5-1993)
5-2-7: FIRE LIMITS1:
There are hereby established fire limits for the Village which shall include all of the following described property:
Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 128/387
47 and 48 in Broadview, a subdivision in Section 22, Township 39 North, Range 12.
Lots 1 to 11 in Grant's Subdivision of Lots 13, 14, 35, and 36 in Broadview, a subdivision in Section 22, Township 39 North, Range 12.
Lots 1 to 2 and 31 to 36 in Broadview Gardens, a subdivision of Lots 28, 29, 68, 69, 76, and 77 in Broadview, a subdivision in Section 22,
Township 39 North, Range 12.
Lots 1 to 20 and Lots 258 to 281 and Lots 312 and 335 in Cummings and Foreman Real Estate Corporation Home Addition in Section 21 and 22,
Township 39 North, Range 12, all property east of the Third Principal Meridian, Cook County, Illinois.
Blocks 13, 14, 15 and 16 in Western Addition, a subdivision of the west half of the southeast quarter of Section 15, Township 39 North, Range 12,
east of the Third Principal Meridian in Cook County, Illinois.
Lots 24 to 60 and Lots 95 to 130, both inclusive. Lots 165 to 200 and Lots 235 to 270, both inclusive. Lots 373 to 408 and Lots 443 to 479, both
inclusive, and Cummings and Foreman Real Estate Corporation Roosevelt Road and 17th Avenue Subdivision of Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7 and 8 of
Owners Partition of the south 83.2 acres of the west half of Section 15, Township 39 North, Range 12, east of the Third Principal Meridian, Cook
County, Illinois.
Lots 1 to 72 in Foreman and Fargo's Roosevelt Road Subdivision of Lot 6 in Owners Partition of the South 83.2 acres of the west half of Section
15, Township 39 North, Range 12.
Lots 16 to 41 in Block 4 in Western Addition, a subdivision of the west half of the southeast quarter of Section 15, Township 39 North, Range 12,
east of the Third Principal Meridian, Cook County, Illinois.
Lots 2 to 11 in Block 10 in Komarek's West 22nd Street First Addition, a subdivision of that part of the east half of the southeast quarter of Section
22, Township 39 North, Range 12, south of the Chicago Central & Pacific Railroad, east of the Third Principal Meridian, Cook County, Illinois.
All Block 8 and Lots 3 to 16 in Block 7 and Lots 1, 2 and 3 in Block 1 in Mares White & Company's West 22nd Street and 17th Avenue subdivision
in the southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 22, Township 39 North, Range 12, east of the Third Principal Meridian in Cook
County, Illinois.
(Ord. 92-4, 2-17-1992)
5-2-8: ENFORCEMENT:
The fire prevention code shall be enforced by the Bureau of Fire Prevention in the Fire Department. (Ord. 92-4, 2-17-1992)
5-2-9: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the fire prevention code or life safety code as adopted by Section 5-2-1 of this Chapter or fail
to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made hereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement
of specifications or plans submitted and approved hereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans
submitted and approved hereunder, or any certificate or permit issued hereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to
comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the Chief Enforcement Officer of the Fire Prevention Bureau or by a court of competent
jurisdiction within the time fixed herein, shall severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a
misdemeanor and punished as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code. The imposition of one penalty for any and all such persons shall be
required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise specified, each ten (10) days that
prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. The application of the penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced
removal of prohibited conditions. (Ord. 92-20, 7-6-1992)
Chapter 3
GENERAL FIRE PREVENTION REGULATIONS
5-3-1: OPEN BURNING:
No open burning of leaves, uprooted weeds, grass clippings, waste materials, garbage, refuse products, glass or metal containers, paper, wood,
cardboard, ashes and cinders and discarded furniture and clothing shall be permitted upon any private lot or public ground within the Village
limits. (1987 Code)
5-3-2: STORAGE OF COMBUSTIBLE REFUSE:
It shall be unlawful to permit or store any combustible refuse in such a way as to create a fire hazard, or to store or throw any refuse of any kind
on any street, alley or other public place. (1987 Code)
5-3-3: BONFIRES:
It shall be unlawful to build or light any bonfire on any public street or sidewalk pavement or so close to any building or other structure as to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 129/387
endanger such building or structure. (1987 Code)
5-3-4: FALSE FIRE ALARMS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly start or spread or maliciously turn in or cause to be turned in, any false fire alarm in the Village.
(1987 Code)
5-3-5: ALLEY ADDRESS NUMBERING:
In order to provide identification for public safety services, every person, firm or corporation owning or occupying property, other than vacant
parcels, to which access can be gained from an improved alley within the Village, shall be required to display the numerals of the address on the
building on the property which faces closest to the alley in reflective numerals no less than three and one-half inches (31/2") in height. (Ord. 92-
23, 7-20-1992, eff. 11-1-1992)
5-3-5-1: NONCOMPLIANCE:
After the effective date hereof, owners or occupiers of attached property who have not complied with the terms of this section 5-3-5 shall be
subject to the general penalty provisions of this Code. (Ord. 92-23, 7-20-1992, eff. 11-1-1992)
Chapter 4
MUTUAL FIRE AID PROGRAM
5-4-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide for a program of mutual aid between this Village and other municipalities, whereby each such
municipality will be obligated to come to the assistance of a neighboring municipality in the event of an emergency, fire or other disaster therein of
such magnitude that the local fire equipment and personnel cannot effectively cope with it. (1987 Code)
5-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
AIDING MUNICIPALITY: A municipality furnishing fire equipment and personnel to a stricken municipality or to another aiding municipality.
MUNICIPALITY: A city or village.
MUTUAL AID AREA: The territory occupied within the Village limits and other areas protected by the following municipalities: Berkeley, Bellwood,
Broadview, Hillside, Maywood, Melrose Park and Westchester, in the County of Cook, State of Illinois.
MUTUAL FIRE AID PROGRAM: A plan or program as provided for in this Chapter whereby the municipalities participating in the program agree
to come to one another's assistance in case of emergency, fire or other disaster too large for local equipment and personnel to handle.
PARTICIPATING MUNICIPALITY: A municipality, in the mutual aid area, that participates in the mutual fire aid program by adopting an ordinance
authorizing or approving the program and entering into an appropriate agreement, (substantially as provided herein) with other participating
municipalities for rendering and receiving aid in case of emergency, fire or other disaster.
STRICKEN MUNICIPALITY: A participating municipality in which an emergency, fire or other disaster occurs that is of such magnitude that it
cannot be adequately coped with by local fire equipment and personnel. (1987 Code)
5-4-3: MUTUAL FIRE AID AGREEMENT:
The President, by and with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, hereby authorizes the Chief of the Fire Department, on behalf of the
Village, to enter into and from time to time to amend, an agreement with any or all of the municipalities in the actual aid area defining and putting
into effect a mutual fire aid program providing generally as follows:
A. In the event that, in the judgment of the officer in charge of the fire department of a stricken municipality, the available fire equipment and
personnel of that municipality is inadequate to effectively cope with an emergency, fire or other disaster therein, said officer may call on a
neighboring participating municipality to furnish fire equipment and personnel (to the extent specified in the agreement) to the stricken
municipality, for use either: 1) in assisting at an emergency, or 2) in combatting a fire or other disaster, or 3) as a standby reserve to meet
other calls that may occur before the local fire equipment is free to take care of them.
B. Each aiding municipality furnishing fire equipment and personnel to a stricken municipality shall have the right to call on another participating
municipality for fire equipment and personnel (to the extent specified in the agreement) as a standby reserve to take the place, in part, of the
equipment and personnel furnished to the stricken municipality until such equipment and personnel shall be returned.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 130/387
C. On receipt of a call under subsection A or B of this Section, the aiding municipality called upon shall (to the extent provided in the agreement)
furnish the equipment and personnel called for by the stricken municipality, or by the aiding municipality; except that each municipality may
always be permitted to retain sufficient fire equipment and personnel to fight any fire or to meet any emergency within its own boundaries that
may reasonably be anticipated. (1987 Code)
5-4-4: MUTUAL FIRE AID PROGRAM ADOPTED:
A "mutual fire aid program" conforming to the provisions of Section 5-4-3 of this Chapter, has been agreed upon by the chiefs of the fire
departments of the villages of Berkeley, Bellwood, Broadview, Hillside, Maywood, Melrose Park and Westchester, and has been submitted to the
authorities of the Village of Broadview. This mutual fire aid program is subject to change or abrogation by action of the President, by and with the
advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, and the Fire Chief of this Village, pursuant to Section 5-4-3 of this Chapter.
Unless and until so changed or abrogated, the mutual fire aid program is ratified as a binding agreement between this Village and all other
municipalities who shall have adopted said program and shall have assumed the obligations thereby imposed upon them. (1987 Code)
5-4-5: AUTHORITY TO SEND EQUIPMENT OUTSIDE VILLAGE LIMITS:
The President and Board of Trustees and the Fire Chief shall have authority to send fire equipment and personnel outside the corporate limits of
the Village as provided in the mutual fire aid program agreed to herein, whenever requested to do so by the officers or authorities of any
participating municipality that has agreed to conform to said program and has assumed the obligations imposed upon it thereby; provided, that
the fire equipment and personnel can be spared from service at the time the request is made. (1987 Code)
Title 6
POLICE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT1
6-1-1: DEPARTMENT CREATED; MEMBERS:
A. Department Created: There is hereby created a police department of the village of Broadview, having the following respective ranks of officers:
one chief of police, one deputy chief of police, two (2) lieutenants, four (4) sergeants, and such additional members of the police department
as may, from time to time, be prescribed by the chief of police, approved by the president and the village board, and, if required, duly
appointed by the board of fire and police commissioners of the village of Broadview. All officers shall function as provided by the rules and
regulations of the police department.
B. Part Time Police Officers:
1. Appointment: The chief of police is authorized to appoint, discipline and discharge part time officers. Part time officers shall be members of
the regular police department except for pension purposes. Part time officers shall, at all times during the performance of their duties, be
subject to the direction and control of the chief of police.
2. Hiring Standards: Prior to being hired, a part time police officer must have previous law enforcement experience or must obtain certification
within eighteen (18) months after the date of hire, according to 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 705/8.2. The applicant must also have a
screening and background check, which includes a fingerprint check through the Illinois criminal history and federal bureau of investigation
(FBI); and pass a physical fitness, power test, that is based on the Illinois training board requirements for minimum fitness for a police
officer.
3. Training Standards2: The part time officer, upon hiring by the village and the village police department, will be required to complete a field
training program as determined by the chief of police with a certified field training officer and successful understanding of the Broadview
police department training guide. The part time officer will be monitored and evaluated periodically. The part time officer must also attend inservice
training as authorized by the chief of police. Such standards shall be submitted to the Illinois law enforcement training standards
board upon passage of this section.
4. Powers And Duties: A part time officer shall have all the powers and duties as a regular member of the police department, but shall not be
assigned under any circumstances, to supervise or direct full time police officers of the village police department. Part time officers shall not
be used as permanent replacements for permanent full time police officers. Part time officers must also abide by all rules, regulations,
policies and general orders as set forth by the chief of police and the village.
C. Auxiliary Police Officers:
1. Powers And Duties: Auxiliary police officers shall not be members of the regular police department of the village. Auxiliary police officers
shall not supplement members of the regular police department in the performance of their assigned and normal duties, except as otherwise
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 131/387
provided in this code. Auxiliary police officers shall only be assigned to perform the following duties in the village: a) to aid or direct traffic
within the municipality, b) to aid in control of natural or manmade disasters, and c) to aid in case of civil disorder as directed by the chief of
police. When it is impractical for members of the regular police department to perform those normal and regular police duties, however, the
chief of police of the regular police department may assign auxiliary police officers to perform those normal and regular police duties.
Identification symbols worn by auxiliary police officers shall be different and distinct from those used by members of the regular police
department. Auxiliary police officers shall at all times during the performance of their duties be subject to the direction and control of the
chief of police. Auxiliary police officers shall not carry firearms, except with the permission of the chief of police and while in uniform and in
the performance of their duties. Auxiliary police officers, when on duty, shall also be conservators of the peace and shall have the powers
specified in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3.1-15-25.
2. Training And Hiring: Auxiliary police officers, before entering upon any of their duties, shall receive a course of training in the use of
weapons and other police procedures appropriate for the exercise of the powers conferred upon them under this section. Before being
permitted to carry a firearm, however, an auxiliary police officer must have the same course of training as required of peace officers under
section 2 of the peace officer firearm training act. The village may require that all auxiliary police officers be residents of the village. Before
the appointment of an auxiliary police officer, the person's fingerprints shall be taken, and no person shall be appointed as an auxiliary
police officer if that person has been convicted of a felony or other crime involving moral turpitude. (Ord. 11-69, 10-17-2011)
6-1-2: ORGANIZATION:
The police department shall be organized and the officers thereof shall be appointed and shall function as provided by the rules and regulations
and subject to the control of the board of fire and police commissioners3 and as may be otherwise provided by ordinance.
A. Deputy Policemen: The president of the village may in times of peril, danger, riot or pestilence, or apprehension thereof, and at all
conflagrations and during any public election or celebration or unusual congregation of the people in the village, appoint for a specified time as
many deputy policemen as he may deem necessary, and during the term of such service, such deputy policemen shall possess all the duties
of regular policemen of the village.
B. Special Policemen: The president, by and with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, may appoint any number of special policemen
whenever he deems necessary, which appointment shall be effective for one year or less, at the pleasure of the board of trustees. (1987
Code)
6-1-3: DUTIES OF CHIEF OF POLICE:
A. Executive Orders Of Health Department: The chief of police shall execute or cause to be executed, all orders directed to him by the health
department so far as they relate to the preservation of the health of the village.
B. Annual Report: The chief of police shall, at the first meeting of the village board of trustees in January of each year, make an annual report in
writing to the president and village board of the state of the police force with a detailed report of the transactions of the police department for
the preceding year, with such statistics and suggestions in regard to the requirements of the department as he may deem advisable. The chief
shall also make reports of any matter or thing concerning such department whenever requested by the president or village board.
C. Arrest Reports: It shall be the duty of the chief of police to report to the village collector the names of all persons arrested or committed to jail,
bridgewall or house of correction, and the collector shall keep a record of the names of all such persons in a book or books to be provided for
such purpose. Such record shall show the date of arrest or committal, the number of days imprisoned, the amount of the fine, when and to
whom paid, and the date of discharge of such persons. (1987 Code)
6-1-4: POWERS AND DUTIES OF POLICE:
A. Assist Fire Department: It is the special duty of the chief and members of the police department and who may be on duty, to respond to all fire
alarms and assist the fire department in the protection of life and liberty in regulating traffic, maintaining order and enforcing observance of all
applicable sections.
B. Arrest Powers4: The several members of the police force are authorized to arrest with or without process, or on view, any person or persons
who shall break the peace or to be found violating any ordinance of the village or any criminal law of the state, and to take such person or
persons before the appropriate court, or if necessary detain such person or persons in custody overnight or Sunday in the village jail or any
other safe place, until they can be brought before the appropriate court for trial.
C. Report Accident: It shall be the duty of each and every police officer of the village, whenever any accident shall occur within the municipal
limits of which he has or should have notice or knowledge, to report forthwith in writing to the president the place, day and nature of the
accident; the hour of day or night when it occurred; and the condition of the weather. If the accident occurred at night, he shall report whether
clear, cloudy or moonlit; whether the street lamps nearby were lighted or not; the name of each person injured; the extent and nature of the
injury suffered; the names and residences of the principal witnesses; and the name and residence of the examining physician, if any.
D. Serve Warrants: Any regular member of the police department shall have power and authority, and it shall be his duty, in the village, to serve
and execute warrants and other processes for the apprehension and commitment of persons charged with the violation of any village
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 132/387
ordinance or any crime, misdemeanor or offense against the peace of the state or the village, or held for examination or trial, or taken on
execution for the commission of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any law or ordinance, and while serving or executing or assisting in
the service or execution of any such warrant or process he shall be vested with and have all the powers and authority conferred on constables
by the common laws and laws of the state.
E. Serve As Witnesses: All officers making arrests shall attend as witnesses before the court where the trial may be had, shall procure all
necessary evidence in their power and furnish a list of witnesses to the court and the corporation counsel. No village officer shall be entitled to
any witness fees to be taxed against the village in any action for any violation where the village is plaintiff. (1987 Code)
6-1-5: COMPENSATION:
The compensation of the various officers shall be prescribed from time to time by the president and board of trustees of the village. (1987 Code)
6-1-6: POLICE RESERVE:
A. Police Reserve Created, Membership: There is hereby authorized a police reserve organization to supplement the regular police department of
the village in such number as the president and the board of trustees may deem necessary at any particular time.
The president and board of trustees may delegate the fire and police commissioners to screen the eligible candidates for the police reserve.
B. Appointment, Applicability Of Rules And Regulations: The president of the village may, on the application of any person showing the necessity
thereof, appoint by and with the advice and consent of the board of trustees the policemen to the reserve or any additional number of police
reserve to do special duty at any fixed place within the village. The person so appointed shall be subject to all rules and regulations governing
the police department and to such special rules and regulations as the chief of police or president and board of trustees may make concerning
such policemen.
C. Powers: The members of the police reserve shall possess all the powers and privileges and perform all the duties of regular policemen. The
police reserve shall be governed by the rules and regulations of the police department except that they shall not come within the jurisdiction of
the fire and police commissioners. (1987 Code)
6-1-7: DEPUTY CHIEF OF POLICE:
A. Creation Of Position: There is hereby created the position of deputy chief of police of the village of Broadview.
B. Appointment And Eligibility: The deputy chief of police shall be appointed by the chief of police with the concurrence of the village president
and board of trustees. The deputy chief of police position is exempt from appointment by the board of fire and police commissioners of the
village of Broadview. The deputy chief may be removed at any time by the chief of police. The deputy chief may be appointed from any rank of
sworn, full time officers of the village's police department, but must have at least five (5) years of full time service as a police officer in the
village police department. The deputy chief of police shall possess discernible leadership skills, and shall have the knowledge, training, and
experience required for this level of work.
C. Service: A deputy chief shall serve at the discretion of the chief of police and, if removed from the position, shall revert to the rank currently
held, without regard as to whether a vacancy exists in that rank. A deputy chief of police, having been appointed from any rank of sworn full
time officers of village's police department, shall be permitted, regardless of rank, to take promotional exams and be promoted to a higher
classified rank than he currently holds, without having to resign as deputy chief of police.
D. Compensation: The president and the village board has initially set the compensation for deputy chief at one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) per year which may be changed from time to time by the village board.
E. Powers And Duties:
1. The deputy chief of police shall be second in command in the village of Broadview police department, shall be in command of all police
activities while on duty, subject only to the orders of the chief of police, and shall have such other authority as prescribed by the chief of
police.
2. In any emergency situation, or during the absence of the chief of police, the deputy chief of police shall assume all of the duties of the chief
of police and shall exercise all powers of the chief of police.
3. The deputy chief of police shall direct the performance of the lieutenants in order to ensure efficient performance of their managerial duties
and assignments and shall provide direct support to lieutenants in meeting department fiscal and support goals.
4. The deputy chief of police shall coordinate the discipline, training and evaluation of all operational, investigative, support, and special units
within the police department.
5. The deputy chief of police shall assist in the development and annual oversight of the police department budget and budget maintenance,
shall assist in identifying and making applications for various police department grants, and shall be responsible for maintaining efficient and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 133/387
fiscally responsible cross training management duties within all ranks.
6. The powers and duties set forth herein are not meant to be exclusive, but are meant to describe in general the duties and functions of the
deputy chief of police. In addition hereto, the deputy chief of police shall perform any and all other duties assigned by the chief of police.
(Ord. 11-69, 10-17-2011)
Chapter 2
MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES1
(Rep. by Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
Chapter 3
CIVIL EMERGENCIES
6-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this Section:
CIVIL EMERGENCY: A. A riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the use of actual force or violence or any threat to use force if accompanied
by immediate power to execute by three (3) or more persons acting together without authority.
B. Any natural disaster or manmade calamity including flood, conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake or explosion within the corporate
limits of the Village, resulting in the death or injury of persons or the destruction of property to such an extent that extraordinary measures
must be taken to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
CURFEW: A prohibition against any person walking, running, loitering, standing or motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public property or
vacant premises within the corporate limits of the Village, excepting officials of any governmental unit and persons officially designated to duty
with reference to the civil emergency. (1987 Code)
6-3-2: PROCLAMATION OF EMERGENCY:
A. Issuance: Whenever an emergency as defined in Section 6-3-1 of this Chapter exists, the Mayor shall declare the existence by means of a
written declaration setting forth the facts which constitute the emergency.
B. Notification Of News Media, Posting Of Proclamation: Upon issuing the proclamation herein authorized, the Chief of Police shall notify the
news media serving the Village and shall cause three (3) copies of the proclamation declaring the existence of the emergency to be posted at
the following places within the Village: the Village Hall, the police station and the post office.
C. Duration: The proclamation authorized in this Section shall be effective for a period of forty eight (48) hours unless sooner terminated by a
proclamation of the Mayor indicating that the civil emergency no longer exists. The Mayor shall have the power to reproclaim the existence of
a civil emergency at the end of each forty eight (48) hour period during the time the civil emergency exists. (1987 Code)
6-3-3: AUTHORITY OF MAYOR:
After the proclamation of a civil emergency, the Mayor may also, in the interest of public safety and welfare, make any or all the following orders:
A. Curfew: Order a general curfew applicable to such geographical areas of the Village or to the Village as a whole, as he deems advisable, said
curfew applicable during such hours of the day or night as he deems necessary in the interest of the public safety and welfare.
B. Retail Liquor Stores: Order the closing of all retail liquor stores, including taverns and private clubs or portions thereof wherein the consumption
of intoxicating liquor and beer is permitted.
C. Liquor Sales: Order the discontinuance of the sale of alcoholic liquor by any wholesaler or retailer.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 134/387
D. Flammable Liquids: Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing or giving away gasoline or other flammable or combustible liquid products
in any container other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle.
E. Firearms: Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing or giving away of any firearms or ammunition of any character
whatsoever.
F. Additional Orders: Issue such other orders as are imminently necessary for the protection of life and property. (1987 Code)
6-3-4: EFFECT OF REGULATIONS:
Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed to impair the powers contained in this Code giving powers to the Police and Fire
Departments, but shall be construed together with existing ordinances now in effect for the safety and welfare of the citizens of the Village. (1987
Code)
Chapter 4
MINORS1
(Rep. by Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
Chapter 5
GAMBLING1
(Rep. by Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
Chapter 6
OBSCENITY1
(Rep. by Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
Chapter 7
ANIMALS1
(Rep. by Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
Chapter 8
ABANDONED, INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES
6-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 135/387
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this Section:
ABANDONED VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle or other vehicle in a state of disrepair rendering the vehicle incapable of being driven in its condition;
or any motor vehicle or other vehicle that has not been moved or used for seven (7) consecutive days or more and is apparently deserted.
ANTIQUE VEHICLE: Any operable motor vehicle or other vehicle over twenty five (25) years of age.
HIGHWAY: Any street, alley or public way within the Village.
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle from which, for a period of at least seven (7) days, the engine, wheels or other parts have
been removed, or in which the engine, wheels or other parts have been altered, damaged or otherwise so treated that the vehicle is incapable of
being driven under its own motor power, except in the case of temporary service or repair operations. (Ord. 90-4, 7-16-1990)
6-8-2: ABANDONMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES:
The abandonment of a motor vehicle or other vehicle or any part thereof on any highway in this Municipality is unlawful and subject to penalties
as set forth herein. The abandonment of a motor vehicle or other vehicle or any part thereof on private or public property other than a highway, in
view of the general public, anywhere in this Municipality is unlawful except on property of the owner or bailee of such abandoned vehicle. A motor
vehicle or other vehicle or any part thereof so abandoned on private property may be authorized for removal by or upon the order of the Chief of
the Police Department of the Municipality, after a waiting period of seven (7) days or more has expired. (1987 Code)
6-8-3: POLICE TO BE NOTIFIED OF VEHICLE POSSESSION:
When an abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed motor vehicle or other vehicle comes into the temporary possession or custody of a person in this
State, not the owner of the vehicle, such person shall immediately notify the Municipal Police Department when the vehicle is within the corporate
limits of the Municipality. Upon receipt of such notification, the Chief of Police shall authorize a towing service to remove and take possession of
the abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed motor vehicle or other vehicle. The towing service will safely keep the towed vehicle and its contents,
maintain a record of the tow until the vehicle is claimed by the owner or any other person legally entitled to possession thereof, or until it is
disposed of as provided in this Chapter. (1987 Code)
6-8-4: REMOVAL OF ABANDONED, WRECKED VEHICLE:
A. When a motor vehicle or other vehicle is abandoned on a highway in this Municipality ten (10) hours or more its removal by a towing service
may be authorized by order of the Village Chief of Police.
B. When an abandoned, unattended, wrecked, burned or partially dismantled motor vehicle or other vehicle is creating a traffic hazard because of
its position in relation to the highway or its physical appearance is causing the impeding of traffic, its immediate removal from the highway by a
towing service may be authorized by order of the Village Chief of Police.
C. Any police officer is hereby authorized to remove or cause to be removed by a towing service any vehicle parked or abandoned upon any
street, alley or public property within the Municipality under the following conditions:
1. When such vehicle is or may be expected to interrupt the free flow of traffic.
2. When such vehicle is or may be expected to interfere with the maintenance of any street, alley or public property.
3. During snowstorms, floods, fires or other public emergencies.
D. When a vehicle is removed from either public or private property the owner of the vehicle will be responsible for all towing and storage costs.
E. When a motor vehicle or other vehicle is authorized to be towed away, the Police Department shall keep and maintain a record of the vehicle
towed, listing the color, year of manufacturer's series name, body style, vehicle identification number and license plate year and number
displayed on the vehicle. The record shall also include the date and hour of tow, location towed from, location towed to, reason for towing and
the name of the officer authorizing the tow. (1987 Code)
6-8-5: NOTIFICATION OF OWNER OF TOWED VEHICLE:
A. When the Municipal Police Department does not know the identity of the registered owner or other legally entitled person it will cause the motor
vehicle registration records of the State to be searched by a directed communication to the Secretary of State for the purpose of obtaining the
required ownership information.
B. The Police Department will cause the stolen motor vehicle files of the State police to be searched by a directed communication to said State
police for stolen or wanted information on the vehicle. When the State police files are searched with negative results, the information
contained in the National Crime Information Center (NCIC) files will be searched by the State police. The information determined from these
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 136/387
record searches will be used by the Police Department in sending a notification by certified mail to the owner or legally entitled person
advising where the vehicle is held, requesting a disposition be made and setting forth public sale information.
C. When the registered owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of a motor vehicle or other vehicle cannot be identified from the
registration files of this State or from the registration files of a foreign state, if applicable, the Police Department shall notify the State police for
the purpose of identifying the vehicle's owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of the vehicle. The information obtained by the
State police will be immediately forwarded to the law enforcement agency having custody of the vehicle for notification of owner. (1987 Code)
6-8-6: RECLAMATION OF VEHICLE BY OWNER:
Any time before a motor vehicle or other vehicle is sold at public sale or disposed of as provided herein, the owner or other person legally entitled
to its possession may reclaim the vehicle by presenting to the Police Department proof of ownership or proof of the right to possession of the
vehicle. No vehicle shall be released to the owner or other person under this Section until all towing and storage charges have been paid. (1987
Code)
6-8-7: SALE, DISPOSAL OF VEHICLE:
A. Owner Notified, Public Sale: Whenever an abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed motor vehicle or other vehicle, seven (7) years of age or
newer, remains unclaimed by the registered owner or other person legally entitled to its possession for a period of thirty (30) days after notice
has been given as provided herein, the Police Department having possession of the vehicle shall cause it to be sold at public sale to the
highest bidder. Notice of the time and place of the sale shall be posted in a conspicuous place for at least ten (10) days prior to the sale on the
premises where the vehicle has been impounded. At least ten (10) days prior to the sale, the Police Department shall cause a notice of the
time and place of the sale to be sent by certified mail to the registered owner or other person known by the Police Department or towing
service to be legally entitled to the possession of the vehicle. Such notice shall contain a complete description of the vehicle to be sold and
what steps must be taken by any legally entitled person to reclaim the vehicle. In those instances where the certified notification specified
herein has been returned by the postal authorities to the Police Department due to the addressee having moved, or being unknown at the
address obtained from the registration records of this State, the sending of a second certified notice will not be required.
B. Owner Unknown, Vehicle Sold Or Junked; Exception:
1. When the identity of the registered owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of an abandoned, lost or unclaimed vehicle of
seven (7) years of age or newer cannot be determined by any means provided for in this Chapter, the vehicle may be sold as provided
herein or disposed of in the manner authorized by this Chapter without notice to the registered owner or other person legally entitled to the
possession of the vehicle.
2. When an abandoned vehicle of more than seven (7) years of age is impounded as specified by this Chapter, it will be kept in custody for a
minimum of ten (10) days for the purpose of determining ownership; the contacting of the registered owner by the U.S. mail, public service
or in person for a determination of disposition; and, an examination of the State police stolen motor vehicle files for theft and wanted
information. At the expiration of the ten (10) day period, without the benefit of disposition information being received from the registered
owner, the Chief of Police will authorize the disposal of the vehicle as junk only.
3. A motor vehicle or other vehicle classified as an antique vehicle is excluded from these provisions.
C. Record Of Sale Or Disposal: When a motor vehicle or other vehicle in the custody of the Police Department is reclaimed by the registered
owner or other legally entitled person, or when the vehicle is sold at public sale or otherwise disposed of as provided in this Chapter; a report
of the transaction will be maintained by the Police Department for a period of one year from the date of the sale or disposal.
D. Proceeds Of Sale: When a vehicle located within the corporate limits of this Municipality is authorized to be towed away by the Chief of Police
and disposed of as set forth herein the proceeds of the public sale or disposition after the deduction of towing, storage and processing
charges shall be deposited in the Municipal Treasury. (1987 Code)
6-8-8: NONLIABILITY OF VILLAGE AND TOWING SERVICE:
Any police officer, towing service owner, operator or employee shall not be held to answer or be liable for damages in any action brought by the
registered owner, former registered owner, or his legal representative, or any other person legally entitled to the possession of a motor vehicle or
other vehicle when the vehicle was processed and sold or disposed of as provided by this Chapter. (1987 Code)
6-8-9: INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES:
A. Nuisance Declared: It is hereby declared to be a nuisance to leave, keep or store an inoperable motor vehicle on public or private property and
in view of the general public within the Village for a period in excess of seven (7) days, except when said vehicle is stored within a building or
upon premises of a business lawfully engaged in the wrecking or junking of motor vehicles1, and except when said vehicle is classified as an
antique vehicle.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 137/387
B. Disposal Of Vehicle: Any person who has an inoperable vehicle under his control, either as the owner of the vehicle and/or as the owner of the
private property on which the vehicle is left, upon notice by the Village to dispose of the inoperable vehicle, shall, within seven (7) days of the
issuance of the notice, dispose of said vehicle.
C. Removal Of Vehicle By Police Department: In the event the vehicle is not disposed of as provided by subsection B of this Section, the Police
Department is given the authority to remove said inoperable vehicle. The owner of the vehicle, in addition to any fines or penalties imposed,
shall be responsible for all towing and storage costs.
D. Disposition Of Vehicle: In the event the inoperable vehicle is removed by the Police Department, the notification to owner, reclamation and sale
and disposal of said vehicle shall be governed by the provisions of Sections 6-8-5, 6-8-6, 6-8-7 and 6-8-8 of this Chapter.
E. Penalty: Any person who fails to dispose of said vehicle after notice, as set forth herein, shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor
more than twenty five dollars ($25.00) for each day that the inoperable vehicle remains on the property. (Ord. 90-4, 7-16-1990)
Footnote 1: See Section 3-20-2 of this Code.
Chapter 9
FAIR HOUSING REGULATIONS
6-9-1: TITLE:
This Chapter shall be known as the FAIR HOUSING ORDINANCE. (Ord. 92-10, 4-6-1992)
6-9-2: POLICY:
It is declared to be the public policy of this Municipality in the exercise of its power to regulate for the protection of the public health, safety, morals
and welfare: to assure fair housing, a competitive real estate market, and freedom from the effects of residential segregation by race, color,
religion, creed, ancestry, national origin, age, sex, familial status, or physical or mental handicap, to promote population diversity in an open
community, and to secure to its citizens the economic, social and professional benefits of living in a diverse society. (Ord. 92-10, 4-6-1992)
6-9-3: SEVERABILITY:
If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this Chapter to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provision of
this Chapter not specifically included in said judgment. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the application of any provision
of this Chapter to any person or circumstance, such judgment shall not affect the application of said provision to any other person or circumstance
not specifically included in said judgment. (Ord. 92-10, 4-6-1992)
6-9-4: CONSTRUCTION:
This Chapter shall be construed according to the fair import of its terms, and shall be liberally construed to further the purposes and policy stated
and the special purposes of the particular provisions involved. (Ord. 92-10, 4-6-1992)
6-9-5: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, the following terms have the following meanings:
ANSI A117.1-1986: The 1986 or most current edition of the American National Standard for buildings and facilities providing accessibility and
usability for physically handicapped people.
ACCESSIBLE: When used with respect to the public and common use areas of a building containing covered multi-family dwellings, means that
the public or common use areas of the building can be approached, entered, and used by individuals with physical handicaps.
ACCESSIBLE ROUTE: A continuous unobstructed path connecting accessible elements and spaces in a building or within a site that can be
negotiated by a person with a severe disability using a wheelchair and that is also safe for and usable by people with other disabilities. A route
that complies with the appropriate requirements of the American National Standards Institute's ANSI A117.1-1986 or a comparable standard is an
"accessible route".
ADJUDICATIVE AGENCY: The agency designated by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village to conduct hearings and adjudicate
charges of violations of this Chapter.
ADMINISTERING AGENCY: The agency designated by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village to investigate, conciliate, receive and
initiate complaints pertaining to violation of this Chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 138/387
ADMINISTRATOR: The person designated by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village to administer the provisions of this Chapter.
AFFIRMATIVE MARKETING: Special efforts designed to promote a competitive real estate market free of practices or influences that would limit
free housing choice because of protected class status.
AGGRIEVED PARTY: A person who is alleged or proved to have been injured by a civil rights violation or believes he or she will be injured by a
civil rights violation that is about to occur.
ANCESTRY: Descent or lineage from a person or group of persons.
BROKER: Any person authorized to perform an action on behalf of another person regarding any matter related to the sale or rental of dwellings,
including offers, solicitation or contracts and the administration of matters regarding such offers, solicitations or contracts of any residential real
estate-related transactions.
BUILDING: A structure, facility, or portion thereof that contains or serves one or more dwelling units.
BUILDING ENTRANCE ON AN ACCESSIBLE ROUTE: An accessible entrance to a building that is connected by an accessible route to public
transportation stops, to accessible parking and passenger loading zones, or to public streets or sidewalks, if available.
CHARGE: An allegation filed with the Administering Agency by an aggrieved party or initiated by the Council under its authority.
COMMON USE AREAS: Rooms, spaces or elements inside or outside of a building that are made available for the use of residents of a building
or the guests thereof. These areas include hallways, lounges, lobbies, laundry rooms, refuse rooms, mail rooms, recreational areas and
passageways among and between buildings.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE: A specialized residential care home serving unrelated persons with disabilities.
COMPLAINANT: A person including the Administering Agency who files a charge or a complaint.
COMPLAINT: The document filed with the Administering Agency following an investigation and finding of substantial evidence of a violation of this
Chapter.
CONCILIATION: The attempted resolution of issues raised by a charge, or the investigation of such charge, through informal negotiations
involving the aggrieved party, the respondent and the Administering Agency.
CONCILIATION AGREEMENT: A written agreement setting forth the resolution of the issues in conciliation.
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE: Any drug or other substance, or immediate precursor included in the definition in section 102 of the Controlled
Substances Act (21 USC 802).
COUNCIL: The Citizens Advisory Council, the Administering Agency hereunder.
COVERED MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING: Buildings consisting of four (4) or more units if such buildings have one or more elevators; and ground
floor units in other buildings consisting of four (4) or more units.
DISCRIMINATE: To treat differently any person because of race, color, religion, creed, ancestry, marital status, national origin, age, sex, ancestry,
sexual orientation, familial status, or physical or mental handicap, or unfavorable military discharge.
DWELLING: Any building structure or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more
families or unrelated individuals, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such
building, structure or portion thereof.
ELDERLY PERSON: A person fifty five (55) years of age or older.
ENTRANCE: Any access point to a building or portion of a building used by residents for the purpose of entering.
EXTERIOR: All areas of the premises outside of an individual dwelling unit.
FAMILIAL STATUS: One or more individuals who have not attained the age of eighteen (18) years being domiciled with:
A. A parent or person having legal custody of such individual or individuals; or
B. The designee of such parent or other person having such custody, with the written permission of such parent or other person; or
C. Person who is pregnant or in the process of securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained the age of eighteen (18).
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION: Any bank, credit union, insurance company, mortgage banking company or savings and loan association or other
entity or organization which makes or purchases loans or provides other financial assistance which operates or has a place of business in the
State of Illinois.
HANDICAP: With respect to a person, a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more major life activities, a record of such
an impairment, or being regarded as having such an impairment.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 139/387
HEARING: That part of an adjudicative proceeding that involves the submission of evidence, either by oral presentation or written submission,
and includes the submission of briefs and oral arguments on the evidence and applicable law.
HEARING AGENCY: The agency designated by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village to conduct hearings on, and adjudicate
question of, ordinance violations.
HOUSING ACCOMMODATION: Includes any improved or unimproved real property or part thereof, which is used or occupied, or is intended,
arranged or designed to be used or occupied, as the home or residence of one or more individuals.
HOUSING FOR ELDERLY OR OLDER PERSONS: A. Housing provided under any State or Federal program for elderly persons as defined by
the specific programs, providing U.S. HUD approval has been secured; or
B. Housing that is intended for, and solely occupied by a person sixty two (62) years of age or older; or
C. Communities in which at least eighty percent (80%) of all units are occupied by one person fifty five (55) years of age or older, if the
existence of significant facilities and services specifically designed to meet the physical and social needs of an older person can be
documented.
INTERIOR: The spaces, parts, components or elements of an individual dwelling unit.
LEASE: Includes any sublease, assignment or rental and any contract to enter into any of the foregoing.
LOAN: Includes, but is not limited to, the providing of funds, for consideration, which are sought for:
A. The purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a housing accommodation; or
B. Any commercial or industrial purposes; or
C. Secured by residential real estate.
MARITAL STATUS: The legal status of being married, single, separated, divorced or widowed.
MODIFICATION: Any change to the public or common use areas of a building or any change to a dwelling unit.
NATIONAL ORIGIN: The place in which a person or one of his or her ancestors was born.
OFFER: Includes every attempt by means of written or oral communications to present for acceptance or rejection, to hold out or proffer, to make
a proposal to; or to exhibit real estate that may be taken or received with the intention of ultimately entering a real estate transaction.
OWNER: Any person who holds legal or equitable title to, or owns any beneficial interest in any real estate, or who holds legal or equitable title to
shares of, or any beneficial interest in, an equity which owns any real estate.
PANIC PEDDLING: For profit, to induce or attempt to induce a person to sell or rent a dwelling by representation regarding the entry or
prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular protected class.
PERSON: Includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual
companies, joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers, and fiduciaries.
PERSON IN THE BUSINESS OF SELLING OR RENTING DWELLINGS: Any person who:
A. Within the preceding twelve (12) months has participated as principal in three (3) or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any
dwelling or any interest therein; or
B. Within the preceding twelve (12) months, has participated as agent, other than in the sale of his or her own personal residence, in providing
sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two (2) or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or interest
therein; or
C. Is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for occupancy by, or is occupied by, three (3) or more families.
PHYSICAL OR MENTAL IMPAIRMENT: Includes:
A. Any physiological disorder or condition, cosmetic disfigurement, or anatomical loss affecting one or more of the following body systems:
neurological, musculoskeletal; special sense organs; respiratory, including speech organs; cardiovascular; reproductive; digestive;
genitourinary; hemic and lymphatic; skin; and endocrine; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 140/387
B. Any mental or psychological disorder, such as mental retardation, organic brain syndrome, emotional or mental illness, and specific learning
disabilities.
PREMISES: The interior or exterior spaces, part, components or elements of a building, including individual dwelling units and the public and
common use areas of a building.
PROTECTED CLASS: In this Chapter includes, and shall be limited to, a person of any particular race, color, religion, creed, ancestry, marital
status, national origin, age, sex, familial status, unfavorable military discharge, or physical or mental handicap.
PUBLIC CONTRACT: Includes every contract to which the State of Illinois, any of its political subdivisions or any municipal corporation is a party.
PUBLIC USE AREAS: Interior or exterior rooms or spaces of a building that are made available to the general public. Public use may be provided
at a building that is privately or publicly owned.
PURCHASE: Includes any contract to purchase.
REAL ESTATE TRANSACTION: The purchase, sale or fee or equitable title to, or beneficial interest in, or rental or lease of, any real property, or
an option to do any of the foregoing, or any negotiation, listing, contract, or agreement in connection therewith; also includes the brokering or
appraising of residential real property and the making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial assistance for purchasing, constructing,
improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling or secured by residential real estate.
REAL PROPERTY: Includes buildings, structures, real estate, lands, tenements, lease holds, interests in real estate cooperatives, condominiums,
and hereditaments, corporeal and incorporeal, or any interest therein.
RELIGION: Includes all constitutionally guaranteed aspects of religious observance and practice, as well as belief.
RENT: Includes to lease, to sublease, to let, and to otherwise grant for consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant.
RESPONDENT: A. The person or other entity against whom a discriminatory housing practice has been alleged in a complaint; or
B. Any other person or entity identified in the course of investigation and notified as required under Section 6-9-12 of this Chapter.
SEX: The status of being male or female.
SOLICIT OR SOLICITATION: Any communication by or on behalf of a real estate agent with the owner or occupant of a dwelling:
A. Which is intended to induce the sale or rental of such dwelling; or
B. Which is intended to offer or promote services in connection with the sale, rental or listing of such dwelling; and
C. Which is carried out by means of:
1. In-person contacts at the dwelling; or
2. Written material mailed or delivered directly to the dwelling, such as direct mail, leaflet or pamphlets; or
3. Telephone contact with owners or occupants of the dwelling.
For purposes of this Chapter, the term "solicit" or "solicitation" shall not refer to communication carried out by means of print or electronic
media of general circulation, such as a newspaper, radio, television, or the yellow pages.
STEERING: Influencing or attempting to influence a person by any words or acts in connection with viewing, buying or leasing of real estate so as
to promote, or tend to promote, the continuance or maintenance of segregated housing; or so as to limit or otherwise make unavailable housing
choice; or so as to retard, obstruct or discourage diversity in the community in part or in whole; or so as to limit or otherwise make unavailable any
types of loans or financing available in the purchase of any real property.
VARYING TERMS: Includes, but is not limited to, the following practices:
A. Requiring a greater down payment than is usual for the particular type or a loan involved.
B. Requiring a shorter period of amortization than is usual for the particular type of loan involved.
C. Charging a higher interest rate than is usual for the particular type of loan involved.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 141/387
D. Underappraising of real estate or other item of property offered as security. (Ord. 92-10, 4-6-1992)
6-9-6: PROHIBITED ACTS:
It shall be unlawful to:
A. Discriminatory Terms: Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of
services or facilities in connection therewith, on the basis of any protected class.
B. Refusal To Negotiate, Deal, Sell Or Rent: Refuse to sell or rent, after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or
rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person on the basis of any protected class.
C. Withholding Dwellings: Represent to any person on the basis of any protected class that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale, or
rental when such dwelling is in fact so available.
D. Advertisement, Signs, Notices: Make, print, circulate, or publish, or cause to be made, printed or published, any written or oral notice,
statement, or advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation, or discrimination on the
basis of any protected class or an intention to make such preference, limitation, or discrimination.
Discriminatory notices, statements, and advertisements shall not be used to discourage marketing housing availability to groups
underrepresented in the community or to limit a competitive housing market or free housing choice in the community and shall include, but not
be limited to:
1. Using words, phrases, photographs, illustrations, symbols or forms which convey that dwellings are available or not available to a particular
group of persons on the basis of any protected class.
2. Expressing to agents, brokers, employees, prospective sellers or renters or any other persons a preference for or limitation on any
purchaser or renter on the basis of any protected class of such persons.
3. Selecting media or locations for advertising the sale or rental of dwellings which deny particular segments of the housing market information
about housing opportunities on the basis of protected class of such persons.
4. Refusing to publish advertising for the sale or rental of dwellings or requiring different charges or terms for such advertising on the basis of
protected class.
E. Lending And Lending Terms: Discriminate in connection with borrowing or lending money, guaranteeing loans, accepting mortgages, or
otherwise financing a real estate transaction on the basis of protected class of such person.
Discriminate by denying, or delaying the processing of, a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefor, the purpose of
purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining real estate, or discriminate in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration,
other terms and conditions of such loan or other financial assistance.
F. Qualification Criteria: Use different qualification criteria or applications, or sale or rental standards or procedures, such as income standards,
application requirements, application fees, credit analysis or sale or rental approval procedures or other requirements, on the basis of
protected class of such person.
G. Appraising/Insurance: Discriminate in appraising the value or real estate or in the sale of insurance in connection with a real estate transaction
on the basis of protected class of the person.
H. Varying Rents/Sale Price: Impose different sales prices or rental charges for the sale or rental of a dwelling upon any person on the basis of
protected class.
I. Eviction: Evict tenants on the basis of protected class of such person or of his or her guests.
J. Panic Peddling: For profit, induce or attempt to induce a person to sell or rent a dwelling by representation regarding the entry or prospective
entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of any particular protected class.
Prohibited actions under this Section include, but are not limited to:
1. Engaging for profit in conduct (including uninvited real estate solicitations) which conveys to a person that a neighborhood has undergone,
is undergoing, or is about to undergo a change in the race, color, religion, national origin, age, sex, familial status of persons residing in it, in
order to encourage persons to offer a dwelling for sale or rental.
2. Encouraging for profit, any person to sell or rent a dwelling through assertions that the entry or prospective entry of person of any particular
protected class can or will result in undesirable consequences for the project, neighborhood or community, such as lowering or decreasing
appreciation of property values, an increase in criminal or antisocial behavior, or a decline in the quality of schools or other services or
facilities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 142/387
K. Listings: Enter into a listing agreement which discriminates against any person because of protected class of such person.
L. Discrimination In Membership Or Services: Deny any person access to or membership or participation in any multiple-listing service, real estate
brokers' organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings or to discriminate against any such access, membership
or participation on account of any protected class.
M. Steering: Restrict or attempt to restrict, because of protected class, the choices of a person by words or acts in connection with buying or
renting a dwelling so as to perpetuate, or tend to perpetuate, segregated housing patterns, or to discourage or obstruct housing choice.
Prohibited actions under this subsection, which are generally referred to as unlawful steering practices, include, but are not limited to, the
following:
1. Discouraging any person from inspecting, purchasing or renting a dwelling because of protected class in a community, neighborhood or
development, so as to perpetuate, or tend to perpetuate, segregated housing patterns, or to discourage or obstruct housing choice.
2. Discouraging the purchase or rental of a dwelling because of protected class by exaggerating drawbacks or minimizing or failing to inform
any person of desirable features of a dwelling or of a community, neighborhood or development, so as to perpetuate, or tend to perpetuate,
segregated housing patterns, or to discourage or obstruct housing choice.
3. Communicating to any prospective purchaser or tenant that he or she would not be comfortable or compatible with existing residents of a
community, neighborhood or development because of protected class so as to perpetuate, or tend to perpetuate, segregated housing
patterns, or to discourage or obstruct housing choice.
4. Assigning any person to a particular section of a community, neighborhood or development, or to a particular floor of a building, because of
protected class, so as to perpetuate, or tend to perpetuate, segregated housing patterns, or to discourage or obstruct housing choice.
5. Failing to inform any person of available housing opportunities in a particular section of a community, neighborhood or development, or in a
particular building or particular floor of a building, because of protected class, so as to perpetuate, or tend to perpetuate, segregated
housing patterns, or to discourage or obstruct housing choice.
N. Participation: Act or undertake to act as a real estate broker, salesperson, or agent with respect to any dwelling, the disposition of which
requires said person to participate in discrimination.
O. Restrictions: Perform any act of discrimination with the intention or effect of restricting or limiting the housing or financing choice of any person.
P. Aid And Abetting: Aid or abet acts performed in violation of this Chapter.
Q. Interference, Coercion, Or Intimidation: Coerce, intimidate, threaten or interfere with any person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account
of his or her having aided or encouraged any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or protected by this Chapter.
R. Solicitation: Solicit any owner to sell or rent or list residential property at any time after such person has notice that such owner does not desire
to sell, rent, or list such residential property. For the purposes of this subsection, notice must be provided as follows:
1. The notice may be given by the owner personally or by a third party in the owner's name, either in the form of an individual notice of a list,
provided it complies with subsection R2 of this Section.
2. Such notice shall be explicit as to whether each owner on the notice seeks to avoid both solicitation for listing and sale, or only for listing, or
only for sale, as well as the period of time for which any avoidance is desired. The notice shall be dated and either of the following shall
apply:
a. Each owner shall have signed the notice; or
b. The person or entity preparing the notice shall provide an accompanying affidavit to the effect that all the names on the notice are, in fact,
genuine as to the identity of the persons listed and that such person have requested not to be solicited as indicated.
3. The Village Clerk shall publish and make available, without charge, appropriate forms which may be executed by any owner or occupant of
a dwelling to provide such notice. The Clerk shall prepare a list of the names and addresses of such owners and occupants and shall
update such list no less than annually during the month of January and shall publish the same as follows:
a. By maintaining a copy of said list in the office of the Village Clerk and making it available for inspection.
b. By furnishing a copy of said list annually to every real estate firm belonging to the local multiple-listing service.
c. By furnishing a copy of said list upon request and payment of reproduction costs to any person having an interest in the sale or rental of
any dwelling in the Village. (Ord. 92-10, 4-6-1992)
6-9-7: PROHIBITED ACTS, HANDICAPPED HOUSING:
In addition to those prohibited acts identified in Sections 6-9-6 and 6-9-8 of this Chapter, it shall be unlawful to:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 143/387
A. Discrimination Against The Handicapped: To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a
dwelling, or in the provision of services of facilities in connection with such dwelling, because of a handicap of:
1. That buyer or renter.
2. A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is so sold, rented, or made available; or
3. Any person associated with that person.
B. Unit Modification: Refuse to permit, at the expense of the handicapped person, reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be
occupied by such person if such modifications may be necessary to afford such person full enjoyment of the premises; except that, in the case
of a rental, the landlord may, where it is reasonable to do so, condition permission for a modification on the renter agreeing to restore the
interior of the premises to the condition that existed before the modifications, reasonable wear and tear excepted.
C. Rules And Policies: Refuse to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices, or services, when such accommodations may be
necessary to afford such person equal opportunity to use and enjoy the dwelling.
D. New Construction: Failure to design and construct dwellings constructed after March 13, 1991, in such a manner that:
1. The public use and common use portions of such dwellings are readily accessible to and usable by handicapped persons;
2. All the doors designed to allow passage into and within all premises within such dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow passage by
handicapped persons in wheelchairs; and
3. All premises within such dwellings contain the following features of adaptive design:
a. An accessible route into and through the dwelling;
b. Light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats, and other environmental controls in accessible locations;
c. Reinforcements in bathroom walls to allow installation of grab bars; and
d. Usable kitchens and bathrooms such that an individual in a wheelchair can maneuver about the space.
E. Guide/Support Dogs: Refusal to sell or rent because a person has a guide, hearing, or support dog. It is a violation for the owner or agent of
any housing accommodation to:
1. Refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable
or deny property to any blind, hearing-impaired or physically handicapped person because he has a guide, hearing, or support dog; or
2. Discriminate against any blind, hearing-impaired, or physically handicapped person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental
property, or in the provision of services of facilities in connection therewith, because he or she has a guide, hearing or support dog; or
3. Require, because a blind, hearing-impaired, or physically handicapped person has a guide, hearing, or support dog, an extra charge in a
lease, rental agreement, or contract of purchase or sale, other than for actual damage done to the premises by the dog. (Ord. 92-10, 4-6-
1992)
6-9-8: PROHIBITED ACTS, FINANCIAL:
In addition to those prohibited acts identified in Sections 6-9-6 and 6-9-7 of this Chapter, it shall be a violation for any financial institution, on the
grounds of unlawful discrimination to:
A. Deny any person any of the services normally offered by such an institution.
B. Provide any person with any service which is different from, or provided in a different manner than, that which is provided to other persons
similarly situated.
C. Deny or vary the terms of a loan on the basis of protected class.
D. Deny or vary the terms of a loan on the basis that a specific parcel of real estate offered as security is located in a specific geographical area.
E. Deny or vary the terms of a loan without having considered all or the regular and dependable income of each person who would be liable for
repayment of the loan.
F. Utilize lending standards that have no economic basis and which constitute unlawful discrimination.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 144/387
G. Refuse to purchase or impose different terms or conditions on loans or other debts or securities which support the purchase, construction,
improvement, repair or maintenance of a dwelling, or which are secured by residential real estate on the basis of protected class. (Ord. 92-10,
4-6-1992)
6-9-9: EXCEPTIONS:
Nothing in this Chapter shall:
A. Single-Family Dwellings: Apply to the following:
1. The rental, lease, or occupancy of a room in an owner-occupied single-family dwelling, provided the following conditions are met:
a. The owner does not own or have any interest in three (3) or more single-family houses at any one time.
b. The house is sold or rented without the use of a real estate broker, agent or salesperson or the facilities of any person in the business of
selling or renting dwellings.
2. Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than two (2) families living
independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living quarters as his or her residence.
B. Religious, Nonprofit Groups: Prohibit a religious organization, association, or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated,
supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization or society from limiting the sale, rental, or occupancy of dwellings
which it owns or operates for other than commercial purposes to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons,
unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, ancestry, national origin, age, or handicap.
C. Private Clubs: Prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes provides lodgings
which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members and their
guests or from giving preference to its members.
D. Senior Citizen And Handicapped Housing: Prohibit the rental or sale of a dwelling on the basis of age or handicap when such dwelling is
authorized, approved, financed, or subsidized in whole or in part by a unit of State, local, or Federal government.
E. Maximum Occupancy: Apply to local, State, or Federal restrictions regarding the maximum number of occupants permitted to occupy a
dwelling.
F. Drug-Related Offense: Require the rental or sale of a unit to any person convicted of the illegal manufacture, distribution or use of a controlled
substance.
G. Housing For Elderly Or Older Persons: Apply to housing for elderly or older persons.
H. Appraisals: Prohibit a person engaged in the business of furnishing appraisals of real property from taking into consideration factors other than
protected class.
I. Underwriting Practices: Prohibit financial institutions from considering sound underwriting practices in contemplation of any loan to any person.
Such practices shall include:
1. The willingness and the financial ability of the borrower to repay the loan.
2. The market value of any real estate or other item of property proposed as security for any loan.
3. Diversification of the financial institution's investment portfolio.
J. Maintenance Of Records: Prohibit any person from maintaining records in furtherance of the purposes of this Chapter.
K. Affirmative Marketing: Apply to affirmative marketing plans or programs. (Ord. 92-10, 4-6-1992)
6-9-10: ADMINISTRATOR:
An administrator of this Chapter shall be appointed by the President of the Village with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees. The
Administrator, who may hold another position in the Village, shall have such duties and responsibilities as are provided in this Chapter and
additionally as may be provided by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village. (Ord. 92-10, 4-6-1992)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 145/387
6-9-11: CITIZENS ADVISORY COUNCIL:
A. Creation: There is hereby created a Citizens Advisory Council (hereinafter, Council) consisting of no more than eleven (11) members appointed
by the President of the Village with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees. All of the members shall be residents of the Municipality.
A chairperson and vice chairperson shall be elected annually by vote of a majority of the Council. In the first term of appointment three (3)
members shall serve for three (3) years, four (4) members shall serve for two (2) years, and four (4) members shall serve for one year.
Subsequent terms of appointment shall be for three (3) years.
B. Duties: The Council's duties shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
1. Advising elected officials and staff and making recommendations on community matters.
2. Assisting elected officials and staff as an educational arm of the Municipality on community matters to all persons, groups, and institutions
in the community.
3. Performing as a catalyst in promoting a better quality of life for all residents in the community.
4. Acting as a bridge between Municipal government, citizens and community groups.
5. Gathering and providing for the exchange of information relative to the provisions of this Chapter among real estate brokers and
salespersons, lenders, developers, employers, Municipal officials and community groups within and without the Municipality.
6. Counseling of prospective residents in accordance with the policy and provisions of this Chapter and maintaining a list of counseling
sources approved by the Municipality.
7. Adopting, promulgating, amending and rescinding rules and regulations of procedures for handling complaints of discrimination in housing.
8. Receiving and reviewing complaints charging discrimination in housing, seeking conciliation of such complaints and compliance with this
Chapter.
9. Performing as the Hearing Agency; holding hearings and making findings of fact and making recommendations in accordance with the
provisions of this Chapter.
10. Performing as the Adjudicative Agency.
11. Performing further duties as may be assigned by the President and Board of Trustees.
C. Powers: The Council shall have power to:
1. Administer oaths and take sworn testimony at hearings.
2. Subpoena witnesses and pertinent documents, and its subpoena power may be enforced by proper petition to any court of competent
jurisdiction.
3. Issue orders and impose fines and penalties.
4. Require all persons subject to the application of this Chapter to maintain such records as may be necessary to demonstrate compliance
with the provisions of this Chapter.
D. Public Meetings: All Council meetings shall be open to the public except those for the purpose of conciliating complaints of discrimination.
(Ord. 92-10, 4-6-1992)
6-9-12: COMPLAINTS AND ENFORCEMENT:
A. Charge: Proceedings under this Chapter shall be commenced by filing a verified complaint with the Administrator within one hundred eighty
(180) days of the alleged violation. The complaint shall be submitted on the form set forth below, to be provided by the Clerk of the
Municipality and shall contain a short and plain statement of the alleged violation, the name and address of the person charged, and shall be
signed by the aggrieved party or by the Adjudicative Agency by its chairperson or vice chairperson. The aggrieved party may be assisted in
the filing of a complaint by a member or members of the Adjudicative Agency.
Within fifteen (15) calendar days after the complaint is filed, the Administrator shall review the complaint to determine whether the allegations
contained therein, if true, would constitute a violation of this Chapter.
The Administrator shall notify the Adjudicative Agency of his or her determination, and recommend to the Adjudicative Agency what, if any,
further action should be taken.
The Adjudicative Agency shall review the complaint and the determination and recommendation of the Administrator. Within twenty (20)
calendar days after the complaint is filed, the Council shall decide whether the allegations of the complaint, if true, constitute a violation of this
Chapter.
If the Council decides that the allegations do not constitute a violation, it shall order that the complaint be dismissed. If the Council decides
that the allegations do constitute a violation, it shall order that an investigation and hearing be held on the merits of the complaint.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 146/387
B. Notice Of Charge: Within thirty (30) calendar days after the complaint is filed, the Administrator shall serve a copy of the complaint personally
or by certified mail, return receipt requested, on the person charged and shall furnish copies thereof to the Adjudicative Agency. If in the
judgment of the Administrator immediate court action is advisable, he or she shall so notify the Adjudicative Agency.
The Administrator shall also, within thirty (30) days of the date on which the charge was filed, send written notice to the complainant informing
the complainant of his or her option to file a complaint with the Illinois Human Rights Commission, including the dates within which the
complainant may exercise such option.
C. Injunctive Relief: At any time after a complaint is filed and determined to constitute a violation of this Chapter, the administering agency may
petition the appropriate court for temporary relief, pending final determination of the proceedings under this Chapter, including an order or
decree restraining the respondent from doing or causing any act which would render ineffectual a recommendation with respect to the
complaint. Such petition shall contain a certification by the Administrator that the particular matter presents exceptional circumstances in which
irreparable injury will result from a violation of this Chapter in the absence of temporary relief.
The petition shall be filed in the circuit court for the county in which the respondent resides or transacts business or in which the alleged
violation took place.
When the petition is based upon a civil rights violation as defined in this Chapter, any relief or restraining order entered by the court shall not
exceed five (5) calendar days unless:
1. A longer period is agreed to by the respondent; or
2. The court finds that there is substantial evidence to demonstrate that the respondent has engaged in violations of this Chapter.
D. Respondent Response: The respondent shall serve a verified response copy of its response to all allegations contained in the charge within
ten (10) days of the date on which the respondent was served copy of the complaint.
The Administrator shall issue a notice of default directed to any respondent who fails to file a verified response to a charge within ten (10) days
of the date on which the complainant was served, unless the respondent can demonstrate good cause as to why such notice should be
issued.
E. Complainant Response: Within ten (10) calendar days of the date he or she receives the respondent's response, the complainant may file a
reply to said response. If he or she chooses to file a reply, the complainant shall serve a copy of said reply on the respondent or his
representative. A party shall have the right to supplement his or her response or reply at any time that the investigation of the charge is
pending.
F. Investigation: The chairperson of the Adjudicative Agency shall order a prompt investigation of the complaint, completing such an investigation
within one hundred (100) calendar days after the filing of the charge.
The Administrator or his or her designated representatives shall have authority to request any member of the Council to issue subpoenas to
compel the attendance of a witness or the production for examination of any books, records, or documents whatsoever.
If any witness whose testimony is required for any investigation resides outside the Municipality, or through illness or any other good cause as
determined by the Administrator is unable to be interviewed by the investigator or appear at a fact-finding conference, his or her testimony or
deposition may be taken, within or without the Municipality, in the same manner as is provided for in the taking of depositions in civil cases in
circuit courts.
Upon reasonable notice to the complainant and the respondent, the Administrator shall conduct a fact-finding conference, unless prior to one
hundred (100) calendar days of the date on which the charge was filed, the administering agency or Administrator has determined whether
there is substantial evidence that the alleged ordinance violation has been committed.
A party's failure to attend the conference without good cause may result in dismissal or default. A notice of dismissal or default shall be issued
by the Administrator and shall notify the relevant party that a request for review may be filed in writing with the Administrator within thirty (30)
calendar days of receipt of notice of dismissal or default.
G. Conciliation: During the period beginning with the filing of charges and ending with the filing of a complaint (decision) or a dismissal, the
Administrator shall, to the extent feasible, engage in conciliation with respect to such charge.
When the Administrator determines that conciliation is feasible, the complainant and respondent shall be notified of time and place of the
conciliation meeting by registered or certified mail at least seven (7) calendar days prior thereto and either or both parties shall appear at the
meeting in person or by attorney.
The Administrator shall attempt by all accepted methods of conciliation and lawful persuasion to resolve the grievance delineated in the
complaint.
A conciliation agreement arising out of such conciliation shall be an agreement between the respondent and the complainant, and shall be
subject to approval by the Administrator and the Adjudicative Agency.
A conciliation may provide for binding arbitration of the dispute arising from the charge. Any such arbitration that results from a conciliation
agreement, may award appropriate relief, including monetary relief.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 147/387
Each conciliation agreement shall be made public unless the complainant and respondent otherwise agree and the Administrator determines
that disclosure is not required to further the purpose of this Chapter.
If, within sixty (60) calendar days after a charge has been received or initiated by the administering agency, the Administrator determines that
attempts at conciliation would not be in furtherance of the objectives of this Chapter, or that the complaint cannot be resolved by conciliation,
the Administrator shall so report to the Adjudicative Agency.
H. Hearing On A Complaint: The Adjudicative Agency shall, upon due and reasonable notice to all parties, conduct a fact-finding conference
(hearing on complaint). All parties shall be entitled to be represented by legal counsel, and shall have the right to call witnesses in their own
behalf and to cross-examine witnesses. All parties to the proceedings may apply to the Adjudicative Agency to have subpoenas issued in the
name of the Adjudicative Agency. Testimony taken at the hearing shall be under oath or affirmation and a transcript shall be made and filed in
the office of the Administrator.
I. Report Of Decision: Each investigated charge shall be the subject of a report to the Adjudicative Agency. The report shall be a confidential
document subject to review by the Administrator, authorized employees of the Municipality, the parties, and where indicated by this Chapter by
members of the commission or their designated hearing officers. Such report must be completed within one hundred (100) calendar days after
a charge has been filed. The report shall contain:
1. The names and dates of contacts with witnesses.
2. A summary and the dates of correspondence and other contact with the complainant and the respondent.
3. A summary description of other pertinent records.
4. A summary of witness statements.
5. Answers to questionnaires.
A final report under this Section may be amended if additional evidence is later discovered.
Upon review of the report and within one hundred (100) calendar days after the filing of the charge, unless it is impracticable to do so, the
Administrator shall determine whether there is substantial evidence that the alleged ordinance violation has been committed or is about to
be committed.
If the Adjudicative Agency is unable to make the determination within one hundred (100) calendar days after the filing of the charge, the
Administrator shall notify the complainant and respondent in writing of the reasons for not doing so.
If the Adjudicative Agency determines that there is no substantial evidence, the charge shall be dismissed and the complainant notified that
he or she may seek review of the dismissal order before the Adjudicative Agency. The complainant shall have thirty (30) calendar days from
receipt of notice to file a request for review by the Adjudicative Agency. The Administrator shall make public disclosure of each such
dismissal.
If the Adjudicative Agency determines that there is substantial evidence he or she shall immediately issue a decision on behalf of the
complainant.
J. Settlement And Dismissal: A settlement of any charge prior to the filing of a decision may be effectuated at any time upon agreement of the
parties and the approval of the Administrator. The settlement of any charge after the filing of a decision shall be effectuated as specified in
subsection I of this Section.
Settlements of charges prior to a decision shall be reduced to writing by the Administrator, signed by the parties, and submitted by the
Administrator to the Adjudicative Agency for approval. Settlements of charges after a decision shall be effectuated as specified in subsection I
of this Section.
When either party alleges that a settlement order has been violated, the Administrator shall conduct an investigation into the matter. If
substantial evidence demonstrates that a settlement has been violated, the Administrator shall refer the matter to the Municipal attorney for
enforcement in the circuit court in which the respondent or complainant resides or transacts business or in which the alleged violation took
place.
The Administrator may dismiss a charge if it is satisfied that:
1. The respondent has eliminated the effects of this Chapter violation charged and has taken steps to prevent its repetition.
2. The respondent offers and the complainant declines to accept terms of settlement which the Administrator finds are sufficient to eliminate
the effects of the civil rights violation charged and prevent its repetition.
In determining whether the respondent has eliminated the effects of the ordinance violation charged, or has offered terms of settlement
sufficient to eliminate same, the Administrator shall consider the extent to which the respondent has either fully provided, or reasonably
offered by ways of terms of settlement, as the case may be, the relevant relief available to the complainant under this subsection J.
When the Administrator dismisses a charge under this Section, he or she shall notify the complainant that he or she may seek review of the
dismissal order before the Adjudicative Agency. The complainant shall have thirty (30) calendar days from receipt of notice to file a request
for review by the Adjudicative Agency. (Ord. 92-10, 4-6-1992)
6-9-13: MUNICIPAL ACTIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 148/387
A. Complaint Referral: The President and Board of Trustees may refer any potential or apparent violation of this Chapter to the Adjudicative
Agency for investigation, findings, and recommendations.
B. Hearing Recommendations: Upon receipt of any report finding a respondent in violation of the provisions of this Chapter, and after
consideration thereof at a public meeting, the President and Trustees, within thirty (30) calendar days following receipt of such report, shall
take action as it deems proper, in addition to the penalties provided elsewhere in this Chapter, including, but not limited to:
1. Initiating an appropriate court action for injunctive relief under this Chapter.
2. Initiating an appropriate court action for enforcement of this Chapter.
3. Filing of proceedings for violation of this Chapter or Federal or State regulations against any person found to have violated the provisions of
this Chapter.
4. Filing of a petition against any person found in violation of the provisions of this Chapter whole under contract to the State or Federal
government, political subdivision, agency, or instrumentality.
5. Filing of a complaint with the Department of Professional Regulation of the State against any person found in violation of the provisions of
this Chapter.
6. Assessment of fines as provided in Section 6-9-16 of this Chapter. (Ord. 92-10, 4-6-1992)
6-9-14: APPEAL:
Any persons aggrieved by the decision of the Adjudicative Agency, shall have the right to appeal in accordance with the following procedures:
A. Initial reconsideration by the full Board of the Adjudicative Agency is required. This appeal shall be initiated by filing with the Administrator,
within seven (7) calendar days of the decision, a written statement, under oath, setting forth specifically the grounds for reconsideration. These
grounds shall be supported by argument and served on all parties at the time they are filed with the Administrator. The Adjudicative Agency,
after reviewing the statement shall:
1. Render a revised decision notifying all parties within fourteen (14) calendar days of the filing of the statement for initial consideration; or
2. Issue and serve on all parties a written order for rehearing the case, citing the cause and additional evidence; or
3. Uphold the decision.
B. Appeal to the President and Trustees in cases where the Adjudicative Agency has been upheld. The appeal shall be initiated within seven (7)
calendar days of the initial decision or the upholding of the initial decision, by filing with the Adjudicative Agency a written statement as
delineated in subsection A1 of this Section. After reviewing the statement and hearing record, the President and Trustees shall:
1. Render a revised decision notifying all parties within thirty (30) calendar days of the filing of the appeal statement; or
2. Issue and serve on all parties a written order for rehearing the case, citing the cause and additional evidence; or
3. Uphold the decision of the Adjudicative Agency.
The decision of the President and Trustees on such appeals shall be final.
C. After a decision by the President and Trustees the aggrieved person may apply for judicial review under writ of certiori. (Ord. 92-10, 4-6-1992)
6-9-15: REMEDY, JUDICIAL RELIEF:
Any person aggrieved by the violation of any provision of this Chapter, who has exhausted the remedies provided by this Chapter, may apply to
any court of competent jurisdiction, not later than two (2) years after the occurrence of an alleged civil rights violation or the breach of a
conciliation or settlement agreement, for appropriate relief from such violation, including:
A. An order compelling compliance with this Chapter; or
B. Compensatory/punitive damages; or
C. Such other further relief as may seem appropriate to the court for the enforcement of this Chapter and the elimination of violations thereof; or
D. Temporary restraining order whereby the respondent is kept from doing or causing any act which would be a violation of this Chapter; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 149/387
E. The Attorney General may commence a civil action in any appropriate United States District Court for appropriate relief. (Ord. 92-10, 4-6-1992)
6-9-16: PENALTY, FINES:
Any person violating any provision of this Chapter shall be fined not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation. Each day that a
violation exists shall be deemed a separate violation. (Ord. 92-10, 4-6-1992)
Title 7
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 1
TRAFFIC DEFINITIONS
7-1-1: TERMS DEFINED:
For the purpose of this Title, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this Section:
ALLEY: A public way within a block, generally giving access to the rear of lots or buildings, and not used for general traffic circulation.
BICYCLE: Every device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, having two (2) tandem wheels either of which is more than
twenty inches (20") in diameter.
BUSINESS DISTRICT: The territory within the Village contiguous to and including a street or highway when, within any six hundred feet (600')
along such highway, there are buildings in use for business or industrial purposes, including, but not limited to, hotels, banks, office buildings,
railroad stations and public buildings which occupy at least three hundred feet (300') of frontage on one side or three hundred feet (300')
collectively on both sides of the street or highway.
CROSSWALK: That portion of the roadway included within the prolongation of the sidewalk lines at street intersections.
DRIVER: Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
EMERGENCY VEHICLE: Police vehicles, vehicles of the Fire Department, ambulances, vehicles carrying a State, County, or Municipal officer or
employee in response to an emergency call and emergency vehicles of a public service corporation on an emergency call.
EXPLOSIVE: Any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is commonly used or intended for the purpose of producing an explosion and
which contains any oxidizing and combustive units or other ingredients in such proportions, quantities or packing that on ignition by fire, by
friction, by concussion, by percussion or by detonation of any part of the compound or mixture may cause such a sudden generation of highly
heated gases that the resultant gaseous pressures are capable of producing destructible effects on contiguous objects or of destroying life or
limb.
FARM TRACTOR: Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily as a farm implement for drawing plows, mowing machines and other
implements of husbandry.
FLAMMABLE LIQUID: Any liquid which has a flash point of seventy degrees Fahrenheit (70F) or less, as determined by tableau or equivalent
closed cup test device.
IMPROVED HIGHWAY: A roadway of concrete, brick, asphalt, macadam or gravel.
INTERSECTION: The area embraced within the prolongation of the property lines of two (2) or more streets which join at an angle, whether or not
such streets cross.
LANED ROADWAY: A street, the roadway of which is divided into two (2) or more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic.
LOADING ZONE: The space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or
materials.
MERGING TRAFFIC: A maneuver executed by the drivers of vehicles on converging roadways to permit simultaneous or alternate entry into the
junction thereof, wherein the driver of each vehicle involved is required to adjust his vehicular speed and lateral position so as to avoid a collision
with any other vehicle.
METAL TIRES: Every tire, the surface of which in contact with the roadway, is wholly or partially of metal or other hard, nonresilient material.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead wires but
not operated upon rails.
MOTORCYCLE: Every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in contact
with the ground, but excluding a tractor.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 150/387
PARK: To stand a vehicle, whether occupied or not, for a period of time grater than is reasonably necessary for the actual loading or unloading of
persons.
PEDESTRIAN: Any person afoot.
PNEUMATIC TIRE: Every tire in which compressed air is designed to support the load.
PROPERTY LINE: The line marking the boundary between any street and the lots or property abutting thereon.
PUBLIC BUILDING: A building used by the Municipality, the County, any park district, school district, the State or the United States Government.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway.
ROAD TRACTOR: Every motor vehicle designed and used for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry any load thereon either
independently or any part of the weight of a vehicle or load so drawn.
SAFETY ZONE: That portion of a roadway reserved for the exclusive use of pedestrians, suitably marked or elevated.
SCHOOL BUS: Every motor vehicle of the second division operated by or for a public or governmental agency or by or for a private or religious
organization solely for the transportation of pupils in connection with school activities.
SCHOOL CROSSING SIGNAL: A permanently mounted, electrically operated signal device equipped with two-way, two (2) color (red and yellow)
signal heads, together with a diamond shaped, single-faced sign reading "School Crossing", by which at predetermined times and when actuated
by push button, traffic is directed to stop so as to permit school children to cross the street or highway safely.
SEMITRAILER: Every vehicle without motive power designed for carrying person or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so
constructed that some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curb line or roadway and the adjacent property line designated for pedestrian use.
SOLID TIRE: Every tire of rubber or other resilient material which does not depend upon compressed air for the support of the load.
STREET OR HIGHWAY: The entire width between property lines of each side or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the
use of the public, as a matter of right, for the purpose of vehicular traffic and each way set aside for public travel by vehicles.
TRAFFIC: Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other conveyances either singly or together while using any highway for the
purpose of travel.
TRAILER: Every vehicle without motive power designed for carrying passengers or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so
constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle.
TRUCK TRACTOR: Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other
than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
URBAN DISTRICT: The territory contiguous to and including any street which is built upon with structures devoted to business, industry or
dwelling houses situated at intervals of less than one hundred feet (100') for a distance of a quarter mile or more.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway except devices moving by
human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
YIELD RIGHT OF WAY: When required by an official sign, means the act of granting the privilege of the immediate use of the intersecting
roadway to traffic within the intersection and to vehicles approaching from the right or left; provided, that when the roadway is clear, the vehicle
may proceed into the intersection. (1987 Code)
Chapter 2
VEHICLE LICENSE
7-2-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
Every motor vehicle or motorcycle owned or operated by a resident of the village or by a business located within the village, shall be required to
pay each year to the village collector, a tax or license fee for the use of each motor vehicle or motorcycle used on any public street or highway
within the village. (Ord. 92-24, 8-17-1992)
7-2-1-1: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; ISSUANCE:
Every owner or operator of a motor vehicle or motorcycle subject to the tax or license fee under this chapter shall make application with the
village collector upon the appropriate form or forms furnished by the collector setting forth the name and address of the applicant and a
description of the motor vehicle or motorcycle and such further information as may reasonably be required. Upon the payment by the applicant of
the license fee herein provided, the village collector shall issue or cause to be issued a license authorizing the use of such motor vehicle or
motorcycle within the village until the expiration of such license. (Ord. 92-24, 8-17-1992)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 151/387
7-2-2: DISPLAY OF VEHICLE LICENSE STICKER:
Every owner or operator of a motor vehicle or motorcycle issued a vehicle license sticker shall prominently display such sticker in the lower right
hand corner of the windshield. Such stickers shall be numbered serially and shall bear the number and year for which the license is issued.
License stickers issued to dealers in motor vehicles or vehicles held for sale and used only for demonstrations may be transferred to any other
vehicle so held and used by the same dealer in the village; provided, that such dealers shall procure one license for each vehicle so held at any
one time during the year. (Ord. 90-13, 11-19-1990)
7-2-3: LICENSE FEES:
The annual license fees to be paid the village for motor vehicles, automobiles, trucks, tractors, semitrailer units, buses, motorcycles, motor
bicycles, recreational vehicles and boat trailers are as follows:
Category Fee
Passenger automobiles $25.00
Passenger automobiles owned by a person
65 years of age or order
10.00
Motorcycles or motor bicycles 10.00
Recreational vehicle (plate type) RV 25.00
Boat trailers 15.00
Trucks, tractors, semitrailer units or buses as follows:
Gross Weight In Pounds Including
Vehicle And Maximum Load
Class
Fee
8,000 or less B $ 25.00
8,001 to 12,000 D 40.00
12,001 to 16,000 F 55.00
16,001 to 24,000 H 65.00
24,001 to 28,000 J 70.00
28,001 to 32,000 K 80.00
32,001 to 36,000 L 85.00
36,001 to 40,000 N 95.00
40,001 to 45,000 P 105.00
45,001 to 50,000 Q 115.00
50,001 to 54,500 R 127.50
54,501 to 59,500 S 135.00
59,501 to 64,000 T 142.50
64,001 to 73,280 V 150.00
73,281 to 77,000 X 157.50
77,001 to 80,000 Z 165.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 152/387
Replacement stickers 5.00
(Ord. 2006-02, 1-17-2006)
7-2-4: PAYMENT AND USE OF FEES; TERM OF LICENSE:
Such license fee or tax shall be due and payable annually in advance on March 1 of each year and the license shall be for a one year period;
provided, that each owner or operator coming into possession of such motor vehicle or motorcycle between September 1 and the last day of
February shall pay one-half (1/2) of the annual fee established herein, and shall have thirty (30) days from date of possession to comply with the
provisions of this chapter.
All revenues derived from such license fees shall be utilized as provided by statute. (Ord. 2006-04, 2-22-2006)
7-2-5: PENALTY:
Every motorized vehicle that is registered, owned, leased, or operated by a resident or business of Broadview shall make timely application for
the vehicle sticker license.
If application is not timely made, after June 15 the applicable license fee shall be twice the amount contained in section 7-2-3 of this chapter;
provided however, that for an owner or operator first coming into possession of a motor vehicle, the doubling of the license fee shall not occur
until thirty (30) days after the date of possession. (Ord. 10-02, 1-4-2010)
7-2-6: VIOLATIONS SUBJECT TO PENALTIES:
The violations of this chapter are hereby further subject to the provisions of section 7-4-6 of this title. (Ord. 2006-04, 2-22-2006)
Chapter 3
GENERAL TRAFFIC PROVISIONS
7-3-1: STATE LAW PROVISIONS ADOPTED:
The following enumerated provisions of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes are adopted and by reference made a part of this code with the same force
and effect as though set forth herein verbatim; and the term "this act" whenever used in any such section shall mean this title, whenever
necessary to effectuate the meaning of this section. Any violation of this section may be cited by referring to the state statute section as a
subsection of this section:
Section Or Chapter Number
Chapter 1 Title and definitions
Chapter 11 Rules of the road
Chapter 12 Equipment of vehicles
(1987 Code)
7-3-2: SCHOOL CROSSING SIGNALS:
A. Locations: School crossing signals shall be erected at the following locations and if such locations are under the jurisdiction of the state
department of public works and buildings, erection of such signals shall be subject to the approval of that department:
At the intersection of Cermak Road and 12th Avenue.
At the intersection of 17th Avenue and 14th Street.
At the intersection of 17th Avenue and Harvard Street.
B. Obedience To Signals: Whenever the red lens of a school crossing signal is illuminated, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the
nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked or if none, then before entering the intersection, and pedestrians within or
entering the crosswalk at either edge of the roadway shall have the right of way over vehicles so stopped. Drivers of vehicles having so
yielded the right of way to pedestrians entering or within the nearest crosswalk at an intersection may proceed but shall also yield the right of
way to pedestrians within any other crosswalk at the intersection. If, in the event a school crossing signal is erected and maintained at a place
other than an intersection, these provisions of this subsection shall also be applicable except as to provisions which by their nature can have
no application. (1987 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 153/387
7-3-3: RECKLESS, CARELESS DRIVING:
A. Reckless Driving: It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle in the village in a reckless or wanton manner, or carelessly so as to endanger life
or property.
B. Driving In Careless Manner: No person shall drive any motor vehicle in a careless manner or without having the vehicle under proper control or
without due regard for the safety and convenience of other vehicles.
C. Excessive Speed: Notwithstanding any speed limit which may be allowed, no person shall drive any motor vehicle at a speed which is greater
than reasonable or prudent for the conditions of, and the traffic upon, the street at the time.
D. Following Too Closely: The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer more closely than is reasonable
and prudent, having due regard to the speed of both vehicles and the traffic upon, and conditions of, the highway at the time.
E. Drag Racing: No person shall engage in a race between two (2) or more motor vehicles on the streets of the village. For the purposes of this
subsection, the term "race" shall include so called "drag racing", quick starts at the change of traffic lights and such other meanings as are
customarily given to it. (1987 Code)
7-3-4: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
A. Clinging To Vehicles: It shall be unlawful for any person on any street riding a bicycle, motorcycle, or any tow vehicle to cling to or to attach
himself or his vehicle to any moving motor vehicle or wagon.
B. Riding On Running Board: It shall be unlawful for any person to ride upon the fenders, running board or outside step of any vehicle.
C. Toy Vehicles: It shall be unlawful for any person upon skates, a coaster, sled, skateboard or other toy vehicle, to go upon any roadway other
than a crosswalk. (1987 Code)
7-3-5: MOTORIZED SCOOTERS:
A. Definitions: For the purpose of this section, a "motor driven scooter" is defined as any electric or gas driven wheeled scooter, motor driven
cycle or other similar motor driven vehicle for which the state of Illinois does not issue a title document, and does not issue license plates or
registration documents.
B. Operation Of Motor Driven Scooters Restricted: No person shall operate a motor driven scooter upon any public street, sidewalk, parking lot,
bike path, park or on any other public property within the village of Broadview.
C. Exemptions: The following shall be exempt from the prohibitions contained in this section:
1. Any police vehicle, fire vehicle, municipal vehicle, special district vehicle, county vehicle or forest preserve district vehicle operated by an
employee in the course of his or her duties.
2. Motorized wheelchairs. For purposes of this section, a "motorized wheelchair" means any motorized vehicle designed for and used by a
person with disabilities.
3. Electronic personal assistive mobility devices, as defined in section 5/1-117.7 of the Illinois vehicle code1.
D. Violations: Any person eighteen (18) years of age or older who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine of not less
than seventy five dollars ($75.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. An offense committed by a minor
under the direct control or with the consent of a parent or guardian may subject the parent or guardian to the penalties provided in this
subsection. (Ord. 2004-23, 11-1-2004)
Chapter 4
PARKING
7-4-1: NO PARKING PLACES1:
At any time it shall be unlawful to permit any vehicle to stand in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other
traffic or in compliance with the directions of a policeman or traffic control device:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 154/387
A. In any intersection.
B. In a crosswalk.
C. Upon any bridge or viaduct, or in any subway or tunnel or the approach thereto.
D. Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty feet (30') of a point of the curb immediately opposite the end of a safety zone.
E. Within thirty feet (30') of a traffic signal, beacon or sign on the approaching side.
F. Within twenty feet (20') of any intersection or crosswalk.
G. At any place where the standing of a vehicle will reduce the usable width of the roadway for moving traffic to less than eighteen feet (18').
H. Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant.
I. At any place where the vehicle would block the use of a driveway.
J. Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad grade crossing.
K. Within twenty feet (20') of a driveway entrance to any fire department station; and on the side of the street opposite the entrance to any such
station, within seventy five feet (75') of such entrance when properly signposted.
L. On any sidewalk or parkway.
M. At any place where official signs prohibit parking. (Ord. 2006-04, 2-22-2006)
7-4-2: GENERAL PARKING RESTRICTIONS:
A. Parking At Curbs, Angle Parking: No vehicle shall be parked with the left side of such vehicle next to the curb, except on one-way streets, and
it shall be unlawful to stand or park any vehicle in a street other than parallel with the curb and with the two (2) right wheels of the vehicle
within twelve inches (12") of the regularly established curb line, except that upon those streets that have been marked for angle parking,
vehicles shall be parked at the angle to the curb indicated by such marks.
B. Peddling: It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle upon any street from which vehicle merchandise is sold, however, said vehicles may stand or
park for such length of time as it is necessary to complete such sale or sales, thereafter such vehicles must move.
Vehicles used for sale of merchandise are hereby prohibited on the village streets from the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. to nine o'clock
(9:00) A.M. and said vehicles are hereby prohibited from ringing bells or making other noise to attract customers.
C. Sale Of Vehicles: It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on the street for the purpose of displaying it for sale. (1987 Code)
D. Trailers And Truck Tractors:
1. No person shall park any vehicle on any street in the village to which is attached a trailer for hauling except as may be allowed for loading
and unloading, which loading and unloading shall be done as expeditiously as possible.
2. No person shall leave any trailer under his control unattended. Any unattended trailer may be impounded as provided in this title.
3. No truck tractor may be parked on any village street or alley at any time. For purposes of this section, "truck tractor" is defined as every
motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the
weight of the vehicle and load so drawn. (Ord. 2001-14, 5-21-2001)
E. Alleys: It shall be unlawful to let any motor vehicle stand or park in any alley in the village at any time.
F. Cab And Bus Stands: No vehicle other than a licensed taxicab2 shall be parked in any area designated by ordinance as a cab stand; and no
vehicle other than a bus shall be parked in a place so designated as a bus loading zone.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 155/387
G. Double Parking Trucks: No person shall stop, stand or park any truck, tractor, semitrailer, trailer or bus on the roadway side of any vehicle
stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street.
H. All Night Parking:
1. All Night Parking Prohibited; Exceptions: No person shall park any vehicle on any street for a period of time longer than thirty (30) minutes
between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. of any day, except physicians on emergency calls. The chief of
police or any other person authorized by the chief of police may grant special all night parking permission to those persons requesting it,
and may also designate where those persons receiving the permission shall park their vehicle.
2. All Night Parking In Municipal Parking Lots: No person shall park any vehicle in any municipal parking lot for a period of time longer than
thirty (30) minutes between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. of any day. The chief of police or any person
authorized by said chief may grant special all night parking permission to those persons requesting it, and may also require those persons
receiving this parking permission to register their vehicles on forms provided by the police department.
I. Parking In Municipal Parking Lots After Snowfall: No person shall park any vehicle or allow any vehicle to remain parked in any municipal
parking lot after a snowfall of three inches (3") or more. Any police officer is hereby authorized to remove or cause to be removed by a towing
service any vehicle parked in any municipal parking lot in violation of this subsection. The owner or operator of such removed vehicle will be
responsible for all towing and storage costs.
J. In Residential Front Yards: No person shall let stand or park any vehicle on that portion of the front yard which lies between the building used
for residential purposes or for apartment purposes, less than three (3) units, and the front lot line, except on side driveways which are not
wider than twelve feet (12').
K. Parking Restricted In Specified Places For The Handicapped: It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in an area restricted by sign to parking for
handicapped persons only unless the vehicle is equipped with a duly authorized handicapped license plate or identification card or sticker.
The board of trustees shall designate certain parking areas within municipal parking lots as restricted to handicapped persons only from time
to time upon recommendation of the safety committee. (1987 Code)
7-4-2-1: SNOW REMOVAL:
A. It is hereby declared and proclaimed that it is necessary to the public health, safety and welfare that the streets of the village be cleared of
snow, and if the clearing of snow is impeded and delayed by vehicles parked on the streets, such impediment is detrimental to the health,
safety and welfare of the public. Accordingly, the following parking regulations regarding snow removal shall be in effect:
1. Whenever there has been a snow event in excess of two inches (2"), in order not to delay the cleaning of streets, all vehicles parked upon
the streets of the village shall be removed by the owners in a timely manner. Vehicles parked on a village street after a snow event in
excess of two inches (2") may be issued a parking citation pursuant to this section.
2. If such vehicles are not removed from the street after a snow event in excess of two inches (2"), and after ticketing, then said vehicles shall
be towed pursuant to subsection 6-8-4C of this code.
3. The village shall post signs as necessary to provide notification of the provisions of this section. (Ord. 11-06, 3-7-2011)
7-4-3: TIME LIMIT PARKING3:
Except on Sundays and holidays, it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle, in any area designated as a limited parking area and so marked, for a
longer consecutive period of time than that designated, between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. (1987 Code)
7-4-4: LOADING ZONES:
It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to stand a passenger vehicle or any freight carrying vehicle for a period of time longer than is
necessary for the loading or unloading of passengers or for the loading, unloading or delivery of materials, not to exceed three (3) minutes, in any
place designated by the board of trustees as a loading zone and marked as such, or in any of the following designated places:
A. Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except momentarily to pick up or discharge passengers:
1. In front of a public or private driveway.
2. Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant.
3. Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk at an intersection.
4. Within thirty feet (30') upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop sign, yield sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway.
5. Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within
seventy five feet (75') of such entrance (when properly signposted).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 156/387
6. At any place where official signs prohibit standing.
7. In any alley.
B. Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise
or passengers:
1. Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing.
2. At any place where official signs prohibit parking.
3. In any alley. (1987 Code)
7-4-5: POSTING SIGNS:
The chief of police or any other person authorized by the president or board of trustees shall cause signs to be posted in all areas where parking
is limited or prohibited, indicating such limitations or prohibitions. (1987 Code)
7-4-6: VIOLATIONS; NOTICE; ADJUDICATION; DETERMINATIONS:
A. Purpose: The stated purpose of this section is to provide a fair and efficient enforcement of village of Broadview vehicular standing, parking,
and condition of vehicle regulation violation(s), through an administrative adjudication of violation(s) of village ordinances regulating the
standing, parking, and condition of vehicles within the geographic boundaries of the village and a schedule of uniform fines and penalties and
authority and procedures for collection of unpaid fines and penalties.
1. Compliance Violation: For purposes of this section "compliance violation" means a violation of a village regulation governing the condition or
use of equipment on a vehicle or governing the display of a village vehicle license or village sticker.
2. Administrative Composition: The system of administrative adjudication of vehicular standing, parking, and compliance, regulation
violation(s) shall provide for a traffic compliance administrator, as selected by the village president, and hearing officer with the power,
authority and limitations as are hereinafter set forth.
B. Traffic Compliance Administrator: The traffic compliance administrator, and/or their designee, shall be selected by the village president and
empowered, authorized and directed to:
1. Operate and manage the system of administrative adjudication of vehicular standing, parking, and compliance regulation violation(s).
2. Adopt, distribute and process standing, parking, and compliance violation notices and other notices as may be required under this section
or as may be reasonably required to carry out the purpose of this section.
3. Collect monies paid as fines and/or penalties assessed after a final determination of vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation
violation(s) liability.
4. Certify copies of final determination(s) of standing, parking, and compliance regulation violation(s) liability and factual report(s) verifying that
the final determination of standing, parking, and compliance regulation violation(s) liability was issued in accordance with this section and
625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-208.3.
5. Certify reports to the secretary of state concerning initiation of suspension of driving privileges in accordance with the provisions of this
section, hereinafter set forth, and those of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-306.5, hereinafter adopted.
6. Review final determination(s) of vehicular standing, parking, and compliance regulation violation(s) liability, validity of notices of impending
impoundment or validity of notice of impending driver's license suspension, in an administrative review capacity in accordance with the
provisions of this section, hereinafter set forth.
7. Promulgate rules and regulations reasonably required to operate and maintain the administrative adjudication system hereby created.
8. Collect unpaid fines and penalties by filing complaints in the circuit court or selecting or appointing an individual or agency to act on behalf
of the village in filing complaints seeking judgments for unpaid fines or penalties and pursuit of all postjudgment remedies available by
current law.
C. Hearing Officer: The hearing officer shall be empowered and is hereby authorized and directed to:
1. Preside over the administrative hearings, established herein, as the adjudicator.
2. Administer oaths.
3. Issue subpoenas to secure the attendance of witnesses and production of relevant papers or documentation.
4. Assess fines, penalties or community service for the violation of vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) as are
established herein.
5. Make final determination of:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 157/387
a. Vehicular standing, parking and compliance regulation violation(s) liability.
b. Validity of notice of impending impoundment.
c. Validity of notice of impending driver's license suspension in accordance with the provisions of this section, hereinafter set forth.
6. Provide for the accurate recording of the administrative adjudication hearing(s). (Ord. 09-66, 12-21-2009)
7-4-7: ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION:
A. Procedure: The system of administrative adjudication of vehicular standing, parking, and compliance regulation violation(s) shall be in
accordance with the following procedures and final determination(s) of vehicular standing, parking, and compliance regulation violation(s)
liability, validity of notice of impending impoundment, validity of notice of impending driver's license suspension. The immobilization and
impoundment of a vehicle and collections shall be made only in accordance with the provisions set forth herein.
B. Violation Notice: Vehicular standing, parking, and compliance regulation violation(s) notice(s) ("violation notice[s]") shall be issued by the
person(s) authorized herein and shall contain information and shall be served, certified by the authorized person and have evidentiary
admissibility as is hereinafter set forth.
C. Authorization: All full time, part time, auxiliary police and community service officers, as well as other specifically appointed individuals, shall
have the authority to issue violation(s) notices.
D. Detection Of Violations: Any individual authorized hereby to issue violation notices and who detects a violation of any section of any applicable
village ordinance, shall issue a notice of violation thereof and shall make service thereof as is hereinafter set forth.
E. Form Of Violation Notice: The vehicular standing, parking, and compliance regulation "violation notice" shall contain, but shall not be limited to,
the following information:
1. The date, time and place of the violation (date of issuance).
2. The particular vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violated.
3. Vehicle make and state registration number.
4. The fine and any penalty which may be assessed for late payment for having failed to appear at scheduled hearings.
5. The signature and identification number of the person issuing the notice.
6. A section entitled "administrative hearing" which shall clearly set forth that the registered owner or lessee shall appear at the administrative
hearing to contest the validity of the violation notice on the date and at the time and place as specified in the violation notice if the fine on
the violation notice is not paid at least five (5) days prior to the date of the scheduled administrative hearing.
7. The date, time and place of an administrative hearing at which the violation may be contested on its merits.
8. A section clearly indicating that payment of the indicated fine up to five (5) days prior to the date of the scheduled initial administrative
hearing shall operate as a final disposition of the violation and no late fee shall be imposed and an appearance at the administrative hearing
is not required.
9. That payment of the indicated fine and any late payment penalty instituted after the initial administrative hearing shall operate as a final
disposition of the violation.
10. A section setting forth procedures for nonresidents to contest violations of this chapter.
F. Service Of Violation Notice: Service of the violation(s) notice(s) shall be made by the person issuing such notice by:
1. Affixing the original or a facsimile of the notice to an unlawfully standing or parked vehicle, or
2. Handing the notice to the operator of the vehicle, if he or she is present.
G. Certification Of Violation Notice: The correctness of facts contained in the vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s)
notice(s) shall be certified by the person issuing said notice by:
1. Signature: Signing his/her name to the notice(s) at the time of service, or
2. Computer Device: In the case of a notice produced by a computer device, by signing a single certificate, to be kept by the traffic compliance
administrator, attesting to the correctness of all notices produced by the device while under his/her control.
3. Retention: The original or a facsimile of the violation(s) notice(s) shall be retained by the village and kept as a record in the ordinary course
of business.
4. Prima Facie Evidence: Any violation(s) notice(s) issued, signed and served in accordance herewith, or a copy of the notice, or a copy of the
computer generated record shall be prima facie correct and shall be prima facie evidence of the correctness of the facts shown on the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 158/387
notice.
5. Admissibility: The violation(s) notice(s), a copy(ies) or a computer generated record, shall be admissible in any subsequent administrative or
legal proceeding. (Ord. 09-66, 12-21-2009)
7-4-8: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS:
A. Process: An administrative hearing to adjudicate the alleged standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) on its merits as allowed by
this chapter and the code hearing department procedures in title 1, chapter 13 of this code:
1. Shall be required of the registered owner or operator of the "cited vehicle", pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-208.3 or the
lessee of the "cited vehicle", pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1306, incorporated herein by reference.
2. Shall be at the date, time and place as is set forth in the violation notice issued and served, or such additional notices issued in accordance
with this chapter. Violators shall be required to appear at an administrative hearing and failure to appear at the scheduled hearing date will
result in a "final determination of liability" as hereinafter set forth.
3. Shall be recorded.
4. Shall culminate in a determination of liability or nonliability made by the hearing officer, who shall consider testimony and other evidence
without the application of the formal or technical rules of evidence. The hearing officer shall, upon a determination of liability, assess fines
and penalties in accordance with this chapter.
5. Persons appearing to contest the alleged standing, parking, or compliance violation on its merits may be represented by counsel at their
own expense.
B. Final Determination: The final determination of any matter which may be decided by the hearing officer may be reviewed as is hereinafter set
forth. (Ord. 09-66, 12-21-2009)
7-4-9: FAILURE TO APPEAR AT HEARING:
A. Additional Notice: Upon failure of the registered owner or lessee of the "cited vehicle" to appear at the administrative hearing indicated in the
vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) notice(s) the traffic compliance administrator shall send or cause to be sent
an additional notice which:
1. Shall be sent to the registered owner or lessee of the "cited vehicle" at the address as is recorded with the secretary of state.
2. Shall be sent to the lessee of the "cited vehicle" at the address last known to the lessor of the "cited vehicle" at the time of the lease.
3. Shall be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid.
B. Service Of Notice: Service of the additional notice sent in accordance herewith shall be complete as of the date of deposit in the United States
mail.
C. Form Of Additional Notice: Upon the failure of the registered owner or lessee of the "cited vehicle" to appear at the hearing set forth in the
vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s), additional notice shall be mailed. The additional notice sent in accordance
herewith shall be in the following sequence and contain, but not be limited to, the following information:
1. Date and location of violation cited in the vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) notice(s).
2. Particular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violated.
3. Vehicle make and state registration number.
4. Fine and any penalty that may be assessed for late payment.
5. Notice to the registered owner or lessee of their current payment status, other than paid in full.
6. Date, time and place of the administrative hearing at which the alleged violation may be contested on its merits.
7. Statement that failure to either pay the fine and any applicable penalty or failure to appear at the hearing on its merits on the date and at the
time and place specified will result in a final determination of vehicle standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) liability for the
"cited" violation in the amount of the fine and penalty indicated.
8. Statement that upon the occurrence of a final determination of vehicular standing, parking, or compliance violation(s) liability for the failure,
and the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, available administrative or judicial procedures for review, any unpaid fine or penalty will
constitute a debt due and owing the village. (Ord. 09-66, 12-21-2009)
7-4-10: DETERMINATION OF LIABILITY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 159/387
A. Final Notice Of Determination: A notice of final determination of vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) liability shall
be served upon the violator directly at the time of the hearing or mailed via first class mail following an appearance by the violator and a
determination of liability. A notice of final determination of vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) liability shall be
sent via first class mail in the event that the violator fails to appear at the initial or second administrative hearing date and upon the conclusion
of any administrative and/or judicial review, as is hereinafter set forth. The notice shall contain, but not be limited to, the following information
and warnings:
1. A statement that the unpaid fine and any penalty assessed is a debt due and owing the village.
2. A warning that failure to pay the fine and any penalty due and owing the village within the time specified may result in the village filing a
complaint in the circuit court to have the unpaid fine or penalty rendered a judgment in accordance with 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-
208.3(f), incorporated herein by reference.
3. A warning that the vehicle owned by the person and located within the village may be impounded for failure to pay fines or penalties for
three (3) or more vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violations.
4. A warning that the person's driver's license may be suspended for failure to pay fines or penalties for ten (10) or more vehicular standing or
parking violations under 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-306.5, incorporated herein by reference.
5. The notice shall also state that the person may obtain a photostatic copy of an original ticket imposing a fine or penalty by sending a selfaddressed,
stamped envelope to the municipality along with a request for a photostatic copy.
B. Final Determination Of Liability: A final determination of vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) liability shall:
1. Occur thirty five (35) days following the failure to pay the total assessed fine or penalty after the hearing officer's final determination of
vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) liability and the exhaustion of or the failure to exhaust any administrative
review procedures hereinafter set forth, or
2. Where a person fails to appear at an administrative hearing provided to contest the alleged violation(s) on the date and at the time and
place specified in a prior served or mailed notice, the hearing officer's determination of vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation
violation(s) liability shall become final;
3. Upon denial of a timely petition to set aside that determination, or
4. Upon the expiration of the period for filing a petition to set aside without a filing having been made. (Ord. 09-66, 12-21-2009)
7-4-11: PETITION TO SET ASIDE:
A. Process For Setting Aside A Determination: A petition to set aside a determination of vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation
violation(s) liability may be filed by a person owing an unpaid fine or penalty in the manner and subject to the restrictions and grounds
hereinafter set forth:
1. A written petition to vacate a determination of liability must be filed in the village police department within, but not later than, twenty one (21)
days from the date the determination of liability is made.
2. The hearing officer or traffic compliance administrator shall act upon the petition(s) timely filed and render a decision thereon within thirty
(30) days of the date filed.
3. The grounds for setting aside a determination of liability shall be limited to the following:
a. The person against whom the determination of liability is made was not the owner or lessee of the "cited vehicle" on the date the
vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) notice(s) was issued.
b. The person having paid the fine or penalty prior to the determination of liability for the violation(s) in question.
c. Excusable failure to appear at or request a new date for a hearing.
B. Process After Setting Aside A Determination: Should the determination of liability be set aside, the traffic compliance administrator shall:
1. Notify the registered owner, or lessee, as the case may be, that the determination of liability has been set aside.
2. Notify the registered owner, or lessee, as the case may be, of a date, time and place for a hearing on the merits of the violation for which
determination of liability has been set aside.
3. Notice of setting aside of the determination of liability and the notice of the hearing date shall be by first class mail, postage prepaid to the
address set forth on the petition to set aside the determination of liability.
4. Service of the notice shall be complete on the date the notice(s) is deposited in the United States mail. (Ord. 09-66, 12-21-2009)
7-4-12: NONRESIDENT PROCEDURES:
A. Procedures: Nonresidents of the village who have been served vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) notice(s), in
accordance with this chapter, shall appear at the initially scheduled administrative hearing to contest the alleged violation on its merits, as
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 160/387
would a resident, or shall contest the validity without personally appearing at an administrative hearing by:
1. Filing a notarized statement of facts specifying the grounds for challenging the violation notice which must be filed with the traffic
compliance administrator postmarked within ten (10) days of the violation notice issuance. The request shall be deemed filed upon receipt
by the traffic compliance administrator.
2. The hearing officer shall make an adjudication based upon the facts set forth in the notarized statement of facts filed by the nonresident as
is contained in the violation notice.
3. Notice of the determination of the hearing officer shall be served upon the nonresident by first class mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the
nonresident at the address set forth in the statement of facts submitted.
4. Service of the notice shall be complete on the date the notice is placed in the United States mail.
B. Applicability Of Other Provisions To Nonresidents: All other provisions of this chapter shall apply equally to nonresidents of this village. (Ord.
09-66, 12-21-2009)
7-4-13: FINES AND PENALTIES:
A. Schedule Of Fines And Penalties: The fines and penalties which shall be imposed for the violation of vehicular standing, parking, or
compliance regulation violation(s) shall be as follows:
FINE PAYMENT SCHEDULE
Step
1.
Upon service of a "violation notice" issued and if paid prior to the end of the initial hearing, the fine amount will be:
1. General standing, parking or compliance violations, thirty dollars ($30.00);
2. Handicapped parking violations, two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
Step
2.
Having failed to pay the fine amount specified in step 1, the fine amount, if paid after the initial hearing and prior to the end of the
second hearing will be:
1. General standing, parking or compliance violations, sixty dollars ($60.00);
2. Handicapped parking violations, three hundred dollars ($300.00).
Step
3.
Having failed to pay the fine amount specified in step 2 and upon the finding of liability for the violation, after failure to appear at
the second hearing, the fine amount will be:
1. General standing, parking or compliance violations, one hundred dollars ($100.00);
2. Handicapped parking violations, three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00).
The fines and penalties herein set forth shall be uniformly applied for each violation of this chapter.
B. Immobilization Fee: If a motor vehicle has been immobilized pursuant to this chapter, the owner of record of the motor vehicle is responsible for
the payment of an immobilization fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) ("immobilization fee") in addition to the other fines, fees and expenses set forth in
this chapter.
C. Impound/Towing Fee: If a motor vehicle has been subject to towing and impoundment under this chapter the owner of record of said motor
vehicle shall be liable to the village for an impoundment fee in an amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) ("impoundment fee") plus the payment of the
actual costs charged to the village by the towing company for towing fees, and the payment of a storage fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) for
each day of storage or the actual cost charged to the village if not stored by the village (whichever fee is greater). (Ord. 09-66, 12-21-2009)
7-4-14: DRIVER'S LICENSE SUSPENSION:
A. Notice Of Impending Suspension: A notice of impending suspension of a person's driver's license shall be sent to any person determined to be
liable for the payment of any fine or penalty that remains due and owing on ten (10) or more vehicular standing or parking, or vehicle
compliance regulation violation(s):
1. The notice shall state that the failure to pay the fine or penalty owing within forty five (45) days of the date of the notice will result in the
village notifying the secretary of state that the person is eligible for initiation of suspension proceedings under 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/6-306.5 incorporated herein by reference.
2. The notice of impending driver's license suspension shall be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the address recorded with the
secretary of state, or if any notice to that address is returned as undeliverable, to the last known address recorded in a United States post
office approved database.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 161/387
B. Certified Report To The Secretary Of State: After notice and upon a violator's failure to pay fines and penalties deemed due and owing the
village after the exhaustion of administrative procedures set forth herein for ten (10) or more vehicular parking regulation violations, the traffic
compliance administrator shall make a certified report to the secretary of state stating that the owner of a registered vehicle has failed to pay
any fine or penalty due and owing the village as a result of ten (10) or more violations of the village's vehicular standing or parking regulations
and thereby cause the suspension of that person's driver's license.
C. Notification To Secretary Of State After Payment Of Fines Or Proof Of Compliance: After the fines and penalties due and owing the village are
paid or upon determination that the inclusion of the person's name on the certified report was in error, at such time, the traffic compliance
administrator shall submit to the secretary of state a notification which shall result in the halting of a driver's license suspension proceeding.
The person named therein shall receive a certified copy of such notification upon request and at no charge.
D. Challenging Certified Report: Persons may challenge the accuracy of the certified report by completing a form provided by the village. The
form shall specify the grounds on which such challenge is based. Grounds for challenge shall be limited to the following:
1. The person was neither the owner nor the lessee of a vehicle or vehicles (so receiving 10 or more violation notices) on the date or dates
such notices were issued; or
2. The person has paid the fine and/or penalty for the ten (10) or more violations indicated on the certified report.
E. Determination After Challenge: The traffic compliance administrator shall render a determination within thirty (30) business days of receipt of
the objection form and shall notify the objector of the determination. (Ord. 09-66, 12-21-2009)
7-4-15: IMMOBILIZATION, IMPOUNDMENT AND TOWING:
A. Procedure For A Registered Owner Having Three Or More Unpaid Vehicular Violations: Any motor vehicle whose registered owner has been
determined to be liable for three (3) or more vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s), for which the fines or penalties
assessed remain unpaid, may be immobilized or towed and impounded if:
1. The traffic compliance administrator has determined that a person has been determined to be liable for three (3) or more vehicular standing,
parking, or compliance regulation violation(s), the fines or penalties for which remain unpaid.
2. The person determined to be liable for three (3) or more violations of this code is the registered owner of a motor vehicle.
3. A pretowing notice has been sent to the registered owner of the motor vehicle which contains, but shall not be limited to, the following:
a. That a final determination has been made on three (3) or more vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s), the fines
and penalties for which remain unpaid.
b. A listing of the violation(s) for which the person has been determined to be liable, which shall include for each violation:
(1) The vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation notice number.
(2) Date of issuance.
(3) Total amount of fine(s) and penalty(ies) assessed.
c. That the motor vehicle(s) owned by the person and located within the village is subject to immobilization and/or towing and impoundment
if the fines and penalties are not paid within fourteen (14) days of the date of the notice.
d. That the registered owner may contest the validity of the notice by fully completing and signing the request for hearing portion of one
notice and by filing the request for hearing with the traffic compliance administrator within, but not later than fourteen (14) days of the date
of the notice.
e. The request for hearing shall be deemed filed upon receipt by the traffic compliance administrator.
f. That if the motor vehicle has been immobilized pursuant to this chapter, the owner of record of the motor vehicle is responsible for the
payment of an immobilization fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) ("immobilization fee") in addition to the other fines, fees and expenses set forth in
this chapter. If the motor vehicle owner fails to pay the immobilization fee and fails to act within the time parameters set forth herein, the
motor vehicle will be towed and impounded pursuant to this chapter.
4. The motor vehicle(s) of the registered owner to whom notice is sent has failed to make payment of the fines or penalties as specified in the
notice and no timely request for hearing has been filed with the traffic compliance administrator to contest the validity of the notice.
B. Request For Hearing To Contest Validity Of Pretowing Notice:
1. Upon the receipt of the request for hearing to contest the validity of the pretowing notice of impending immobilization or towing and
impoundment, the traffic compliance administrator shall schedule an administrative hearing to contest the validity of said notice, by
disproving liability for the unpaid final determinations of parking, standing, or compliance violation liability listed on the notice, on the next
available hearing date, but in no case shall the hearing be scheduled later than sixty (60) days after the request for hearing is filed.
a. The traffic compliance administrator shall serve notice of the hearing date upon the registered owner.
b. Notice shall be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid to the address as is set forth on the request for hearing.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 162/387
c. Service of the notice shall be complete on the date it is placed in the United States mail.
2. The registered owner of a vehicle(s) immobilized or towed and impounded under this chapter, shall have the right to a prompt administrative
hearing without the requirement of payment of outstanding fines and penalties for which final determination has been made.
C. Immobilization And Towing: If a motor vehicle is determined to be eligible for immobilization and is subsequently immobilized pursuant to this
chapter, a notice shall be placed on the vehicle, in a conspicuous manner, warning that such vehicle has been immobilized and that any
attempt to move the vehicle may result in damage to the vehicle. The notice shall state how to obtain information regarding release of the
immobilization device and the vehicle. The notice shall also state that payment of all fines owed; or the posting of a bond with acceptable
security in an amount of all fines and fees owed to the village; the payment of the immobilization fee; and the request for a court hearing on
the same will result in the release of the vehicle.
If forty eight (48) hours after the immobilization, the owner has not sought release of the vehicle, the vehicle may be towed to a specified
location for impoundment. (Ord. 09-66, 12-21-2009)
7-4-16: POSTTOWING NOTICE:
The traffic compliance administrator shall serve a posttowing notice upon the registered owner of a vehicle immobilized or towed and impounded
under this chapter which notice shall contain, but not be limited to, the following information:
A. Date of immobilization or towing and date of impoundment.
B. Location of vehicle.
C. That the vehicle was immobilized under this chapter for nonpayment of fines or penalties assessed for the violation of three (3) or more
violations of vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation(s) for which the registered owner has been determined liable and notified of
impending immobilization or towing and impoundment.
D. Date of pretowing notice of impending immobilization or towing and impoundment.
E. That the registered owner may contest the validity of the immobilization or towing and impoundment by completing and signing the request for
hearing portion of the notice and filing the request for hearing with the traffic compliance administrator within, but not later than, fourteen (14)
days of the date of the notice which shall be deemed filed upon receipt by the traffic compliance administrator.
F. That if the vehicle is not claimed and released pursuant to this section, within thirty (30) days after the date of the posttowing notice, then the
vehicle shall be determined to be abandoned and shall be sold at public sale or disposed of pursuant to section 6-8-7 of this code.
G. That if the motor vehicle has been immobilized, towed and impounded pursuant to this chapter, the owner of record of the motor vehicle is
responsible for the payment of the immobilization fee of fifty dollars ($50.00), the payment of the impoundment fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) and
the payment of the actual costs charged to the village by the towing company for towing fees, and the payment of a storage fee of twenty
dollars ($20.00) for each day of storage or the actual cost charged to the village if not stored by the village (whichever fee is greater) in
addition to the fines and penalties owed to the village as it relates to the motor vehicle or otherwise owed to the village by the motor vehicle
owner.
H. That in order for the village to release the motor vehicle to the owner of record, the owner of record must pay fines, penalties, fees and charges
as defined in this chapter or successfully contest the towing and impoundment as described in section 7-4-17 of this chapter and obtain an
order from the hearing officer to that effect.
I. That prior to releasing the motor vehicle to the lawful owner or person entitled to possess the motor vehicle such person must possess a valid
operator's license, proof of ownership or registration, and proof of liability insurance. However, if the vehicle is being towed from the location of
impoundment, only proof of ownership must be provided. (Ord. 09-66, 12-21-2009)
7-4-17: CONTEST VALIDITY OF IMMOBILIZATION OR TOWING AND IMPOUNDMENT:
A. Hearing: Upon the receipt of the request for hearing to contest the validity of the immobilization or towing and impoundment, the traffic
compliance administrator shall schedule an administrative hearing to contest the validity of the immobilization or towing and impoundment on
the next available hearing date or if sooner scheduled by the traffic compliance administrator for good cause shown, but in no case shall the
hearing be scheduled later than sixty (60) days after the request for hearing is filed.
1. The traffic compliance administrator shall serve notice of the hearing date upon the registered owner.
2. Notice shall be sent by certified or first class mail, postage prepaid to the address as is set forth on the request for hearing.
3. Service of the notice shall be complete on the date it is placed in the United States mail.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 163/387
B. Vehicle Ownership, Prima Facie Proof: The fact that an automobile which is in violation of this code is registered in the name of a person shall
be considered prima facie proof that such person was in control of the automobile at the time of such parking.
C. Final Administrative Decision: An order entered after the hearing to contest the validity of the immobilization or towing and impoundment is a
final administrative decision within the meaning of 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-101 et seq., incorporated herein by reference.
D. Release Of Vehicle: A vehicle impounded pursuant to this chapter shall be released to the registered owner thereof, or his, her or its agent,
upon payment of the fines and penalties for the underlying violations due and owing the village as specified in the posttowing notice as
described in section 7-4-16 of this chapter and the payment of towing charges and accrued daily storage charges, immobilization fees and
impoundment fees as more fully described in section 7-4-13 of this chapter or upon order of the hearing officer following the hearing
contesting the validity of the impoundment.
E. Judicial Review: Judicial review of final determinations of vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) and final
administrative decisions issued after hearing(s) regarding vehicle immobilization or towing and impoundment made under this section shall be
subject to the provisions of the administrative review law as is set forth in 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-101 et seq., incorporated herein
by reference.
F. Debt To Village: Any fine, penalty or part of any fine or any penalty assessed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and remaining
unpaid after the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust administrative remedies created under this section and the conclusion of any judicial
review procedures shall be a debt due and owing the village and, as such, may be collected in accordance with the applicable law. Payment in
full of any fine or penalty resulting from a standing, parking, or compliance violation shall constitute a final disposition of that violation.
G. Judgment: The traffic compliance administrator shall, following the expiration of the period within which administrative or judicial review may be
sought for a final determination of violation, take all necessary action(s), execute all required documents and collect monies from the person(s)
who has been assessed fines or penalties which remain unpaid and have become a debt due and owing the village in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-208.3 plus costs by:
1. Filing a complaint in the circuit court for the entry of a judgment against the person for whom a final determination of standing, parking, or
compliance regulation violation(s) liability has been made.
2. The complaint filed by the traffic compliance administrator or individual or agency on behalf of the village seeking entry of a judgment
against the registered owner of the motor vehicle for unpaid fines and/or penalties pursuant to a final determination of standing, parking, or
compliance regulation violation(s) shall have appended:
a. A certified copy of the final determination of the standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s).
b. A certification that recites facts sufficient to show that the final determination of standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s)
was issued in accordance with this section and 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-208.3.
H. Lienholders: Whenever a person or other entity with a lien of record against an impounded motor vehicle has proof of commenced
repossession proceedings, and also provides the village with a hold harmless letter, possession of the motor vehicle shall be given to that
lienholder upon payment of any immobilization or impoundment fees, all towing and storage cost and all other charges, fines and penalties
specified in this chapter.
I. Consolidation Of Multiple Final Determinations: Nothing shall prevent the village from consolidating multiple final determinations of standing,
parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) liability in an action in the circuit court against an individual and from pursuing all available
remedies, allowed by law, to collect money judgments.
J. Maximum Fines: Service of process and a copy of the complaint may be served upon the person against whom a judgment is sought under the
provisions of this chapter by any method provided under 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/2-203, incorporated by reference, or by certified mail,
return receipt requested, provided the total amount of fines and penalties for final determination of standing, parking, or compliance regulation
violation(s) does not exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). (Ord. 09-66, 12-21-2009)
Chapter 4.1
VEHICLE IMMOBILIZATION
(Rep. by Ord. 09-66, 12-21-2009)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 164/387
Chapter 4.2
TOWING AND IMPOUNDMENT
7-4.2-1: MOTOR VEHICLES SUBJECT TO TOWING AND IMPOUNDMENT:
Any motor vehicle operated, used, or in the physical control of any person with the express or implied permission of the owner of record (as
registered with the secretary of state of Illinois or any applicable state), on any public highway within the village of Broadview during the
commission of or in furtherance of any offense or violation set forth herein, shall be subject to seizure and impoundment by the village of
Broadview, and the owner of record of said motor vehicle shall be liable to the village for an impoundment fee in an amount of five hundred dollars
($500.00) plus the payment of the actual costs charged to the village by the towing company for towing fees, and the payment of a storage fee of
twenty dollars ($20.00) for each day of storage or the actual cost charged to the village if not stored by the village (whichever fee is greater). (Ord.
09-39, 9-8-2009)
7-4.2-2: VIOLATIONS OR OFFENSES:
A. The arrest of the operator of a motor vehicle for the following violations or offenses shall subject a motor vehicle to seizure and impoundment:
1. 720 ILCS 5/11-
14
Prostitution.
720 ILCS 5/11-
15
Soliciting for a prostitute.
720 ILCS 5/11-
15.1
Soliciting for a juvenile prostitute.
720 ILCS 5/11-
18
Patronizing a prostitute.
720 ILCS 5/11-
18-1
Patronizing a juvenile prostitute.
2. 720 ILCS 5/12-
4.2
Aggravated battery with a firearm.
3. 720 ILCS 5/24-
1
Unlawful use of weapon.
720 ILCS 5/24-
1.2
Aggravated discharge of a firearm.
4. 720 ILCS
550/4(c) _
550/4(g)
Possession of cannabis punishable as a class A misdemeanor or higher.
5. 720 ILCS
570/401 _
570/413
Possession of a controlled substance.
6. 625 ILCS 5/6-
303
Driving while driver's license, permit, or privilege to operate a motor vehicle is suspended or revoked, excluding
emissions suspension when the emissions suspension is the sole reason for the suspension.
7. 625 ILCS 5/11-
501
Driving while under the influence of alcohol, other drug or drugs, intoxicating compound or compounds or any
combination thereof.
8. 625 ILCS 5/11-
204
Fleeing or attempting to elude a peace officer.
625 ILCS 5/11-
204.1
Aggravated fleeing or attempt to elude a peace officer.
9. 625 ILCS 5/11-
503
Reckless driving, aggravated reckless driving.
10.
625 ILCS 5/11-
506
Street racing, aggravated street racing.
11.
Operator of a motor vehicle who is also the owner of record of the motor vehicle has an outstanding arrest warrant.
12.
The use of a motor vehicle as a part of the commission of a felony.
13. Operator of the motor vehicle never having been issued a driver's license.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 165/387
(Ord. 09-39, 9-8-2009)
7-4.2-3: CONFLICT OF LAW:
The provisions of this chapter shall be in addition to and shall not replace or otherwise abrogate any existing state or federal law or village
ordinance that relates to the seizure and/or impoundment of motor vehicles, and any penalty provided herein shall be in addition to any and all
penalties that may be assessed or imposed by a court for violation of any criminal offense or local ordinance violation offense. (Ord. 09-39, 9-8-
2009)
7-4.2-4: APPROVAL OF TOWING COMPANY FEES:
Any and all fees incurred for towing and/or storage of a motor vehicle seized under this chapter shall be those approved by the chief of police for
all towing companies authorized to operate in the village. (Ord. 09-39, 9-8-2009)
7-4.2-5: THEFT OF MOTOR VEHICLE:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply if at the time of the offense the motor vehicle was stolen and the theft was reported to the
appropriate police authority within twenty four (24) hours after the theft was discovered. (Ord. 09-39, 9-8-2009)
7-4.2-6: TOWING/SEIZURE OF MOTOR VEHICLE:
Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a motor vehicle subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this chapter and
the police officer has arrested the operator or person in physical control of the motor vehicle for any of the offenses set forth above herein, the
police officer shall provide for the towing of the motor vehicle to a facility authorized by the village. The police officer shall make a reasonable
attempt to notify the owner or any person identifying themselves as the owner of the motor vehicle, or any person who is found to be in physical
control of the motor vehicle at the time of the alleged offense, of the fact of the seizure and of the motor vehicle owner's right to request a
preliminary motor vehicle impoundment hearing to be conducted in accordance with the procedure set forth herein. The motor vehicle shall be
impounded pending the completion of the hearings provided for herein, unless the owner of the motor vehicle or someone on their behalf posts
with the village a cash bond in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) and pays all applicable towing and storage fees and any existing
fines owed to the village on the motor vehicle or owed by the owner of record. (Ord. 09-39, 9-8-2009)
7-4.2-7: PRELIMINARY HEARING:
Where the owner of a motor vehicle seized under the provisions of this chapter, or the designated agent of the owner of the motor vehicle, makes
a request to the chief of police and/or his authorized officer for a preliminary hearing within twenty four (24) hours after the seizure of the motor
vehicle, the chief of police and/or his authorized officer must conduct a preliminary hearing within three (3) business days after the request for
preliminary hearing is received by the village; not including Saturdays, Sundays, or legal holidays. In order for a designated agent to request a
preliminary hearing on behalf of the owner of the motor vehicle, the designated agent must present a written authorization authorizing the
designated agent to act and which is signed by the owner of the motor vehicle and which is notarized by a notary public. For purposes of this
chapter, the following shall apply:
A. All interested persons will be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at the preliminary hearing.
B. The formal rules of evidence will not apply at the hearing, and hearsay testimony will be allowed, and shall be admissible.
C. If, after the conclusion of the hearing, the chief of police and/or his authorized officer determines that there is probable cause to believe that the
motor vehicle was used as described in section 7-4.2-2 of this chapter, the chief of police and/or his authorized officer shall order the
continued impoundment of the motor vehicle, unless the owner of the motor vehicle posts a cash bond with the village in the amount of five
hundred dollars ($500.00), plus any towing and storage cost plus existing fines owed to the village on the motor vehicle or owed by the owner
of record.
D. If the chief of police and/or his authorized officer determine that there is not probable cause to believe that the motor vehicle was used as
described in section 7-4.2-2 of this chapter, the motor vehicle will be returned to the owner of record of the motor vehicle after the owner of
record pays the towing and storage fees. (Ord. 09-39, 9-8-2009)
7-4.2-8: NOTICE OF HEARING:
Within ten (10) days of the motor vehicle's impoundment, the village shall notify the owner of record of the motor vehicle by United States mail
and/or certified mail, return receipt requested, postage prepaid, of his/her right to a full hearing before the hearing officer to contest the
impoundment; and that, in the event that the owner of record would like a hearing, he/she must file a request for such hearing in writing with the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 166/387
village of Broadview police department. If a written request is not received within thirty (30) days of the mailing of the notice by the village, then
the owner is defaulted ("default date"). If the motor vehicle owner fails to pay the impoundment fee, towing charges and storage fees on or before
the thirty first day after the expiration of the default date, then the motor vehicle can be disposed of in the manner provided by law for the
disposition of unclaimed motor vehicles under the Illinois vehicle code. (Ord. 09-39, 9-8-2009)
7-4.2-9: HEARING:
For purposes of this section, the following shall apply to the owner's hearing:
A. Unless continued by order of the hearing officer, the hearing shall be held within thirty (30) days but not more than forty (40) days after a
request for hearing is received by the village of Broadview police department.
B. All interested persons will be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at the hearing.
C. If, after the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer determines by a preponderance of the evidence that the motor vehicle was used as
described in section 7-4.2-2 of this chapter the hearing officer shall order the continued impoundment of the motor vehicle until the owner of
the motor vehicle pays to the village a penalty in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00), plus the towing and storage costs, plus existing
fines owed to the village on the motor vehicle or owed by the owner of record. This amount shall be a debt due to the village.
D. If the owner of record fails to appear at the hearing, the hearing officer shall enter an order of default in favor of the village, which order shall
require the payment to the village of an administrative penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00) plus the towing and storage costs.
E. If the hearing officer determines that the motor vehicle was not used as described in section 7-4.2-2 of this chapter, the motor vehicle will be
returned to the owner of record of the motor vehicle without any penalty; and, if a cash bond had previously been posted, the cash bond shall
be returned. (Ord. 09-39, 9-8-2009)
7-4.2-10: UNCLAIMED MOTOR VEHICLES:
If the administrative penalty and applicable towing and storage fees are not paid within thirty five (35) days after the expiration of time in which
administrative review of the hearing officer's final determination may be sought, or within thirty (30) days after an action seeking administrative
review has been resolved in favor of the village, whichever is applicable, the motor vehicle shall be deemed unclaimed and shall be disposed of in
the manner provided by law for the disposition of unclaimed motor vehicles under the Illinois vehicle code. (Ord. 09-39, 9-8-2009)
7-4.2-11: LIENHOLDERS:
Whenever a person or other entity with a lien of record against an impounded motor vehicle has proof of commenced repossession proceedings,
and also provides the village with a hold harmless letter, possession of the motor vehicle shall be given to that lienholder upon payment of the five
hundred dollar ($500.00) impoundment fee and all towing and storage costs. (Ord. 09-39, 9-8-2009)
7-4.2-12: ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION:
Other than for the preliminary hearing, section 7-4.2-7 of this chapter, the code hearing department identified in title 1, chapter 13 of this code
shall be charged with the adjudication of all claims under this chapter. (Ord. 09-39, 9-8-2009)
Chapter 5
TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
7-5-1: NO TURNS:
A. No Left Turns: It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to make any of the following prohibited left turns:
From Roosevelt Road to the service drives and from the service drives to Roosevelt Road, where the service drives are located west of 25th
Avenue in the Village.
From the 15th Street exit of Hines Hospital entering 9th Avenue.
Southbound on 25th Avenue at Fillmore Street, Harvard Street and the alley north of Roosevelt Road, from the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
to nine o'clock (9:00) P.M., except on weekends and holidays.
Traveling northbound on 9th Avenue from the hours of three o'clock (3:00) P.M. to five o'clock (5:00) P.M. at the following locations:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 167/387
Alley between Roosevelt Road and 13th Street
13th Street
14th Street
B. No Right Turns At Certain Times: It is hereby prohibited and shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to turn right from the hours
of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and from three o'clock (3:00) P.M. to six o'clock (6:00) P.M., except on weekends and
holidays, at the following intersections:
Northbound on 25th Avenue at 13th Street, 14th Street and at the alley south of Roosevelt Road.
C. No Right Turns: It is hereby prohibited and shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to turn right at any time onto southbound
16th Avenue from the eastside exits from any business located at the southwest corner of 16th Avenue and Roosevelt Road.
D. Penalty: Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than two hundred
dollars ($200.00). (Ord. 99-01, 1-19-1999)
7-5-2: THROUGH TRUCK ROUTES:
It is hereby prohibited for any through truck traffic to use any of the residential streets in the Village. The following streets are hereby designated
as through truck traffic streets:
Bataan Drive
Cermak Road
Gardner Road
Roosevelt Road
Seventeenth Avenue
25th Avenue
Through truck traffic is specifically prohibited on 16th Avenue, south of the first alley south of Roosevelt Road. (Ord. 99-01, 1-19-1999)
7-5-3: ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS:
It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle on any street in any direction other than that so designated, and it shall be unlawful to drive a vehicle
through an alley unless that person owns property abutting said alley or unless for an express business purpose. Under no circumstances are
alleys to be used as a thoroughfare for through traffic. (Ord. 2014-56, 10-6-2014)
A. North: Traffic movement along the following streets shall be north, and it shall be unlawful for any vehicle to proceed on such streets in a
southerly direction:
The 1800 and 1900 blocks of 15th Avenue.
18th Avenue from Roosevelt Road to Harvard Street.
20th Avenue from Roosevelt Road to Harvard Street.
22nd Avenue from Roosevelt Road to Harvard Street.
24th Avenue from Roosevelt Road to Harvard Street.
B. South: Traffic movement along the following streets shall be south, and it shall be unlawful for any vehicle to proceed on such streets in a
northerly direction:
The 1900 block of 14th Avenue.
19th Avenue from Harvard Street to Roosevelt Road.
21st Avenue from Harvard Street to the east-west alley immediately to the north of Roosevelt Road.
23rd Avenue from Harvard Street to Roosevelt Road.
North-south alleyway between 14th and 13th Avenue from Bataan Drive to Lexington Avenue.
North-south alleyway between 15th and 14th Avenue from Bataan Drive to Lexington Avenue.
North-south alleyway between 16th and 15th Avenue from Bataan Drive to Lexington Avenue. (Ord. 12-13, 5-7-2012)
C. East: Traffic movement along the following streets shall be east, and it shall be unlawful for any vehicle to proceed on such streets in a
westerly direction:
The south frontage road (Bataan Drive) of the Congress Street Expressway from the easterly limits to the westerly limits of the Village.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 168/387
D. West: Traffic movement along the following streets shall be west, and it shall be unlawful for any vehicle to proceed on such streets in an
easterly direction:
The first east-west alley south of Roosevelt Road between 17th and 18th Avenues is hereby designated a one-way vehicular traffic alley and
the direction of permissible traffic movement shall be west, and it shall be unlawful for any vehicle to proceed in such alley in an easterly
direction.
The north frontage road (Harrison Street) of the Congress Street Expressway from the easterly limits to the westerly limits of the Village.
E. One-Way Alleys, North And South: The following alley on Sundays only:
The north-south alley between 16th and 17th Avenues from Fillmore to the T-intersection of the alley just north of Roosevelt Road is hereby
designated a one-way vehicular traffic alley and the direction of permissible traffic movement shall be south, and it shall be unlawful for any
vehicle to proceed in such alley in a northerly direction, and said restriction shall only apply to vehicular traffic on Sundays. (1987 Code)
F. One-Way Alleys, East And West: The following alley:
The east-west alley immediately north of Roosevelt Road between 16th Avenue and 17th Avenue is hereby designated as a one-way
vehicular traffic alley and the direction of permissible traffic movement shall be west. (Ord. 2014-07, 1-21-2014)
7-5-4: TWO-WAY STREETS:
All other north-south streets or portions thereof not enumerated in section 7-5-3 of this chapter shall be two-way vehicular traffic streets. (1987
Code)
7-5-5: STOP STREETS:
A. Operation Of Vehicle At Stop Streets: The driver of a vehicle shall stop in obedience to a stop sign at an intersection where a stop sign is
erected at one or more entrances thereto, and shall proceed cautiously yielding to the vehicles not so obliged to stop which are within the
intersection or approaching so close as to constitute an immediate hazard, unless traffic at such intersection is controlled by a police officer on
duty, in which event the directions of the police officer shall be complied with. (1987 Code)
B. Stop Streets Designated: All vehicular traffic shall come to a stop before proceeding into the following intersections:
CERMAK ROAD BRIDGE:
Southbound, before proceeding into the north service drive on the east end, 21st Avenue.
ERIKA DRIVE:
Four-way stop Sunnydale Avenue, Erika Drive.
Eastbound traffic only, Terry Lane.
Southbound traffic only, Terry Lane.
Southbound traffic only, 24th Avenue.
FILLMORE STREET:
Eastbound traffic only, 13th Avenue.
Eastbound and westbound traffic, 15th Avenue.
Eastbound and westbound traffic, 16th Avenue.
Northbound traffic only, 18th Avenue.
Eastbound, westbound and southbound traffic, 19th Avenue.
Northbound traffic only, 20th Avenue.
Eastbound, westbound and southbound traffic, 21st Avenue.
HARVARD STREET:
Eastbound traffic only, 13th Avenue.
Four-way stop at 14th Avenue.
Four-way stop at 15th Avenue.
Four-way stop at 16th Avenue.
Eastbound and westbound traffic, 19th Avenue.
Eastbound and westbound traffic, 21st Avenue.
Eastbound and westbound traffic, 23rd Avenue.
LEXINGTON STREET:
Northbound traffic only, Beach Street and Lexington Street.
Westbound traffic only, Lexington Street and Beach Street.
Eastbound traffic only, 13th Avenue.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 169/387
Eastbound and westbound traffic, 15th Avenue.
9TH AVENUE:
Northbound and southbound traffic, 13th Street.
Northbound and southbound traffic, 14th Street.
13TH STREET:
Eastbound traffic only, 9th Avenue.
Eastbound and westbound traffic, 11th Avenue.
Eastbound and westbound traffic, 13th Avenue.
Eastbound and westbound traffic, 15th Avenue.
Eastbound and westbound traffic, 19th Avenue.
Eastbound and westbound traffic, 21st Avenue.
Eastbound and westbound traffic, 23rd Avenue.
14TH STREET:
Eastbound traffic only, 9th Avenue.
Four-way stop signs, 11th Avenue.
Four-way stop signs, 13th Avenue.
Four-way stop signs, 15th Avenue.
Four-way stop signs, 19th Avenue.
Four-way stop signs, 21st Avenue.
Four-way stop signs, 23rd Avenue.
Northbound and southbound traffic, 10th Avenue.
Northbound and southbound traffic, 12th Avenue.
Northbound and southbound traffic, 14th Avenue.
Northbound and southbound traffic, 16th Avenue.
Northbound and southbound traffic, 18th Avenue.
Northbound and southbound traffic, 20th Avenue.
Northbound and southbound traffic, 22nd Avenue.
Southbound traffic only, 24th Avenue.
15TH STREET:
Eastbound traffic only, 9th Avenue.
Eastbound and westbound traffic, 11th Avenue.
Eastbound and westbound traffic, 13th Avenue.
Eastbound and westbound traffic, 15th Avenue.
Eastbound and westbound traffic, 19th Avenue.
16TH AVENUE:
Eastbound traffic only, 9th Avenue.
Eastbound and westbound traffic, 15th Avenue.
18TH AVENUE:
Northbound and southbound traffic, 19th Street.
Eastbound and westbound traffic, 21st Street.
18TH STREET:
Eastbound traffic only, 9th Avenue.
Westbound traffic only, 13th Avenue.
Southbound traffic only, 11th Avenue.
19TH STREET:
Traffic exiting the 19th Street apartment complex at the driveway located on the east end. Said driveway is midway between 9th Avenue and
10th Avenue.
Northbound and southbound traffic, 11th Avenue.
Northbound and southbound traffic, 12th Avenue.
Southbound traffic only, 13th Avenue.
Northbound traffic only, 19th Avenue.
21ST STREET:
Eastbound traffic only, 9th Avenue.
Eastbound and westbound traffic, 11th Avenue.
Westbound traffic only, 13th Avenue.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 170/387
26TH STREET:
Eastbound or westbound traffic, 23rd Street. (Ord. 12-13, 5-7-2012; amd. Ord. 2017-129, 8-21-2017)
C. Posting Signs: All intersections must be posted before this section becomes operative.
D. Penalty: Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than two hundred
dollars ($200.00). (1987 Code)
7-5-6: PARKING RESTRICTIONS1:
7-5-6-1: NO PARKING ZONES:
No person shall let any vehicle stand or park at any time at any of the following locations:
BEACH AVENUE:
From Gardner Road to Beach Street.
BEACH STREET:
Between Lexington Street and Beach Avenue.
East side between Lexington Street and Harvard Street.
CERMAK ROAD:
From Gardner Road to Ninth Avenue.
North side from 9th Avenue to 21st Avenue.
North and south service drives from IHB to 21st Avenue.
CRESCENT DRIVE:
North side from 25th Avenue to 16th Street.
LEXINGTON STREET:
Between Beach Street and 25th Avenue.
FIRST ALLEY NORTH OF LEXINGTON STREET:
Between Beach Street and 25th Avenue.
ROBERTS DRIVE:
North side from 21st Avenue to the end of complete cul-de-sac except for loading zone commencing at the driveway entrance to 2101 Roberts
Drive thence westerly a distance of 50 feet.
ROOSEVELT ROAD:
From Gardner Road to Ninth Avenue.
From Ninth Avenue to 25th Avenue.
South side, 40 feet from the crosswalk west of 9th Avenue.
South side, 40 feet from the crosswalk east of 10th Avenue.
South side, 40 feet from the crosswalk east of 12th Avenue.
North side, 40 feet from the crosswalk east of 15th Avenue.
Between 16th Avenue and 18th Avenue.
North and south sides from 23rd Avenue to 25th Avenue.
Trucks, south side from 9th Avenue through 25th Avenue, inclusive.
Trucks, north side from 13th Avenue through 25th Avenue, inclusive.
10TH AVENUE:
West side from Cermak Road north to the alley line.
11TH AVENUE:
East side from Cermak Road north to the alley line.
12TH AVENUE:
West side from 19th Street to I.C. tracks.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 171/387
13TH AVENUE:
West side from Cermak Road to I.C. tracks.
16TH STREET:
From Addison Creek to 21st Avenue.
From 25th Avenue east to Addison Creek.
North side between 13th Avenue and 15th Avenue.
South side from IHB to 25th Avenue.
South side between 21st Avenue to end of complete cul-de-sac.
17TH AVENUE:
East side from Bataan Drive to a point 125 feet south of center line of Bataan Drive.
East side from Roosevelt Road to a point 174 feet south from the center line of Roosevelt Road.
From Roosevelt Road north to the alley.
18TH AVENUE:
West side from 19th Street north 225 feet.
West side from 19th Street to Cermak Road.
East side from Cermak Road to first alley north.
19TH AVENUE:
West side from 19th Street to Cermak Road.
19TH STREET:
North side between 17th Avenue and 18th Avenue.
South side between 17th Avenue and 18th Avenue.
South side from radius of 21st Avenue to 17th Avenue.
21ST AVENUE:
East side from 16th Street to 19th Street including radius on west side of 19th Street.
21ST STREET:
South side from Addison Creek to 17th Avenue.
23RD PLACE:
From 26th Avenue to 25th Avenue.
23RD STREET:
From 27th Avenue to 25th Avenue.
25TH AVENUE:
East side from Cermak Road to Harvard Street.
West side from Cermak Road north to the Eisenhower Expressway.
East and west sides from Fillmore Street to 13th Street.
From south service drive of Cermak Road south to Village limits.
Within the vicinity of the bridge over Addison Creek.
26TH AVENUE:
East side from south service drive of Cermak Road to 23rd Place.
27TH AVENUE:
East side from 16th Street to end of cul-de-sac. (1987 Code; amd. Ord. 92-16, 6-15-1992; Ord. 92-27, 9-8-1992; Ord. 98-06, 4-27-1998; Ord. 98-
07, 4-27-1998; Ord. 2001-11, 5-8-2001; Ord. 2016-22, 5-16-2016)
7-5-6-2: TIME-LIMIT PARKING:
A. Two Hour Parking: No person shall let stand or park any vehicle for a period longer than two (2) hours on any day of the week except Sundays
and holidays as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 172/387
1. In any of the streets in the area bounded as follows:
On the north, the Illinois Central Railroad right-of-way; on the east, the east side of 17th Avenue; on the south, the north side of Cermak
Road; and on the west, the east side of Gardner Road.
The boundaries established in this subsection shall become effective when the Director of Public Works or the Chief of Police has caused
the proper signs to be posted in the streets on which parking is limited, indicating such limitation.
2. From nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. to eight o'clock (8:00) P.M.:
27TH AVENUE:
East side between Lexington Street and Bataan Drive.
13th Avenue to 24th Avenue, both inclusive, with the exception of 17th Avenue, from the alley north of Roosevelt Road and running parallel
with Roosevelt Road, to the alley south of Roosevelt Road and running parallel with Roosevelt Road.
B. Additional Time-Limit Parking:
1. No person shall let stand or park any vehicle on the following streets between the hours of six thirty o'clock (6:30) A.M. and nine o'clock
(9:00) A.M. and three thirty o'clock (3:30) P.M. and six thirty o'clock (6:30) P.M., except on Sundays and holidays:
ROOSEVELT ROAD:
South side, 40 feet from the crosswalk west of 10th Avenue.
South side, 40 feet from the crosswalk west of 11th Avenue.
South side, 40 feet from the crosswalk west of 12th Avenue.
South side, 40 feet from the crosswalk west of 21st Avenue.
South side, 40 feet from the crosswalk west of 22nd Avenue.
South side, 40 feet from the crosswalk west of 23rd Avenue.
South side, 40 feet from the crosswalk west of 24th Avenue.
East and west sides north to the first alley on 17th Avenue. At all other times, parking shall be limited to one hour.
16TH STREET:
North side from 17th Avenue to a point 160 feet east from the center line of 17th Avenue.
17TH AVENUE:
East side from the center line of Roosevelt Road south to 13th Street.
25TH AVENUE:
East side from Roosevelt Road to 13th Street.
2. Parking shall be prohibited from six thirty o'clock (6:30) A.M. to nine thirty o'clock (9:30) A.M. and from three thirty o'clock (3:30) P.M. to
six thirty o'clock (6:30) P.M. on the following streets:
25TH AVENUE:
East side from Roosevelt Road to Fillmore Street.
3. No person shall let stand or park any vehicle on the following streets between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00)
A.M. and three o'clock (3:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M., except on weekends and holidays:
17TH AVENUE:
East side from 16th Street north to Bataan Drive.
West side from Central Drive north to Harvard Street.
C. Sunday Morning Parking: No person shall let stand or park any vehicle on the following streets on Sunday, between the hours of eight o'clock
(8:00) A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) P.M.:
16TH AVENUE:
West side from alley north of Roosevelt Road north to Harvard.
18TH AVENUE:
West side from alley north of Roosevelt Road north to Harvard.
FILLMORE STREET:
North side between 15th Avenue and 19th Avenue.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 173/387
D. Restricted Parking - Loading Zone:
1. No person shall let stand or park any vehicle on the following street between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00)
A.M. on every day of the week, except for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise for the adjacent business:
16TH AVENUE:
West side from Roosevelt Road south to a point 248 feet south of the centerline of Roosevelt Road.
(Ord. 99-01, 1-19-1999)
7-5-7: LIMITED LOAD STREETS:
Whenever the weight of vehicles permitted on a street is limited by ordinance and signs indicating such limitations are posted, it shall be unlawful
to operate a vehicle in excess of such weight on such street, except for the purpose of making delivery or picking up a load, in which case such
vehicle may be driven on such street for not more than the minimum distance necessary for the purpose. (1987 Code)
7-5-8: POSTING SIGNS:
The Chief of Police or any other person designated by the President or Board of Trustees shall post or cause to be posted suitable signs for all
through streets, one-way streets or alleys and stop intersections. (1987 Code)
7-5-9: CUL-DE-SACS:
A. Locations: The following thoroughfares shall be cul-de-sacs at the locations provided below:
Filmore Street at 13th Avenue.
Lexington Street at 13th Avenue.
14th Avenue at Bataan Drive.
15th Avenue at Bataan Drive.
16th Avenue at Bataan Drive.
The north-south alleyway between 17th and 16th Avenues at Bataan Drive.
B. Posting Signs: All cul-de-sacs must be constructed and properly identified before this section shall become operative. (Ord. 12-13, 5-7-2012)
Chapter 6
VEHICLE EQUIPMENT AND CONDITION
7-6-1: CLEAR VISION:
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle which is loaded or in such a condition that the operator does not have a clear vision of all parts of the
roadway essential to the safe operation of the vehicle. Any view of the roadway to the rear so obstructed shall be equipped with a mirror so
attached as to give him a view of the roadway behind him. (1987 Code)
7-6-2: LIGHTS:
It shall be unlawful to operate or park on any street any vehicle not equipped with adequate lights conforming to the requirements of the State
law1; provided, that vehicles may be parked at nighttime without lights on any street or portion thereof, designated by ordinance as a place where
vehicles may so park at nighttime. (1987 Code)
7-6-2-1: TURN SIGNAL LIGHTS:
Any motor vehicle in use on a highway shall be equipped with, and required signal shall be given by, a signal lamp or lamps or mechanical signal
device when the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the left outside limit of the body, cab, or load of such motor vehicle
exceeds twenty four inches (24"), or when the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the rear limit of the body or load thereof
exceeds fourteen feet (14') The latter measurement shall apply to any single vehicles, also to any combination of vehicles. (1987 Code)
7-6-2-2: VEHICLES OWNED BY FIREMEN:
Any motor vehicle owned or usually operated by a volunteer fireman may be equipped with not to exceed two (2) lamps which shall emit a blue
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 174/387
light without glare. One such lamp may be mounted on the rear of any such vehicle. A flashing blue light may be used only when such fireman is
responding to a fire call. (1987 Code)
7-6-2-3: BICYCLES:
Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least
five hundred feet (500') to the front, and with a reflector on the rear of a type which shall be visible from all distances from fifty feet (50') to three
hundred feet (300') to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible
from the distance of five hundred feet (500') to the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector. (1987 Code)
7-6-3: HORN:
Every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a good and sufficient audible signaling device in efficient working condition. Such signaling device
shall be sounded when necessary to give timely warning of the approach of a vehicle, but such horn or other signaling device shall not be
sounded for any purpose other than a warning of impending danger.
A. Emergency Vehicles, Sirens: No motor vehicle other than an emergency vehicle shall be equipped with a siren or gong signaling device.
B. Bicycles: No person shall operate a bicycle that is not equipped with a bell or other device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at
least one hundred feet (100'), except that a bicycle shall not be equipped with nor shall any person use upon a bicycle, any siren or whistle.
(1987 Code)
7-6-4: BRAKES:
It shall be unlawful to drive any motor vehicle upon a street unless such vehicle is equipped with good and sufficient brakes in good working
condition, as required by the State traffic law2, or to operate any vehicle which is so loaded that the operator does not have ready access to the
mechanics operating the brakes of such vehicle.
Every bicycle shall be equipped with a good and adequate brake. (1987 Code)
7-6-5: MUFFLERS:
No motor vehicle shall be operated on any street unless such vehicle is provided with a muffler in efficient actual working condition. The use of a
cutout is prohibited. (1987 Code)
7-6-6: TIRES:
It shall be unlawful to operate on any street any motor vehicle which is not equipped with tires conforming to the requirements of the State traffic
law3. (1987 Code)
7-6-7: SIZE, WEIGHT AND LOADS:
A. Width, Length, Height; Projecting Loads:
1. The maximum width and height of any vehicle and its load shall not exceed the limits expressed in the State traffic law4.
2. No passenger type vehicle shall be operated on the streets with a load extending beyond the line of the fenders on the left side of the
vehicle nor extending more than six inches (6") beyond the line of the fenders of the right side thereof.
3. No vehicle, unladen or with load, shall exceed any length limited by the traffic laws of the State.
4. No combination of vehicles coupled together shall consist of more than two (2) units, and no such combination of vehicles, unladen or with
load, shall exceed a total length of fifty feet (50'); but such length limitations shall not apply to vehicles operated in daytime with transporting
pipes, poles, machinery and other objects which cannot be readily dismembered, nor to such vehicles operated at nighttime by a public
utility when engaged in emergency repair work. Such loads carried at night shall be clearly marked with sufficient lights to show the full
dimensions of the load.
5. No part of the load of a vehicle shall extend more than three feet (3') in front of the extreme front portion of the vehicle.
B. Weight: It shall be unlawful to drive on any street any motor vehicle with a weight, including load, in excess of that permitted by the State traffic
law for driving on improved highways, or with weight distributed in a manner not conforming to such law5. (1987 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 175/387
7-6-8: PROHIBITED CONDITIONS:
A. Spilling Loads, Depositing Mud On Streets: No vehicle shall be driven on any highway or street unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded
so as to prevent any of is load from dropping, shifting, leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom; nor shall any vehicle be driven from any
unimproved or parcel of land onto any improved public street or alley in the Village without first having the wheels of such vehicle free from
any mud, clay or other refuse which may be deposited on the public street or alley by the operator of the vehicle. Any person violating this
provision shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00).
B. Noisy Vehicles: It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle which makes unusually loud or unnecessary noise.
C. Excessive Smoke: It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle which emits dense smoke or such an amount of smoke or fumes as to be
dangerous to the health of persons or as to endanger the drivers of other vehicles.
D. Nonskid Devices: It shall be unlawful to operate upon any street any motor vehicle equipped with any nonskid device so constructed that any
rigid or nonflexible portion thereof comes into contact with the pavement or roadway. (1987 Code)
Footnote 1: 625 ILCS 5/12-101, 5/12-102 and 5/12-201 et seq.
Footnote 2: 625 ILCS 5/12-301.
Footnote 3: 625 ILCS 5/12-401 et seq.
Footnote 4: 625 ILCS 5/15-101, 5/15-102.
Footnote 5: 625 ILCS 5/15-111.
Chapter 7
PEDESTRIANS
7-7-1: RIGHT OF WAY:
Where traffic-control signals are not in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right of way, slowing down or stopping if need be, to a
pedestrian crossing the roadway or street within any marked crosswalk or within any unmarked crosswalk.
Whenever stop signals or flashing red signals are in place at an intersection or a marked crosswalk between intersections, the pedestrian shall
have the right of way over drivers of vehicles; and at such marked places, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk and
any pedestrian within or entering the crosswalk at either edge of the roadway shall have the right of way over any vehicle so stopped.
The driver of a vehicle shall stop before entering any crosswalk when any vehicle proceeding in the same direction is stopped at such crosswalk
for the purpose of permitting a pedestrian to cross. (1987 Code)
7-7-2: PEDESTRIAN USE OF ROADWAYS:
A. Pedestrian Crossings:
1. At no place shall a pedestrian cross any roadway other than by the most direct route to the opposite curbing, and when crossing at any
place other than a crosswalk he shall yield the right of way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
2. Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are in operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a
crosswalk.
3. No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk in any business section.
4. No person shall stand or loiter in any roadway other than in a safety zone, if such act interferes with the lawful movement of traffic.
B. Standing On Sidewalks: It shall be unlawful for a pedestrian to stand upon any sidewalk except as near as reasonably possible to the building
line or curb line, if such standing interferes with the use of the sidewalk by other pedestrians.
C. Walking Along Roadways:
1. Where sidewalks are provided it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
2. Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along and upon a highway shall, when practicable, walk only on the left side of
the roadway or its shoulder facing traffic, and upon meeting a vehicle shall stop off to the left.
3. No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride from the driver of any vehicle. (1987 Code)
7-7-3: BLIND PERSONS, RIGHT OF WAY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 176/387
Any blind person who is carrying in a raised or extended position, a cane or walking stick which is white in color or white-tipped with red, or who is
guided by a dog, shall have the right of way in crossing any street or highway, whether or not traffic on such street or highway is controlled by
traffic signals, anything in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding. The driver of every vehicle approaching the place where a blind person so
carrying such a cane or walking stick or being so guided is crossing a street or highway, shall bring his vehicle to a full stop and before
proceeding shall take such precautions as may be necessary to avoid injury to the blind person. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to a
blind person who is not carrying such a cane or walking stick or guided by a guide dog when walking on streets, highways or sidewalks but shall
not be considered evidence of contributory negligence. (1987 Code)
7-7-4: PEDESTRIANS TO OBEY SIGNALS:
At intersections where traffic is directed by a policeman or by a stop and go signal, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to cross the roadway
other than with released traffic, if such crossing interferes with the lawful movement of traffic. (1987 Code)
Chapter 8
ALTERNATIVE PENALTIES
7-8-1: ADOPTION OF THE ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE BY REFERENCE:
Pursuant to section 20-204 of the Illinois Vehicle Code1, the Illinois Vehicle Code is hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter by reference
and shall be applicable in the Village. Any person who violates any provision of the Illinois Vehicle Code within the Village shall be cited for that
violation in the manner and form as prescribed by law and as may be required subject to a fine up to seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord.
2017-126, 8-7-2017)
7-8-2: COMPLIANCE WARNING TICKETS:
A. Any person, pursuant to the issuance of a compliance warning ticket, who is accused of a violation of certain sections of this Code as
described in section 7-8-1 of this chapter, except a traffic offense for which a court appearance is required pursuant to Illinois Compiled
Statutes Supreme Court rule 551, may settle and compromise that ticket by paying to the Village a fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) within ten
(10) days from the date such alleged violation was committed, or may request a hearing date to contest the alleged violation by appearing in
person at the police station within ten (10) days of the time such alleged offense was committed. Any person failing to pay the fine above or
failing to request a hearing within ten (10) days shall be fined the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00).
B. The issuance of compliance warning citations shall be as a courtesy in lieu of instituting a prosecution in court for the alleged offense. If the
person accused of the violation does not settle the claim, a uniform traffic complaint or notice to appear may be issued for that violation and
otherwise that person shall be subject to the general penalties set forth in section 1-4-1 of this Code or as State law otherwise provides. (Ord.
2006-04, 2-22-2006)
Chapter 9
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND BOAT TRAILERS
7-9-1: PERMIT REQUIRED; LICENSING; OWNERSHIP:
A. No recreational vehicle or boat trailer may be parked or stored without the prior issuance of a permit by the village.
B. The code enforcement officer shall issue a permit upon submission of a completed and approved application and payment of the license fee as
set forth in section 7-2-3 of this title.
C. Required state license plates and village stickers shall be current and properly displayed.
D. Property owners shall have and display upon request of a police officer, the zoning administrator or the code enforcement officer proof of
ownership of, and a valid permit for, a stored or parked recreational vehicle or boat trailer. (Ord. 2003-07, 11-3-2003)
7-9-2: PARKING AND STORAGE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Recreational vehicles and boat trailers may only be parked or stored on single-family residential property. No recreational vehicles or boat
trailers may be parked or stored on commercial, industrial or multi-family residential property. Only one recreational vehicle or one boat trailer
may be stored on a single property.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 177/387
B. Recreational vehicle and boat trailer storage and parking shall be permitted only when the vehicle or trailer is owned by a resident of the village
of Broadview or a Broadview property owner and then only upon premises which said resident resides upon or upon premises owned by said
recreational vehicle or boat trailer owner. Storage of a recreational vehicle or a boat trailer shall not constitute or be part of any business.
C. A recreational vehicle or boat trailer may be parked in a driveway or on a paved or concrete service on single-family residential property for
thirty (30) days or less, cumulative. Parking or storage of a recreational vehicle or boat trailer for more than thirty (30) days shall only be
permitted in an enclosed garage, shed or permanent enclosed structure. No parking or storage of a recreational vehicle or boat is allowed on
grass, gravel, street or public property.
D. Recreational vehicles shall not be used as a dwelling, storage or accessory building. Additionally, parked or stored recreational vehicles or
boat trailers shall not be occupied or used for living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes and shall not be connected to sewer, water or
electrical service.
E. A recreational vehicle or boat trailer shall not be parked or stored with flammable liquids aboard the trailer or boat in a portable container.
F. No recreational vehicle or boat trailer parked or stored in the village shall exceed:
1. Eleven feet (11') in height, as parked, including trailer, cradle or mount, but excluding mast; or
2. Thirty two feet (32') in length including trailer hitch, tongue and bumpers.
G. No recreational vehicle or boat trailer parked or stored in the village shall be located:
1. Less than three feet (3') from any structure; or
2. Less than three feet (3') from any lot line; or
3. Within any required front yard.
H. Camping trailers and other foldable or collapsible recreational vehicles shall be parked or stored in the same condition as when towed (i.e.,
folded down). (Ord. 2003-07, 11-3-2003)
7-9-3: MAINTENANCE:
A. Recreational vehicles and boats shall be locked and secured from entry while stored or parked hereunder. Exterior propane gas bottles or
tanks on recreational vehicles or boat trailers shall have the valve handles or controls locked or removed during storage periods.
B. A recreational vehicle or boat trailer shall be maintained in mobile condition; no major construction or repair of such recreational vehicle or boat
trailer shall be permitted on residential property.
C. It shall be a public nuisance and against the health, safety and welfare of the village and the residents thereof for any person to park or store a
recreational vehicle or boat trailer in an unsanitary condition or in an unsafe or dangerous condition, or in any manner, which endangers the
health or safety of any person. (Ord. 2003-07, 11-3-2003)
Title 8
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
Chapter 1
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY ADMINISTRATION
8-1-1: DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS AND WATER1:
A. Office Created, Appointment: There is hereby created the office of Director of Public Works and Water, an executive office of the Village. Such
Director of Public Works and Water shall be appointed by the President and Board of Trustees.
B. Powers And Duties:
1. Streets2: All public streets, alleys, sidewalks and other public ways in the Village shall be under the supervision of the Director of Public
Works and Water. He shall have charge of and supervision over all work thereon, and the cleaning thereof and he shall see to it that all
gutters and drains therein function properly and that the same are kept free from defects. He shall be charged with the enforcement of all
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 178/387
provisions of this Code and other ordinance provisions relating to such public places, except traffic ordinances, and he is hereby authorized
to enforce all such provisions.
2. Sewers And Sewer System3:
a. The Director of Public Works and Water shall be ex officio Superintendent of Sewers, and shall see to the enforcement of all provisions of
this Code and other ordinances relating thereto, and shall supervise the repair thereof where no provision to the contrary is made.
b. The Director of Public Works and Water shall have charge and custody of sanitary and storm sewer systems of the Village and shall see
to it that the same are kept in good repair and that they function properly.
3. Lights: The Director of Public Works and Water shall supervise the lighting of the public streets and alleys and shall keep the lighting system
in efficient operation and good repair.
4. Water Supply System4:
a. The Director of Public Works and Water shall have care and custody of the Municipal water supply system and all equipment, pipes and
machinery pertaining thereto. He shall be responsible for the care of all such property and for the efficient management of said system.
b. The Director of Public Works and Water shall perform such duties as may be prescribed for him by the Westchester-Broadview Water
Commission.
5. Custodian Of Village Property: The Director of Public Works and Water shall be the custodian of all property of the Village which is not
assigned to the care or custody of any other officer. (1987 Code)
8-1-2: DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS:
All officers and employees assigned to the Department of Public Works shall perform their duties subject to the orders and under the supervision
of the Director of Public Works and Water. (1987 Code)
8-1-3: STREET DEPARTMENT:
A. Department Created, Composition: There is hereby created the Street Department, an executive department of the Village. The Street
Department shall consist of the Director of Public Works and Water and such other officers and employees as may be assigned thereto.
B. Duties: It shall be the function of the Street Department, and the duty of each officer and employee assigned thereto, to see to it that the
streets, alleys and other public ways are kept in good repair and are cleaned at regular intervals or so often as may be necessary.
C. Enforcement Duties: The Director of Public Works and Water and members of the Street Department shall, and are hereby empowered to,
enforce the provisions of this Code and other ordinances relating to obstructing the streets or other public ways or making excavations, unless
specifically given to some other officer or department for enforcement. (1987 Code)
8-1-4: WATER DEPARTMENT5:
A. Department Created, Composition: There is hereby created the Water Department, an executive department of the Village. The Water
Department shall consist of the Director of Public Works and Water who shall be the head of the Department and such number of other
officers and employees as may be assigned thereto.
B. Powers And Duties: The Director of Public Works and Water shall be the head of the Water Department and responsible for the efficient
management thereof. All officers and employees assigned to this Department shall perform their duties subject to the control and supervision
of said Director, and shall obey all instructions and orders given by him.
C. Enforcement Of Code Provisions By Department: The Director of Public Works and Water, and all officers and employees in the Water
Department, shall be charged with and see to the enforcement of all provisions of this Code and other ordinances relating to the water supply
system where no provision to the contrary is made. (1987 Code)
Footnote 1: Whenever in this Code, reference is made to Superintendent of Public Works, the title Director of Public Works and Water shall
apply.
Footnote 2: See Chapter 2 of this Title.
Footnote 3: See Chapter 5 of this Title.
Footnote 4: See Chapter 4 of this Title.
Footnote 5: Whenever, in this Code, reference is made to Superintendent of Water, the title Director of Public Works and Water shall apply.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 179/387
Chapter 2
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS1
8-2-1: CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS:
A. Permit Required: It shall be unlawful to construct or lay a pavement on any public way without first having secured a permit therefor.
Applications for such permits shall be made to the village clerk and shall conform to the provisions of title 3, chapter 1 of this code relating to
applications for licenses and permits. Each application shall state the location of the intended pavement, the extent thereof, and the person
who is to do the actual construction work.
B. Approval Of Pavement Specifications Required: It shall be unlawful to construct or lay any street or sidewalk pavement in the village unless the
specifications for such pavement have been first specifically approved by the president and board of trustees. Such pavements may be
constructed in accordance with any general specifications that may be adopted by said board of trustees to cover all pavement construction in
the village whenever such general specifications shall have been adopted by resolution or ordinance. In addition to such general
specifications, the president and board of trustees may prescribe such further requirements in a particular instance as may to them seem
proper.
C. Curbs Required: No street pavement shall be laid or constructed unless there is provided an adequate curb on each side for the full length of
such pavement, of such material and dimensions as may be approved by the president and board of trustees.
D. Village Exempt From Provisions: The provisions of this chapter pertaining to the construction of pavements or sidewalks shall not apply to work
done by the municipality or any agency thereof. (1987 Code)
8-2-2: REPAIRS AND DEFECTS:
A. Pavements To Be In Good Repair, Supervision: All public street, alley and sidewalk pavements shall be kept in good repair. Such repair work,
whether done by the village or by the abutting owner, in case of sidewalks, shall be done under the supervision of the director of public works
and water.
B. Defects Reported: It shall be the duty of any village employee or officer becoming cognizant of any defect in any street, alley or sidewalk, or
any obstruction thereof, to report the same to the director of public works and water as soon as possible.
C. Deposit Required; Restoration: Any person to whom a building permit is issued shall make a deposit of six hundred dollars ($600.00) for each
permit that is issued for property on which building operations are to be carried on, to ensure the maintenance of the streets in a safe condition
and to ensure its complete restoration after the completion of the building. Whenever any pavement, curb, parkway, sidewalk or other public
structure thereof is broken, the same shall be restored at the expense of the party who obtained the permit to a condition as good and as
serviceable as prior to the beginning of the work. The village shall have the privilege and election of restoring, or of contracting out the work of
restoring, the street, curb, parkway or sidewalk to its prior condition. Upon the restoration as hereinbefore mentioned, so much of the deposit
as shall have been expended by the village for the restoration shall be retained by the village and the remainder of the deposit, if any, shall
then be returned to the applicant of the building permit; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall preclude the village from
maintaining an action against the person to recover the damage done to any pavement, curb, parkway, sidewalk or other public structure.
(1987 Code)
8-2-3: APPROACHES, DRIVEWAYS AND PARKING AREAS:
A. Permit Required, Fee: No person shall construct an approach, driveway, parking space or parking lot without first obtaining a permit therefor
and paying a fee therefor to the Village Clerk. The fee shall be the same as for a general permit.
B. Construction Standards:
1. All approaches, driveways, parking spaces and parking lots shall be constructed in accordance with the specifications adopted by the Board
of Trustees and maintained on file in the office of the Village Clerk and shall also conform to the following general conditions:
a. Surface shall be concrete, blacktop or equivalent impervious material as approved by the Village.
b. Driveway approaches shall have a minimum width of ten feet (10') flared to fourteen feet (14') at the curb.
c. On single-family zoned property only, one driveway shall be constructed and this driveway shall not exceed twenty four feet (24') in width.
d. On single-family zoned property, the driveway shall extend to the garage apron or to the rear of the house if there is no garage and no
alley.
2. Driveways that cross a public sidewalk shall conform to the sidewalk grade. That part of a public sidewalk which is also part of a driveway
shall be constructed of concrete with a thickness of not less than six inches (6") and a troweled and brushed surface.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 180/387
3. It shall be unlawful to cover up any public sidewalk with asphalt or any other material without first receiving permission from the Director of
Public Works and Water or his authorized representative. (1987 Code)
8-2-4: CURB CUTS:
No curb shall be broken or opened for any purpose without first procuring a permit and paying a fee therefor to the Village Clerk of fifteen dollars
($15.00). (1987 Code)
8-2-5: EXCAVATIONS:
A. Permit Required: It shall be unlawful to make any excavation on any public street or alley without first having secured a permit therefor. All the
provisions of subsection 8-2-1A of this Chapter relating to the construction or laying of pavement shall apply hereto.
B. Bonds Required:
1. Applications for the permit required by subsection A of this Section shall be accompanied by a bond conditioned to indemnify the Village for
any loss or damage resulting from the work undertaken or the manner of doing the same. Such bond shall be in the sum as provided in
Section 3-1-6 of this Code with sureties to be approved by the President and Board of Trustees.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain any opening of any kind in any public sidewalk unless such person shall file with the Village
Clerk a bond in the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), conditioned to indemnify the Village for any loss, damage or liability resulting
from the existence or use of such opening. (1987 Code)
8-2-6: BARRICADES:
Any person laying or repairing any pavement on a street, sidewalk or other public place, or making an excavation in such place, shall maintain
suitable barricades to prevent injury to any person by reason of the work, and shall have the barricades lighted at night. (1987 Code)
8-2-7: OPENINGS IN STREETS AND SIDEWALKS:
All openings maintained in any public sidewalk or parkway shall be kept securely covered at all times when not opened for use. (1987 Code)
8-2-8: DEPOSITS ON PUBLIC WAYS:
A. Building Supplies And Trash: It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit on any street any material, and this includes, but it is not limited to,
sand, bricks, mortar or any other building materials which may be harmful to the pavement thereof, or any waste material or any leaves, waste
and other material which are to be burned which may cause injury to the street.
B. Snow From Parking Lots: Every owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or other person having charge of any parking lot for an apartment building,
commercial building or industrial building, in removing snow from such parking lot, shall not deposit such snow on any public way of the
Village.
C. Missiles, Debris: It shall be unlawful to cast, throw or propel any missile on any street, alley or public place, and it shall be unlawful to throw or
deposit any glass, nails, tacks or other similar articles on any street, sidewalk or alley in the Village. (1987 Code)
8-2-9: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
A. Injury To Pavements:
1. It shall be unlawful to walk upon, drive any vehicle or animal upon or injure any newly laid street or sidewalk pavement while the same is
guarded by a warning sign or barricade.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or to do any injury to any sidewalk, street or alley in the Village, in any manner except as
provided in this Chapter.
3. No person shall carelessly, negligently, maliciously or wilfully injure, destroy or deface any sidewalk, lamp, lamppost, street sign, or other
property of the Village.
B. Obstructions:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct in any manner any street, alley or sidewalk. The Chief of Police is authorized to remove or
cause the removal of any obstruction in any such place.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 181/387
2. No person shall congregate in a group on any corner or in front of any store in the Village in such manner as to congest the sidewalk or
corner thus obstructing the free passage of passersby.
C. Encroachments: It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any building or structure which encroaches on any public street or property.
D. Public Ways For Displays Or Sale Of Goods: It shall be unlawful for any person to use any street, sidewalk or other public place as a place for
the display or sale of goods or merchandise of any kind.
E. Permitting Dangerous Conditions:
1. Placing Movables On Outside Windowsills: It shall be unlawful to place any movable article on any window or ledge, or other place abutting
on a public street, alley or other public place and at a height above four feet (4') from the ground, in such a manner that the same can or is
in danger of falling onto such street, sidewalk or other public place.
2. Scaffolds, Ladders, Tools: Any scaffolds or ladders placed in such a position that they overhang or can fall onto any public street, alley or
other public way in the Village shall be firmly and properly constructed and safeguarded, and it shall be unlawful to place or leave any tools
or articles on any such place in such a manner that the same can fall onto such street, sidewalk, or other public way from a greater height
than four feet (4').
F. Marking Public Ways With Addresses: Only Village employees shall mark curbs, sidewalks or roadways with numbers signifying addresses in
the Village. Any person violating this subsection shall be punished by a minimum fine of twenty five dollars ($25.00) and not exceeding two
hundred dollars ($200.00), and a violation of this subsection shall constitute a separate offense for each time such a violation occurs.
G. Placing Boards In Gutters: No person shall place boards in any gutter in the Village in order to make a crossover from the street onto any curb
or sidewalk.
H. Playing Games On Streets: It shall be unlawful to play any games on any street, sidewalk or other public place in the Village. (1987 Code)
8-2-10: DISCHARGE INTO STORM SEWERS OR DRAINAGE FACILITIES:
No person, firm, corporation or other entity shall discharge any sanitary waste or industrial waste into any storm sewer or drainage facility
constructed as a part of the following road improvement projects:
CERMAK ROAD:
Between Gardner Road and Ninth Avenue.
ROOSEVELT ROAD:
Between Gardner Road and Ninth Avenue.
Between 25th Avenue and 1st Avenue.
25TH AVENUE BRIDGE:
Over Addison Creek.
(Ord. 92-17, 6-15-1992; amd. Ord. 92-25, 9-8-1992; Ord. 98-10, 5-18-1998; Ord. 2001-13, 5-8-2001)
Chapter 3
TREES AND SHRUBS
8-3-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter provides full power and authority over all trees, plants and shrubs located within street rights of way, parks and public places of the
village; and over all trees, plants and shrubs located on private property that constitute a hazard or threat as described herein. (Ord. 2001-019, 8-
20-2001)
8-3-2: ADMINISTRATION:
The director of public works shall be in charge of administering the provisions of this chapter. It shall be the responsibility of the director of public
works to monitor the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks and other public areas.
The director of public works, when requested by the village board of trustees, shall consider, investigate, report and recommend upon any special
matter of question coming within the scope of this chapter. (Ord. 2001-019, 8-20-2001)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 182/387
8-3-3: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
No person shall plant, remove, cut above the ground, or disturb any tree on any street, park, or other public place without first filing an application
and procuring a permit from the director of public works. (Ord. 2001-019, 8-20-2001)
8-3-4: PLANTING REQUIREMENTS:
A. Street Tree Species To Be Planted: The following list constitutes the official street tree species for the village of Broadview, Illinois. No species
other than those included in this list may be planted as street trees without permission of the director of public works:
1. Large Trees:
Ash
Ginkgo
Hackberry
Locust
Red oak
Scarlet maple
Scarlet oak
Shingle oak
Sugar maple
Swamp white oak
Sweet gum
Tulip tree
White linden
2. Small Trees:
Grey birch
Hornbean
Ironwood
Pear
B. Spacing: The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the tree species size classes in subsection A of this section, and no trees may
be planted closer than the following: small trees, thirty feet (30'); and large trees, forty five feet (45'); except in special plantings designed or
approved by a landscape architect.
C. Distance From Curb And Sidewalk: The distance that trees may be planted from curbs or curb lines and sidewalks will be in accordance with
the tree species size classes listed in subsection A of this section, and no trees may be planted closer to any curb or sidewalk than the
following: small trees, two feet (2'); and large trees, four feet (4').
D. Distance From Street Corners And Fireplugs: No street tree shall be planted closer than thirty five feet (35') of any street corner, measured
from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curb lines. No street trees shall be planted closer than ten feet (10') of any fireplug.
E. Utilities: No street trees other than those species listed as small trees in subsection A of this section may be planted under or within ten (10)
lateral feet of any overhead utility wire, or over or within five (5) lateral feet of any underground water line, sewer line, transmission line or
other utility. (Ord. 2001-019, 8-20-2001)
1. Poles And Wires: Any person given the right to maintain poles and wires in the streets, alleys or other public places in the municipality shall,
in the absence of provision in the franchise concerning the subject, keep the wires and poles free from and away from any trees or shrubs in
such places so far as may be possible and shall keep all such trees and shrubs properly trimmed, subject to the supervision of the director
of public works or his designee, so that no injury shall be done either to the poles or wires or the shrubs and trees by their contact.
2. Gas Pipes: Any person maintaining any gas pipes in the municipality shall, in the absence of provision in the franchise concerning the
subject, keep such pipes free from leaks so that no injury shall be done to any trees or shrubs.
F. Excavations: In making excavations in streets or other public places, proper care shall be taken to avoid injury to the roots of any tree or shrub,
wherever possible. (1987 Code; amd. Ord. 2001-019, 8-20-2001)
8-3-5: PUBLIC TREE CARE:
A. Planting: The village shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys,
avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and
beauty of such public grounds.
B. Removal:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 183/387
1. Unsafe, Injurious Trees: The village may remove or cause or order to be removed, any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or
which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines, or other public improvements, or is affected
with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest.
2. Removal Of Stumps: All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of the ground so that the top of the stump shall
not project above the surface of the ground. (Ord. 2001-019, 8-20-2001)
8-3-6: PRUNING; CORNER CLEARANCE:
Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right of way within the village shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct
the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of eight feet (8') above the
surface of the street or sidewalk. Said owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a
menace to the safety of the public. The village shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper
spread of light along the street from a streetlight or interferes with visibility of any traffic-control device or sign. (Ord. 2001-019, 8-20-2001)
8-3-7: DEAD OR DISEASED TREE REMOVAL ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
The village has the authority to enter onto private property whereon there is located a tree, shrub, plant or plant part that is suspected to have an
infectious disease or insect problem; is dead or dying; has limb(s) that obstruct streetlight, traffic signs, the free passage of pedestrians or
vehicles; or otherwise poses a threat to safety. The village shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or diseased trees on private
property within the village, when such trees constitute a hazard to life and property, or harbor insects or disease which constitute a potential threat
to other trees within the village. The director of public works will notify in writing the owners of such trees. Removal shall be done by said owners
at their own expense within sixty (60) days after the date of service of notice. In the event of failure of owners to comply with such provisions, the
village may have the authority to remove such trees and charge the cost of removal to the owners of the property. (Ord. 2001-019, 8-20-2001)
8-3-8: PROHIBITED ACTS:
A. Injury To Trees And Shrubs: It shall be unlawful to injure any tree or shrub planted in any public place.
B. Attaching Signs And Advertisements: It shall be unlawful to attach any sign, advertisement or notice to any tree, shrub or post in any street,
parkway or other public place.
C. Attaching Wires And Ropes: It shall be unlawful to attach any wire or rope to any tree or shrub in any public street, parkway or other public
place without the permission of the village.
D. Landscaping Parkways: It shall be unlawful to plant shrubs or put any ornamental objects such as rocks, railroad ties, flower boxes, wagon
wheels or to box in trees with additional dirt buildup on or in any public property. Anyone having such objects on their parkway must remove
them within thirty (30) days of notification or the village will remove the objects at the property owner's expense. The village is not responsible
for personal injury caused by foreign objects placed or planted by property owners on public parkways. (1987 Code; amd. Ord. 2001-019, 8-
20-2001)
E. Tree Topping: It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm, or village department to top any street tree, park tree, or other tree
on public property. "Topping" is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs or stubs larger than three inches (3") in diameter within the tree's
crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or
certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this subsection at
the determination of the director of public works. (Ord. 2001-019, 8-20-2001)
8-3-9: INTERFERENCE WITH VILLAGE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the village, or any of its agents, while engaging in and about the planting,
cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying, or removing of any street trees, park trees, or trees on private grounds, as authorized in this chapter.
(Ord. 2001-019, 8-20-2001)
ARTICLE A. DUTCH ELM DISEASE
8-3A-1: NUISANCES DECLARED:
A. Infected Trees: All species and varieties of elm trees (trees of genus Ulmus) infected with the fungus known as the Dutch elm disease
(Certostomella Ulmi) as determined by laboratory analysis by the Village Forestry Department are hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
B. Dead Trees: All species and varieties of elm trees that are dead or substantially dead and all dead elmwood to which the bark is still attached
which, because of their condition, may serve as a breeding place for the European elm bark beetle (Scolytus Multistriatus), are hereby
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 184/387
declared to be a public nuisance. (1987 Code)
8-3A-2: OWNER TO REMOVE AND DESTROY INFECTED TREES:
It shall be unlawful for any owner of any lot or land in the Village to permit or maintain on any such lot or land, any elm tree or dead elmwood
which, as provided in Section 8-3A-1 of this Article, is a public nuisance, and it shall be the duty of any such owner promptly to remove and burn
any such elm tree or dead elmwood under the supervision and direction of the Village Forester or his duly authorized representative. (1987 Code)
8-3A-3: INSPECTION OF SUSPECTED TREES:
In order to carry out the purposes of this Article and to implement this enforcement thereof, the Village Forester or his duly authorized
representative, is hereby authorized and empowered to enter upon any lot or land in the Village at all reasonable hours for the purpose of
inspecting any elm trees or dead elmwood situated thereon, and said Village Forester or his duly authorized representative may remove such
specimens from any tree as are required for the purposes of the laboratory analysis referred to in Section 8-3A-1 of this Article or to determine
whether such tree, because it is dead or substantially dead, may serve as a breeding place for the European elm bark beetle.
It shall be unlawful for any person to take any action to prevent the Village Forester or his duly authorized representative from entering on any lot
or land in the Village for the purpose of such inspection, or to interfere with said Forester or such representative in the performance of any of his
duties provided for under the provisions of this Article. (1987 Code)
8-3A-4: NOTICE TO OWNER:
If, on laboratory analysis of specimens removed from any elm tree by the Village Forester, it is determined that such tree is a public nuisance, or
that any dead or substantially dead elm trees or dead elmwood is a public nuisance as provided herein, the Village Forester shall serve or cause
to be served upon the person that is owner of the lot or land on which such tree or dead elmwood is located, a written notice requiring such owner
to comply with the provisions of this Article. Service of notice provided for herein shall be by personal service if the owner of the lot or land on
which an infected elm tree, as aforesaid, is located is a resident of the Village. If such owner cannot be found in the Village, or is a nonresident of
the Village, written notice shall be served by registered mail, addressed to owner at his last known address and by publication at least one time in
a newspaper of general circulation in the Village. (1987 Code)
8-3A-5: REMOVAL BY VILLAGE, COSTS CHARGED TO OWNER:
If the person upon whom notice is served, fails, neglects or refuses to remove and destroy by burning such elm tree or dead elmwood within thirty
(30) days after service of such notice, the Village Forester or his duly authorized representative may proceed to remove and burn such tree or
dead elmwood and assess the cost thereof against the owner of such lot or land, and the amount of such cost shall be paid by such owner to the
Village.
If the Village removes from any lot or land in the Village any infected elm tree or any dead or substantially dead elm tree or dead elmwood which
is a public nuisance as provided herein, the assessment of the cost of the work done by the Village against the owner of the lot or land involved
shall be in addition to the penalties imposed herein for any violation or noncompliance with any provision of this Article.
Pursuant to State law, where the owner of property refuses or neglects to remove any diseased Dutch elm tree, the Village may collect from the
property owner the reasonable cost thereof if and when the Village removes such diseased or infected elm tree. The cost for such removal shall
be a lien upon the real estate affected, provided that notice has been given as described and set forth in the State law1. (1987 Code)
8-3A-6: INFECTED TREES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY:
Any elm tree or dead elmwood on property owned by the Village which is a public nuisance as provided herein shall promptly be removed and
burned under the supervision of the Village Forester or his representative at the expense of the Village. (1987 Code)
Footnote 1: 65 ILCS 5/11-20-12.
Chapter 4
WATER USE AND SERVICE
8-4-1: WATER USE:
A. Turning On Water: No water from the municipal water supply system shall be turned on for service into any premises by anyone other than the
director of public works and water or some person authorized by him to do so.
B. Water Service, Application: Applications to have water turned on shall be made in writing to the village clerk and shall contain an agreement by
the applicant to abide by and accept all of the provisions of this chapter as conditions governing his use of the village water supply. All such
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 185/387
applications, when properly made shall be filed by the clerk.
C. Building Construction, Fee: During the construction of any building and before any water meter is installed as provided by this chapter, the
contractor so constructing such building may be permitted to use the municipal water supply by previously making application therefor to the
village clerk and paying a fee of seventy five dollars ($75.00) to one hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00) depending on the type of structure
and use of water during the period of construction and before the premises are occupied. The fee and manner of the use of the water by the
contractor shall be determined by and meet with the approval of the director of public works and water. (1987 Code)
8-4-2: SERVICE CONNECTIONS:
A. General Requirements: No connection with a water main shall be made without a permit being issued and twenty four (24) hours' notice having
been given to the building commissioner. All such connections shall be made under the supervision of the director of public works and water,
and no connection shall be covered until the work has been inspected by him or some person authorized to make such inspection by him.
Applications for permission to make such a connection shall be made to the building commissioner and shall state the premises for which the
service is desired, the size of the pipe proposed to be used and such other matters as may be required by the director of public works and
water.
B. Fees: The fees for water main taps will be as follows:
Size (Inches) Fee
3/4 to 1 $ 50.00
11/2 to 2 160.00
3 to 4 250.00
6 to 8 500.00
C. Plumbing: No water shall be turned on for service in premises in which the plumbing does not comply with the provisions of this code;
provided, that water may be turned on for construction work in unfinished buildings, subject to the provisions of this chapter.
D. Abandoned Service: If any new water service is to be put in where an existing service is to be abandoned, the old service must be capped and
shut off at the water main's corporation cock. (1987 Code)
8-4-2-1: CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL:
A. Application: These rules and regulations shall apply to all premises served by the public potable water supply system of the village.
B. Definitions: The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of these regulations:
AGENCY: Illinois environmental protection agency.
APPROVED BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES: Backflow prevention devices or methods approved by the Research Foundation For
Cross-Connection Control of the University Of Southern California, Association Of State Sanitary Engineers, http://www.usc.edu/dept/fccchr/,
American Water Works Association, www.awwa.org, American National Standards Institute, www.ansi.org, or certified by the National
Sanitation Foundation, www.nsf.org, or listed in the Illinois plumbing code.
AUXILIARY WATER SYSTEM: Any water source or system on or available to the premises other than the public water supply system and
includes the water supplied by the system. These auxiliary waters may include water from another purveyor's public water supply system; or
water from a source such as wells, lakes, or streams, or process fluids; or used water. These waters may be polluted or contaminated or
objectionable or constitute a water source or system over which the water purveyor does not have control.
BACKFLOW: The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water system from any source
other than the intended source of the potable water supply.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: Any device, method, or type of construction intended to prevent backflow into a potable water system.
All devices used for backflow prevention in Illinois must meet the standards of the Illinois plumbing code and the Illinois environmental
protection agency.
CONTAMINATION: An impairment of the quality of the water by entrance of any substance to a degree which could create a health hazard.
CROSS CONNECTION: Any physical connection or arrangement between two (2) otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains
potable water and the other a substance of unknown or questionable safety or quality, whereby there may be a flow from one system into the
other.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 186/387
CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL BY CONTAINMENT: The installation of a backflow prevention device at the service connection to a
premises to protect the water main.
CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL BY ISOLATION: The installation of a backflow prevention device at each cross connection in a premises
to protect both the premises and water main.
CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL DEVICE INSPECTOR (CCCDI): A plumber who holds an Illinois plumbing license and who has been
certified by the Illinois environmental protection agency to inspect, test, maintain and repair cross connection control devices. Such
certification attests to an inspector's understanding of the principles of backflow and back siphonage, and the public health hazard presented
by the improper installation of cross connection control devices. A CCCDI who works in the village must on a yearly basis be registered in the
village and must submit and have on file with the village their current agency approval number and Illinois plumbing license for the time period
when they are operating in the village.
CUSTOMER: The owner, official custodian, tenant, or person in control of any premises supplied by or in any manner connected to a public
water system.
CUSTOMER'S WATER SYSTEM: Any water system located on the customer's premises. A building plumbing system is considered to be a
customer's water system.
DIRECT CROSS CONNECTION: A cross connection formed when a water system is physically joined to a source of unknown or unsafe
substance.
DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY: An assembly composed of single, independently acting check valves approved under ASSE standard
1015. A double check valve assembly must include tight shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly and suitable connections for
testing the watertightness of each check valve.
FIXED PROPER AIR GAP: The unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the water discharge point and the flood
level rim of the receptacle.
HEALTH HAZARD: Any condition, device or practice in a water system or its operation resulting from a real or potential danger to the health
and well being of customers. The word "severe" as used to qualify "health hazard" means a hazard to the health of the user that could be
expected to result in death or significant reduction in the quality of life.
INDIRECT CROSS CONNECTION: A cross connection through which an unknown substance can be forced, drawn by vacuum or otherwise
introduced into a safe potable water system.
INSPECTION: A plumbing inspection to examine carefully and critically all materials, fixtures, piping and appurtenances, appliances and
installations of a plumbing system for compliance with requirements of the Illinois plumbing code.
INSPECTOR: A fully licensed plumber who is a certified cross connection control device inspector ("CCCDI").
NONPOTABLE WATER: Water not safe for drinking, personal, or culinary use as determined by the requirements of 35 Illinois administrative
code 601 et seq.
PHYSICAL SURVEY: The actual physical survey of the premises by a CCCDI or the public works department's designee to confirm the results
of the written survey described below and to obtain information for the public records which will help maintain a system to protect the public
water supply.
PLUMBING: The actual installation, repair, maintenance, alteration or extension of a plumbing system by any person. Plumbing includes all
piping, fixtures, appurtenances and appliances for a supply of water for all purposes from the source of a private water supply on the premises
or from the main in the street, alley or at the curb to, within and about any building or buildings where a person or persons live, work or
assemble. Plumbing includes all piping, from discharge of pumping units to and including pressure tanks in water supply systems. Plumbing
includes all piping, fixtures, appurtenances, and appliances for a building drain and a sanitary drainage and related ventilation system of any
building or buildings where a person or persons live, work or assemble from the point of connection of such building drain to the building
sewer or private sewage disposal system five feet (5') beyond the foundation walls.
POLLUTION: The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic, radiological, or biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality
so as to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of the water.
POTABLE WATER: Water which meets the requirements of 35 Illinois administrative code 601 et seq., for drinking, culinary, and domestic
purposes.
POTENTIAL CROSS CONNECTION: A fixture or appurtenance with threaded hose connection, tapered spout, or other connection which
would facilitate extension of the water supply line beyond its legal termination point.
PREMISES: The property location in which the customer's building plumbing system or water system is located and any property which is in
any manner connected to a public water system.
PROCESS FLUID(S): Any fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or
concentration such as would constitute a health, pollution, or system hazard if introduced into the public or a customer's potable water system.
This includes, but is not limited to:
1. Polluted or contaminated waters;
2. Process waters;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 187/387
3. Used waters originating from the public water supply system which may have deteriorated in sanitary quality;
4. Cooling waters;
5. Questionable or contaminated natural waters taken from wells, lakes, streams, or irrigation systems;
6. Chemicals in solution or suspension;
7. Oils, gases, acids, alkalis and other liquid and gaseous fluids used in industrial or other processes, or for firefighting purposes.
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY: All mains, pipes and structures through which water is obtained and distributed to the public, including wells and
well structures, intakes and cribs, pumping stations, treatment plants, reservoirs, storage tanks and appurtenances, collectively or severally,
actually used or intended for use for the purpose of furnishing water for drinking or general domestic use and which serve at least fifteen (15)
service connections or which regularly serve at least twenty five (25) persons at least sixty (60) days per year. A public water supply is either a
"community water supply" or a "noncommunity water supply".
PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT: The department in charge of the village public works which, among other things, supervises varied activities
associated with obtaining, treating and distributing water to village residents, businesses, industries and other users and directs the operation,
maintenance and repair of pump stations, reservoirs, transmission lines and other equipment associated with the village public water supply
and/or distribution system.
REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: A device containing a minimum of two (2) independently acting
check valves together with an automatically operated pressure differential relief valve located between the two (2) check valves and approved
under ASSE standard 1013. During normal flow and at the cessation of normal flow, the pressure between these two (2) checks shall be less
than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the differential relief valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall operate
to maintain the pressure between the check valves at less than the supply pressure. The unit must include tightly closing shutoff valves
located at each end of the device, and each device shall be fitted with properly located test cocks.
SCHEDULE OF FINES AND FEES: The fines and fees applicable to this section as referenced in the text of this section and set forth in
exhibit A attached to the ordinance codified herein which may be amended from time to time at the sole discretion of the village of Broadview
corporate authorities ("schedule of fines and fees").
SECONDARY CROSS CONNECTION DEVICE: Any other water system or cross control device and which is designed for cross connection
control by isolation and which is not a primary, domestic or primary sprinkler cross connection control device and which is part of the
customer's water system.
SERVICE CONNECTION: The opening, including all fittings and appurtenances, at the water main through which water is supplied to the
user.
SYSTEM HAZARD: A condition through which an aesthetically objectionable or degrading material not dangerous to health may enter the
public water supply system or a customer's potable water system.
USED WATER: Any water supplied by a public water supply system to a customer's water system after it has passed through the service
connection and is no longer under the control of the village water supply.
WATER PURVEYOR: The owner or official custodian of a public water system.
WRITTEN SURVEY: The written document sent to each industrial, commercial and residential customer by the public works department for
the purpose of collecting information pertaining to the customer's piping system regarding the location of all connections to the public water
supply system and the existence of plumbing fixtures. The customer is required to complete, execute and forward the response to the written
survey to the public works department. The written survey will request information which requests responses regarding the location, type and
most recent inspection and testing date of all cross connection control devices and methods located within that customer's piping system. The
written survey must be in written form, and should not be an actual plumbing inspection. The village is conducting the written survey to obtain
accurate contact information for each customer and to create up to date records regarding all cross connections within the village. If the
written survey is not completed by the customer, such survey shall be completed by the public works department's designee at the time of the
physical survey.
C. Purpose: The purpose of the cross connection control program is to:
1. Protect the public water supply system from contamination or pollution by isolating within the customer's water system, contaminants or
pollutants which could backflow through the service connection into the water supply system.
2. Promote the elimination or control of existing cross connections, actual or potential between the public or customer's potable water system
and nonpotable water systems, plumbing fixtures and sources of systems containing substances of unknown or questionable safety.
3. Provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross connection control which will prevent the contamination or pollution of the
public and consumer's potable water systems.
D. Policy: The customer of the premises shall be responsible for protection of the public water supply system from contamination due to backflow
or back siphonage of contaminants through the customer's water service connection. If the public works department or a village registered
CCCDI engaged by the village determines that an approved backflow prevention device is necessary for the safety of the public water supply
system, the public works department shall give notice to the customer to install such approved backflow prevention device at each service
connection to the premises. The customer shall immediately install such approved device or devices at the customer's own expense in a
location and in a manner in accordance with the village ordinance and all applicable regulations and shall have inspections and tests made of
such approved device upon installation and as required by the village ordinance. The failure, refusal or inability on the part of the customer to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 188/387
install such device or devices immediately shall constitute grounds for discontinuing water service to the premises until such device or devices
have been installed. The customer shall retain records of installation, maintenance, testing and repair as required herein for a period of at
least five (5) years. The public works department may require the customer to submit a cross connection inspection report to the village to
assist in determining whether or not service line protection will be required. All cross connection inspections shall be conducted by a CCCDI.
E. Cross Connection Prohibited: Connections between potable water systems and other systems or equipment containing water or other
substances of unknown or questionable quality are prohibited except when and where approved cross connection control devices or methods
are installed, tested and maintained to ensure proper operation on a continuing basis. No physical connection shall be permitted between the
potable portion of a supply and any other water supply not of equal or better bacteriological and chemical quality as determined by inspection
and analysis by the agency. There shall be no arrangement or connection by which an unsafe substance may enter a public water supply or
water supply for the premises.
F. Backflow Prevention Device Required: All plumbing installed within the village, shall be installed in accordance with the Illinois plumbing code.
If in accordance with the Illinois plumbing code or by the determination of the public works department or village registered CCCDI, an
approved backflow prevention device is necessary for the safety of the public water supply system, the public works department will give
notice to the water customer to have such an approved device installed immediately. The type of device protection required shall depend on
the degree of hazard which exists and shall be at the discretion of the public works department. The water customer shall, at the water
customer's own expense, install such approved device at a location and in a manner in accordance with the Illinois plumbing code and all
applicable village municipal ordinance provisions including permits for said work, and shall have inspections and tests made of such approved
devices upon installation and as required by the Illinois plumbing code and village ordinance provisions as stated herein.
In the event that there is any addition or alteration to an automatic or fire sprinkler system or the installation of a backflow device onto a fire or
sprinkler system, a thorough hydraulic analysis shall be performed to ensure that the installation of the backflow system does not result in
pressure loss to the system that compromises the fire safety system. In the event that there is a loss of pressure, the customer shall restore
the pressure in the system to operate at the required safety levels. Prior to installing a backflow device onto a fire or sprinkler system the
customer shall submit all hydraulic calculations and backflow prevention device specifications to the fire department to ensure that fire
requirements have been met.
G. Water Customer Responsibility: It shall be the responsibility of the water customer to prevent backflow into the public water system by ensuring
that:
1. All cross connections are removed or approved cross connection control devices are installed for control of backflow and back siphonage.
2. Cross connection control devices are installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.
3. Cross connection control devices are inspected at the time of installation and at least annually by a cross connection control device
inspector (CCCDI) approved by the agency and registered and licensed in the village. The inspection of mechanical devices shall include
physical testing in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.
4. The customer has retained any and all manufacturer's instructions and schematics with regard to the cross connection control device. The
customer shall present the same to the CCCDI and the public works department, when requested.
5. Any new construction, change of ownership or rehabilitation of existing residential and nonresidential premises shall be required to be in
compliance with this section and shall be subject to the permitting process of the village.
H. Additional Water Supplies: No person, firm or corporation shall establish or permit to be established or maintain or permit to be maintained any
connection whereby a private, auxiliary or emergency water supply other than the regular public water supply of the village enters the supply
or distribution system of the village, unless such private, auxiliary or emergency water supply and the method of connection and use of such
supply shall have been approved by the public works department and the Illinois environmental protection agency.
I. Written Surveys: The public works department will cause written surveys to be issued and investigations to be made of both residential and
nonresidential premises served by the public water supply to determine whether actual or potential hazards to the public water supply and the
premises may exist and to accurately keep records of the existence of any cross connection devices.
1. Timing And Administration Of Written Survey: Such written surveys and investigations shall be made a matter of public record and shall be
repeated at least every two (2) years, or as often as the public works department shall deem necessary. Because of the large quantity of
residential and nonresidential buildings, the public works department has the discretion to stagger the distribution of the written surveys.
Records of such written surveys shall be maintained and available for review. Written surveys shall be served via U.S. mail first class ("initial
notice"). The customer shall return the written survey to the public works department no later than thirty (30) days following the date on the
initial notice.
2. Failure To Respond To Written Survey: Should a customer fail to provide the information required by the written survey, in the time specified
by the written survey, then the public works department shall provide another letter requesting that the written survey be completed and
returned within fifteen (15) days from the date on the second notice ("second notice"). If the customer still fails to return the written survey to
the public works department on the sixteenth day after the date of the second notice, the public works department shall have the right to
disconnect water service until compliance with the written survey is achieved. In addition, the failure to submit a completed written survey
will be considered a violation of this section and will subject the customer to the fines set forth in the schedule of fines and fees, and any of
the remedies set forth in subsection L of this section.
J. Physical Survey: The public works department will cause physical surveys to be made of both residential and nonresidential premises served
by the public water supply to determine whether actual or potential hazards to the public water supply may exist and the existence of any
cross connections and any cross connection devices.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 189/387
1. Timing And Administration Of Physical Survey: Such physical surveys shall be made at least every two (2) years, or as often as the public
works department shall deem necessary. Such physical surveys will be performed by a CCCDI registered with and selected by the village.
The cost of the physical survey shall be based on the schedule of fines and fees and shall be payable to the village. Records of such
physical surveys shall be maintained and available for review. The village may also send an approved CCCDI for the purpose of verifying
the presence or absence of cross connections and cross connection devices with the public water supply or within the premises. On
demand, the customer of the premises so served shall furnish to the public works department any information, which the public works
department may request regarding the plumbing and piping system or systems or water use on such premises.
2. Failure To Respond To Physical Survey Or Failure To Provide Information: The refusal of such information, when demanded, shall, within
the discretion of the public works department, be deemed evidence of the presence of improper connections as provided in this section and
may subject the customer to a disconnection from the public water supply after reasonable notice and a fine as set forth in the schedule of
fines and fees.
K. Inspection, Testing, Records And Repairs: Each cross connection device and secondary cross connection device shall be tested by a CCCDI
registered with and selected by the village after the physical survey, at the time of installation of the cross connection device and at least
annually or more frequently if recommended by the manufacturer. (Ord. 10-31, 6-7-2010)
1. Inspection And Testing Of Cross Connection Devices: If it is determined by the public works department and/or the CCCDI that there exists
a cross connection or cross connection device(s) as specified by this section, agency regulations or other law, the following shall apply:
a. Village Notice To The Customer: The village shall issue notice to the customer that the customer's connection(s) to the village's public
water supply or distribution and the customer's plumbing system and all cross connection devices and secondary cross connection
devices must be inspected and tested by a CCCDI who is registered with and selected by the village. The notice shall also contain the
cost of the inspection and testing as set forth in the schedule of fines and fees.
b. Scheduling Of The Inspection And Testing: After receiving the notice from the village, the customer shall call the village public works
department, or the CCCDI if directed by the public works department, to schedule the inspection and testing. The inspection and testing
must be completed within the time period as specified in the notice. The CCCDI who will conduct the inspection will be designated by the
village from the CCCDI registered in the village.
c. CCCDI Reporting To The Village: Upon completion of the inspection and testing, the CCCDI shall prepare and deliver to the customer a
certified record of the test results. Within five (5) business days after the inspection and testing of the cross connection device by the
CCCDI, the CCCDI shall submit the certified record of the test results to the village for each of the devices tested. A copy of the CCCDI's
documents evidencing certification as a CCCDI with a current agency approval number, a copy of the CCCDI's current Illinois plumbing
license, and proof of insurance with the village listed as an additional insured, must be on file with the village prior to performing any
inspections and testing. Records submitted shall be available for inspection by agency personnel in accordance with 415 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/19.
d. Tagging Of Device: Following each inspection and testing each cross connection device shall have a tag attached listing the date of the
most recent test, name and approval number of the CCCDI performing the test, test results certified by the CCCDI, repairs or servicing
required, repairs or services performed and date repairs and services completed. A maintenance log shall be maintained at the premises
for each device which includes all testing and repairs done since installation.
e. Compliance Prior To The Effective Date Hereof: Notwithstanding the foregoing, if at the time of the physical survey or anytime prior to the
first inspection and testing following the initial physical survey following the passage of this section, the customer provides the village with
certified test results for the cross connection devices and other documents required in full compliance with this section, the customer may
submit the required documents as specified in this subsection along with the applicable fees, if any, as specified in the schedule of fines
and fees. In order for the public works department to maintain a system of uniformity, the public works department may set a new annual
inspection date that may be less than three hundred sixty five (365) days from the previous inspection and testing.
2. Determination Of Lack Of Compliance After Inspection And Testing: If the CCCDI determines that the cross connection device is not in
compliance with applicable laws or that a cross connection exists without a cross connection device in place, the CCCDI shall immediately
notify the village public works department and the customer shall take steps to remedy the situation no later than five (5) business days
thereafter. The customer shall hire a CCCDI registered in the village and fully licensed to conduct the repair. Upon repairing the device or
otherwise bringing the cross connection device or cross connection into compliance with this section, the cross connection device or cross
connection shall be reinspected by the CCCDI selected by the village for reinspection. The customer shall be responsible for all applicable
fees and costs for any CCCDI reinspection as listed within the schedule of fines and fees herein. In the event that the customer informs the
public works department of extenuating circumstances as to why the correction cannot or has not been made within five (5) business days
of being notified of the lack of compliance, a time extension may be granted at the discretion of the public works department. (Ord. 10-42, 9-
20-2010)
L. Failure To Comply: If it is determined that a premises is not in compliance with this section, agency regulations or other law, the premises,
cross connection or cross connection devices must be brought into compliance immediately. The public works department of the village is
hereby authorized and directed to act as follows in the enforcement of this section.
1. Discontinuance Of Water Service With Notice: The public works department of the village is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue,
after reasonable notice to the occupant thereof, the water service to any premises wherein any connection in violation of the provisions of
this section is known to exist, and to take such other precautionary measures as the public works department may deem necessary to
eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water supply distribution mains. Water service to such premises shall not be restored
until such conditions have been eliminated or corrected in compliance with the provisions of this section, and until a reconnection fee as
listed in the schedule of fines and fees is paid to the village.
2. Discontinuance Of Water Service Without Notice: Immediate disconnection can be effected when the public works department believes that
imminent danger of harmful contamination of the public water supply system exists with as much notice as possible. Such action shall be
followed by verbal and written notification of the cause of disconnection. Immediate disconnection without notice to any party can be
effected to prevent actual or anticipated contamination or pollution of the public water supply, provided that, in the reasonable opinion of the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 190/387
public works department or the Illinois environmental protection agency, such action is required to prevent actual or potential contamination
or pollution of the public water supply.
3. Issuance Of A Violation Notice: Issue a violation notice to the customer, pursuant to this section, for not being in compliance with this
section and which shall be adjudicated by the code hearing department procedures in title 1, chapter 13 of this code.
4. Disconnection Of Water Service For Failure To Pay Fines And Fees: At the discretion of the public works department, water service to the
premises will continue to be disconnected if the customer does not come into compliance and pay any outstanding fines and fees after
being provided with reasonable notice of the same.
M. Permits: The installation of any cross connection device or secondary cross connection device and the elimination of any cross connection in
violation of this section requires the completion of a building permit and full compliance with all provisions of the village ordinance.
N. Customer Responsibility: The customer responsible for back siphoned material or contamination through backflow, if contamination of the
potable water supply system occurs through an illegal cross connection or an improperly installed, maintained or repaired device, or a device
which has been bypassed, must bear the cost of cleanup of the potable water supply system.
O. Nonliability: Neither the village nor its employees, directors, trustees, agents or assigns shall be liable to any customer for any injury, damages
nor lost revenues which may result from termination of said customer's water supply in accordance with the terms of this section, whether or
not said termination was with or without notice.
P. Administrative Adjudication: Any violation notice issued pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be governed by the code hearing
department procedures in title 1, chapter 13 of this code.
Q. Property Transfer: All residential, commercial, and industrial properties being transferred within the village shall fully comply with this section
and shall be required to complete a written survey, have a physical survey, have an inspection and testing of any and all devices, pay all
necessary fees and fines and take all necessary action to be in compliance with this section and this code prior to closing on the sale. (Ord.
10-31, 6-7-2010)
8-4-3: CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS:
8-4-3-1: SERVICE PIPES:
A. Separate Connections: Each residential structure and each business, regardless of whether it is located in the same building structure as
another business, shall have its own service pipe connection to the public water main.
B. Installation: All service pipes from the main to the premises to be served shall be installed at the cost of the owner of the property involved or
the applicant for the service. Such installation shall be under the supervision of the director of public works and water.
C. Specifications: No service pipe shall be installed unless it conforms to specifications approved by the board of trustees, a copy of which
specifications shall be kept on file by the clerk and shall be open to inspection by any interested person. (Ord. 2002-06, 5-20-2002)
8-4-3-2: SHUTOFF BOXES AND VALVE BASINS:
A. Shutoff Boxes: Shutoff or service boxes shall be placed on every service pipe and shall be located between the curb line and the sidewalk line
where this is practicable. Such boxes shall be located so that they are easily accessible and shall be protected from frost.
B. Valve Basins: All new water service connections with shutoff valves of three inches (3") and over must be put in sixty inch (60") precast
concrete valve basins. All existing water services with valves three inches (3") or over that are in a six inch (6") cast iron valve box shall be
converted to a sixty inch (60") precast concrete valve basin. This subsection will be enforced when there is a new building, change of
ownership, change of occupancy or major remodeling. (1987 Code)
8-4-3-3: STOPCOCKS:
There shall be a stopcock and waste cock attached to every supply pipe at the point where it enters the building inside the same so as to admit
the water being shut off. Where service pipes are intended to supply two (2) or more premises or tenements, a separate service cock shall be
used for each tenement or premises. (1987 Code)
8-4-3-4: REPAIRS:
A. Service Pipes And Meters: Service pipes shall be kept in good repair at all times. All repairs on service pipes and the plumbing system of
buildings shall be made by and at the expense of the owner of the premises served; excepting, the meters shall be repaired only by the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 191/387
village. The director of public works and water may, in case of emergency, repair any service pipe, and if this is done, the cost of such repair
work shall be repaid to the village by the owner of the premises served. Said director shall cut off the water to allow repairs to be made
whenever notice is given that such repairs are contemplated.
B. Leaks: The village shall notify the property owner of any water leak in the water service line between the buffalo box and the water meter and
shall give the property owner written notice to repair the leak within fifteen (15) days. If the water leak is not repaired within the allotted time,
the village shall bill the property owner for water wasted at the rate of six thousand (6,000) gallons per day from the date of notice to repair the
water leak. The water wasted shall be paid for at the regular water rates then in effect. (Ord. 92-9, 3-2-1992)
8-4-3-5: EXCAVATIONS:
Excavations made for installing service pipes or repairing the same shall be made under the supervision of the director of public works and water.
(1987 Code)
8-4-3-6: RESPONSIBILITY OF VILLAGE:
The village shall be responsible for the operation and maintenance of water mains, valves, fire hydrants and all other appurtenances of the water
system and water service leads to the buffalo box, including the joints on either side of the round way. (1987 Code)
8-4-3-7: NONLIABILITY OF VILLAGE:
The village shall not be liable for any damage caused by a leak or break in any service pipe, or for damage caused by a failure to repair the same
promptly; nor shall the village be liable for any damage caused by the repair or installation of such pipe or resulting therefrom when such work is
not done by the village. (1987 Code)
8-4-4: WATER METERS:
Each residential structure and individual business, regardless of whether the business is located in the same building structure as another
business, must be equipped with an adequate water meter, tested by the director of public works and water, at the expense of the owner of the
residence or business. Only one meter shall be operated for each residential structure or individual business, and additional meters shall be
disconnected. No water from the municipal water supply shall be used unless it is drawn through and measured by such a meter, except water
used in case of fires or for construction work. Before any premises are occupied, a water meter shall be installed therein as herein provided. (Ord.
2002-06, 5-20-2002)
8-4-4-1: INSTALLATION REGULATIONS:
A. Installation Required: Meters shall be installed by the applicant for service.
B. Location: Meters shall be installed in a place easy of access, and the location must be approved by the director of public works and water.
C. Seal: All meters shall be sealed before applicant can receive water from the village, and no seal shall be broken by anyone not authorized so
to do.
D. Fee: Builders, plumbers and others shall pay a price equal to the last paid by the village plus twenty percent (20%) to cover the cost of
handling and setting of meters, for all water meters installed in homes and all other structures within the village where required. (1987 Code)
8-4-4-2: METER MAINTENANCE; INSPECTIONS, TESTS, FEES:
The village shall be responsible for the operation and maintenance of the water meter for all property owners and shall, upon request, inspect and
make tests of the water meter if the village deems it necessary to determine its condition and accuracy. The village will replace water meters
where judged necessary or desirable by the director of public works and water. Maintenance of the water meter shall not include the shutoff valve
immediately before the water meter.
If any water user shall ask to have his meter checked for accuracy, such meter shall be taken out and tested by or under the supervision of the
director of public works and water. If such meter is demonstrated to be accurate, the user shall pay a fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) for such test
and if such meter is demonstrated to be inaccurate, the same shall be repaired by the Village and the expense thereof paid by the user.
If any water user shall ask to have their house or building checked for high water usage, there will be a twenty dollar ($20.00) charge. (1987
Code)
8-4-4-3: CHANGE OF LOCATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 192/387
The water meter must be located so that it is readily accessible to representatives of the Village. Any change in the location of the water meter or
any construction change which will alter its accessibility must be approved by the Director of Public Works and Water. (1987 Code)
8-4-4-4: READING METERS:
The Village of Broadview shall have access to all residences, businesses, and other structures one time per year to verify the water meter
readings. The Village of Broadview shall have access to such places at additional time(s) during the year if the Village has reason to believe that
the water meter is not properly functioning. (Ord. 2001-01, 1-8-2001)
8-4-5: WATER AND SEWER RATES:
The water and sewer rates charged to water and sewer consumers of the Village of Broadview shall be as provided by the President and Board of
Trustees.
Effective immediately, any changes to water and sewer rates whatsoever, shall be imposed by ordinance.
A minimum fee equal to the cost of two hundred (200) cubic feet of water shall be charged to each consumer of water in the Village per month.
(Ord. 2016-38, 9-6-2016)
8-4-6: WATER BILLS:
A. Penalty For Nonpayment: Bills for water used shall be dated and sent out at such time as may be provided by the Board of Trustees and a
penalty of ten percent (10%) shall be due on each and every bill that is not paid and received by the Village on or before the last weekday of
the month. If payment has not been received by the Village by the twelfth day of the following month, an additional ten dollar ($10.00) penalty
shall be assessed. (Ord. 2005-13, 6-6-2005)
B. Water Turnoff, Notice:
1. The Village of Broadview may send a notice to a resident that their water bill has not been paid on or before the due date and such notice
may state that water services shall cease on a date certain unless the bill is paid in full. (Ord. 2001-01, 1-8-2001)
2. Once water services have been shut off, the Village of Broadview shall charge fifty dollars ($50.00) to restore water service. (Ord. 2005-13,
6-6-2005)
3. All fees charged for restoration of water service are in addition to the amount owed for the unpaid water bill. The resident must pay all fees
for restoration of water service as well as the full amount owed for the unpaid water bill prior to the Village restoring water service. (Ord.
2001-01, 1-8-2001)
4. If the fees for restoration of water service and the full amount of the unpaid water bill are paid prior to three o'clock (3:00) P.M. on a date the
Village Hall is open for regular business, water service shall be restored that same day. If the fee is paid after three o'clock (3:00) P.M. on a
date the Village Hall is open for regular business, water service may be restored the same day for an additional seventy dollar ($70.00) fee,
which is in addition to the fees owed for the restoration of water service and for the unpaid water bill. In all other instances, water service
shall be restored the next day the Village Hall is open for regular business upon full payment of fees for restoration of water service and of
the unpaid water bill. (Ord. 2005-09, 3-7-2005)
5. Any person whose check is returned to the Village for nonsufficient funds shall be assessed a twenty five dollar ($25.00) fee. This fee is in
addition to any fees owed to the Village for restoration of water service or for an unpaid water bill. After two (2) checks from the same
individual, residence, or account are returned to the Village for nonsufficient funds, no checks shall be accepted by the Village from that
individual, residence, or account. (Ord. 2001-01, 1-8-2001)
C. Lien Against The Property, Notice: In addition to any other provisions herein for the nonpayment of water bills, the Village may, pursuant to 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-139-8, place a lien upon the real estate to which water service is provided for delinquent water charges. A
notice of lien shall be filed with the recorder of deeds of registrar of titles setting forth the following information: 1) a description of the subject
real estate; 2) the amount of money due for such service; and 3) the date when such amount became delinquent. The village shall have the
power to foreclose its lien as provided by statute. (Ord. 86-4, 3-17-1986)
8-4-7: LAWN SPRINKLER SYSTEMS:
A. Permit And Place Required: No installation of lawn sprinkler systems shall be made until a permit is issued by the authorized village official. A
plan in duplicate shall be submitted for approval by the installer when the application is made. One plan is to be kept as a record in the village
files and one copy of the plan stamped "approved" is to be issued to the installer when the permit is issued and is made available when
installation is made.
B. Inspection Fee, Bond Required: An inspection fee of fifty cents ($0.50) for each sprinkler head in the sprinkler system shall be charged with a
minimum charge of ten dollars ($10.00) and a bond of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) shall also be furnished by the plumbing contractor
before the permit is issued.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 193/387
C. Licensed Plumbers To Install, Inspection Required: All installations of lawn sprinkler systems shall be made by qualified, licensed contractors
as required under the Illinois plumbing license law1 and a final inspection will be made by the village plumbing inspector before installation can
be approved for use of water and connection to the water distribution system on premises.
D. Construction Specifications:
1. Compliance With Plumbing Code: All street openings, water taps, B-boxes, water connections and meters for measuring water
consumption, are to comply with, and shall be installed in accordance with the existing plumbing code2.
2. Sprinkler Heads: All sprinkler heads shall be level with all public sidewalks, curbs and roadways.
3. Automatic Timing And Backflow Devices: An automatic timing device and backflow device shall be installed on each section of the lawn
sprinkling systems for proper control and consumption of water. Only automatic timing devices shall be installed on lawn sprinkling systems
and all sections shall be installed in a manner which will ensure proper draining.
E. Nonliability Of Village: The village assumes no responsibility for damaged heads due to public work on such utilities. (1987 Code)
8-4-8: WATER CONSERVATION3:
A. Definition Of Sprinkling Purposes: As used in this section the expression "sprinkling purposes" means and refers to the use of water for
sprinkling lawns, gardens, trees, shrubs, washing cars, flushing walks and any other sprinkling or watering which requires the use of a hose.
(1987 Code)
B. Water Use Restricted: It shall be unlawful to use water from the village water distribution system for sprinkling purposes:
1. At any time from eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. to five o'clock (5:00) P.M. from May 1 to September 30 of each year. (Ord. 90-3, 7-2-1990)
2. At any time during which the president or a majority of the board of trustees determines an emergency exists by reason of a shortage of
water.
C. Determination Of Emergency: The president or a majority of the board of trustees shall have power, from time to time, to determine that an
emergency exists by reason of a shortage of water and each such determination shall become and be in full force and effect immediately upon
giving reasonable notice thereof by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the village, or by written or verbal notice by the
president, or by any other department, agency, officer, employee or agent selected by the president for such purpose, or in any other manner
provided by the majority of the board of trustees.
D. Conservation By Industrial Users: If the president or a majority of the board of trustees determines that there is a water shortage pursuant to
subsection C of this section, then the president or the board of trustees or any authorized agent thereof may request industrial users of the
village's water supply to refrain from any nonessential use of water until such emergency has ceased. (1987 Code)
8-4-9: PROHIBITED ACTS:
A. Tampering With Water System: It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by the director of public works and water to tamper with, alter
or injure any part of the village waterworks or supply system or with any meter. (1987 Code)
B. Use Of Ground Water As A Potable Water Supply; Prohibited:
1. Except for such uses or methods as are in existence on or before August 7, 2000, the use of, or attempted use of, ground water, from within
the corporate limits of the village, as a potable water supply, by the installation or drilling of wells or by any other method, is hereby
prohibited, including at points of withdrawal by the village.
2. For purposes of this subsection, "potable water" is any water used for human or domestic consumption, including, but not limited to, water
used for drinking, bathing, washing dishes, preparing foods, watering lawns, or watering gardens in which produce intended for human
consumption is grown.
3. Any person violating the provisions of this subsection B shall be subject to a fine of not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for
each violation. (Ord. 2000-10, 8-7-2000)
C. Landlord Collection Of Fees; Payment To Village: It shall be unlawful for any landlord to collect fees for water services in addition to or as part
of a rental payment and fail to pay the village of Broadview the full amount due and owing to the village of Broadview for water services within
thirty (30) days of collecting such fees. Any landlord violating this provision shall be fined the maximum penalty allowed by law. Each day the
landlord is in violation of this provision constitutes a separate violation for which a fine may be imposed. For purposes of this section,
"landlord" is defined as someone who collects rental fees for the use and/or occupancy of a space. (Ord. 2001-01, 1-8-2001)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 194/387
Chapter 5
SEWER USE AND SERVICE
8-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
HOUSE: Any store building, apartment building, office building, or other principal structure upon any parcel of land.
HOUSE DRAIN: That part of the horizontal piping within any building which receives the discharge from any or all fixtures within the structure and
carries it to the house sewer outside the wall of the building.
HOUSE SEWER: That part of the horizontal pipe which begins outside of the wall of a building and connects the "house drain" with the main
public sewer.
SANITARY SEWER: A sewer or drain for the drainage of water closets, sinks, laundry tubs, bathtubs and similar fixtures.
STORMWATER SEWER: A sewer or drain for the drainage of roofs, lands, foundations and surface water. (1987 Code)
8-5-2: SERVICE CONNECTIONS:
A written notice of intention to make a connection with a public sewer shall be filed at the office of the department of public works at least twenty
four (24) hours, exclusive of Sundays and holidays, before such connection is made. Every such connection shall be left uncovered until it has
been inspected and approved by the director of public works and water or an inspector from his office.
In every case, connections of any kind with the public sewer shall be made under the supervision of and in a manner satisfactory to the director of
public works and water. (1987 Code)
8-5-3: CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS:
8-5-3-1: GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
The connection between the soil or waste pipe and the vitrified tile sewer extending to the public sewer shall be constructed with Portland cement
mortar, made with one part cement and two (2) parts clean, sharp sand. An arched or other proper opening shall be provided in the wall for the
house drain to prevent damage by settlement. The opening around the house drain may be filled with pure refined asphaltum. (1987 Code)
8-5-3-2: QUALITY OF MATERIALS:
All vitrified clay sewer pipe shall conform to the ASTM standard and specifications for clay sewer pipe. There shall be no change in the quality
and specifications for cast iron, wrought iron or steel pipe. (1987 Code)
8-5-3-3: MATERIALS FOR HOUSE DRAINS AND SEWERS:
All house drains shall be constructed using either cast-iron pipe, vitrified clay sewer pipe or steel pipe and all house sewers shall be constructed
of vitrified clay sewer pipe, or extra heavy cast-iron pipe. (1987 Code)
8-5-3-4: JOINTS AND CONNECTIONS:
In joining vitrified clay sewer pipe, the spigot of one pipe must be carefully centered into the bell of the next pipe. Joints shall be firmly packed and
oakum or jute in such a manner as to not disturb the alignment of the pipes, and in such a way as to permit the compound to have the greatest
unobstructed surface for good pouring and adhesion. For a four inch (4") pipe approximately one ounce of dry braided jute shall be used and for a
six inch (6") pipe approximately four (4) ounces of dry braided jute shall be used. Joints shall then be poured with an asphalt compound. Asphalt
joints shall be made of Peraseal, G-K, Korite or equal. Care shall be exercised in placing the runner or snake, to assure nonleakage during
pouring and it shall not be removed until the compound is sufficiently cooled to be permanently set. The pouring temperature of the compound
shall be between three hundred fifty and four hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (350_450F). The compound shall be poured continuously until
the joint is completely filled and shall done as rapidly as possible. Pipes, before pouring, shall preferably be dry and clean. There shall be no
change in the manner in which joints and connections are made on cast-iron, wrought-iron or steel pipe. (1987 Code)
8-5-3-5: "Y" JUNCTIONS:
Whenever practicable, the house sewer shall connect with the public sewer by means of "Y" junctions in the public sewer left for such purpose. If
such "Y" junction is not available, a break may be made in the public sewer for the house sewer connection, and such connection shall be made
with a clamp type saddle and circular saw cut of sewer main by proper tool (Shewer tap machine or equivalent) and supported by brick and
Portland cement mortar in a manner satisfactory to the Director of Public Works and Water; provided, however, that when the public sewer is of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 195/387
vitrified tile eight inches (8") or less in diameter, no break shall be made, but a length of pipe shall be removed and a "Y" substituted therefor to
which the house sewer shall connect. (1987 Code)
8-5-3-6: CONNECTIONS MADE BY LICENSED PLUMBER:
All connections between metal pipes and between metal pipe and tile sewer, shall be made by a licensed plumber and in such manner as the
Director of Public Works and Water shall direct. (1987 Code)
8-5-4: MANHOLES:
A. Direct Connections Prohibited: Direct connection of a house sewer to a manhole or catch basin on the public sewer is prohibited unless the
written permission of the Director of Public Works and Water is first obtained.
B. House Sewer Change Of Direction: Where it is necessary to make a change in direction of the house sewer between the building and the
public sewer, such change of direction shall be made by means of a manhole to be construed as the Director of Public Works and Water shall
direct.
C. Construction Standards: All manholes and gravel basins shall be constructed of concrete, either monolithic or block, composed by volume of
one part Portland cement, two (2) parts sand, and four (4) parts gravel or crushed stone, mixed with sufficient water. They shall be circular in
section, with an interior diameter of three feet (3'), except that the top shall be drawn into two feet (2') beginning at a point three feet (3') below
the top, so as to fit and support the cover. The walls of such manhole or gravel basin shall be four inches (4") thick if built monolithic, or five
inches (5") if built of blocks with full joints of mortar composed of one part Portland cement to two (2) parts of sharp, clean sand, mixed with
sufficient water. Each manhole or gravel basin shall be provided with a six inch (6") concrete floor with the invert, if any, molded smoothly in
the concrete or formed of sections of vitrified pipe imbedded in the concrete. Each manhole or gravel basin shall be provided with a cast-iron
cover and cast-iron or concrete frame. The floor of all gravel basins shall be three feet (3') below the flow line of the outlet.
D. Industrial And Commercial Buildings: All industrial and commercial buildings, where applicable, must provide a sanitary inspection manhole
four feet (4') in diameter. This is to provide access to take sewer samples as per Code by the Metropolitan Sanitary District. (1987 Code)
8-5-5: STREET OPENINGS:
A. Applicability Of Code Provisions: The provisions of Chapter 2 of this Title shall apply to any street openings made in connection with sewer
work.
B. Bond Required1: No permit shall be issued for the construction or installation of any plumbing or sewer work which necessitates, or in
connection with which there is made, any excavation in any street, alley, parkway, sidewalk or other public place, unless the applicant shall
furnish a bond with a corporation licensed to do business in the state as surety thereon, to indemnify the village against any loss, cost,
damage, expense or liability of any kind which the village may suffer or which may accrue against it by reason of anything done in connection
with the doing of such work, or by reason of any failure to maintain proper barriers and warning signals around any opening or excavation, or
by reason of any obstruction arising, existing, or caused by reason of the work. The bond required herein shall be in the penal sum of five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00). (1987 Code)
8-5-6: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS:
8-5-6-1: SEPARATE SEWERS REQUIRED:
Each house and individual business, regardless of whether the business is located in the same building structure as another business, shall be
provided with a separate sewage outlet for storm water, and with a separate sewage outlet for sanitary sewage. These separate house or
business sewers or services shall each extend from the house or business to the street line. The downspouts for draining roofs and areaways,
and all storm or surface water connections shall be connected with the house or business storm water service pipe. All other house or business
sewage pipes, including water closet, sink, laundry tub and bathtub drain and basement floor drains shall be connected with the house or
business sanitary sewage service pipe. (Ord. 2002-08, 7-1-2002)
8-5-6-2: CONNECTIONS TO PUBLIC SYSTEMS:
A. If separate public sanitary sewers and storm sewers exist in the public street adjacent to the house or business, the above mentioned sanitary
sewerage house or business service pipe shall be connected with the public sanitary sewer and the above mentioned storm water house or
business service pipe shall be connected with the public storm water sewer. In no case shall any sewer connections be made by adjacent
property owners which will permit sanitary sewage to drain into any public storm water sewer. (Ord. 2002-08, 7-1-2002)
B. Where only one public sewer for both storm water and sanitary sewage is provided, roof drain and any other storm water connection that go
into the sanitary sewer must be disconnected and sealed to allow no storm water into the sanitary sewer. (1987 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 196/387
8-5-6-3: EXTRANEOUS FLOWS, PROHIBITED DISCHARGES:
A. Purpose: It is the purpose of this section that the entry of extraneous flows into the sanitary sewer system be prohibited and be discontinued,
where such entry may be accidentally or knowingly occurring.
B. Definition: "Extraneous flows" are those flows, other than domestic sewage or industrial waste, consisting of ground waters, surface waters,
storm waters and other drainage of clear waters.
C. Prohibited Discharges And Connections:
1. It shall be unlawful to discharge or cause to be discharged, directly or indirectly, into the sanitary sewer system of the village, any ground
waters, surface waters, storm waters or any other extraneous flows.
2. It shall be unlawful to make a connection or to maintain or operate a connection which serves any home, building or any other
establishment, premises or facility, and which contributes, directly or indirectly, to the sanitary sewer of the village, any ground waters,
surface waters, storm waters or any other extraneous flows.
All drains or connections designed or intended to receive and discharge ground waters, surface waters, storm waters, and other drainage,
shall be considered illegal connections if they discharge directly or indirectly into the sanitary sewer system. Such illegal connections
include, but are not limited to, roof drains, downspouts, footing drains, areaway drains, drain tiles (and sump pumps used to collect and
discharge same), yard drains, catch basins2 and inlets, and such connections shall not be allowed to discharge directly or indirectly into the
sanitary sewers.
D. Responsibility Of Owner: The proper maintenance and operation of a building service sewer, house connection or sanitary sewer line to the
point of connection to the municipal sanitary sewer system shall be the responsibility of the owner of the premises served by said sanitary
sewer pipes. "Maintenance" means keeping the sanitary sewer connection, sewer lines or other sewer facilities or structures in satisfactory
working condition and good state of repair (including, but not limited to, preventing any obstruction or extraneous materials or flows from
entering said facilities, protecting said facilities from any damage and keeping same free from defects or malfunctions), and making necessary
provisions and taking necessary precautions to assure that said sewer facilities are at all times capable of satisfactorily performing the
services and adequately discharging the functions and producing the final results and purposes said facilities are intended to perform,
discharge or produce.
E. Construction Requirements:
1. All downspouts or roof drains shall discharge onto the ground or be connected to a storm sewer, drainage ditches or a drainage system.
2. Footing drains shall be connected to sump pumps and discharge shall be made into storm sewers, drainage ditches or a drainage system.
3. Sump pumps installed to receive and discharge ground waters or other stormwaters shall be connected to the storm sewer or shall
discharge into a drainage ditch or drainage system. Sump pumps installed to receive and discharge floor drain flow, laundry tubs or other
sanitary sewage shall be connected to the sanitary sewers. A sump pump shall be used for one function only, either the discharge of
stormwaters or the discharge of sanitary sewage.
F. Village Program To Eliminate Extraneous Flows: Because of their almost instantaneous impact, their injurious results, substantial contributions
and relative ease of correction, the village will institute a priority program for the elimination of extraneous flows entering into the sanitary
sewer system through downspouts, roof drains and other visible or outside connections which are connected directly or indirectly to the
sanitary sewer system.
1. Within a period of one year, starting July 15, 1975, the village will enter into the premises and make or assist in the making of additional
inspections of the premises to ascertain if illegal connections are present. Upon completion of the visual outside or inside inspection, the
village will advise the property owner in writing if any illegal connections are observed and will advise on the manner corrections are to be
made, and the village will, at no expense to the owner, make further inspections of the corrections to ensure compliance with this chapter.
2. Within ninety (90) days after notice to the property owner by the village of the presence of illegal connections, the property owner shall, at
his expense, disconnect all illegal connections observed and all discharges of extraneous flows into the sanitary sewer system, directly or
indirectly, shall be discontinued.
3. In addition to visual inspections on the outside or the inside of the premises as indicated herein, the village may make other tests and
inspections of the municipal sewer systems as it deems necessary in order to locate such illegal connections and sources of extraneous
flows as may exist. The village, at its option, may also invoke other legal powers vested in it or implied by the statutes for the protection of
the health and welfare of the public, or institute such legal action as it deems necessary to discover and order the disconnection of any
illegal connections that may exist.
G. Penalty: Failure on the part of the property owner to comply with the provisions of subsections A, B, C, D, E and F2 of this section shall be
considered a violation which, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than two hundred dollars
($200.00). Each day shall constitute a separate violation.
H. Specifications Adopted: "Manual Of Procedures For The Administration Of The Sewer Permit Ordinance", adopted September 3, 1970, as
amended October 26, 1972, metropolitan sanitary district greater Chicago and "Guidelines For Sewer Rehabilitation And The Elimination Of
Extraneous Flow" (second print May 1973) are hereby adopted by reference as part of this section, copies of which are on file in the offices of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 197/387
the village.
In the event of conflict between the provisions of this section and any other previous ordinance, the provisions of this section shall govern.
(1987 Code)
I. Inspections, Access To Premises:
1. Any person who owns, leases, manages or controls a single-family or multiple-family residence, or a business establishment in the village,
shall allow the building commissioner or his duly appointed inspector, to gain entry to the premises for the purpose of making inspections
and tests required by the MSD.
2. Any person who denies entry to the building commissioner or inspector shall receive a warning notice advising that if entry is not allowed
within five (5) days, the person will be in violation of this subsection and subject to fines as set forth herein.
3. Any person who violates any provision of this subsection shall be subject to a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day, said fine to
accrue until such time as entry is allowed. (Ord. 88-3, 3-21-1988)
8-5-6-4: COMBINED SEWERS:
No permits for sewers shall be issued after December 31, 1970, by the village unless the following conditions herein are complied with. In all
areas designated as combined sewer areas on the metropolitan sanitary district maps, the following requirements shall apply:
A. Separation: Complete separation of sewers shall be provided within the property lines.
B. Downspouts: All downspouts or roof drains shall discharge onto the ground or be connected to storm sewers. No downspouts or roof drains
shall be connected to the sanitary sewers.
C. Footing Drains: Footing drains shall be connected to sump pumps and discharge shall be made into storm sewers or drainage ditches. No
footing drains or drainage tile shall be connected to the sanitary sewer.
D. Sump Pumps: Sump pumps installed to receive and discharge ground waters or other stormwaters shall be connected to storm sewers or
discharged into a drainage ditch. Such pumps installed to receive and discharge floor drain flow or other sanitary sewage shall be connected
to the sanitary sewer. A sump pump shall be used for one function only, the discharge of stormwaters. (1987 Code)
8-5-7: PERMIT FEES:
A. The permit fee for any connection with the public sewer system shall be sixty dollars ($60.00).
B. The fee for all sewer work not involving public sewer connections shall be based on the contract price in conformity with the general building
permit fees3. (1987 Code)
8-5-8: RESPONSIBILITIES OF VILLAGE AND PROPERTY OWNERS:
A. Responsibility Of Village: The village shall be responsible for the main trunk sanitary sewers wherever located within the village limits. Said
village shall keep them in proper condition, repair and free from obstructions.
B. Responsibility Of Property Owner: Each property owner shall be responsible for the sanitary sewer service line from the building to the point,
including the connection, with the village main trunk line. It shall be the property owner's responsibility to keep the sanitary sewer service line
in proper condition, repair and free from obstructions.
C. Village Policy On Obstructions: In the event of an obstacle in the sanitary sewer service line, the village, if requested and without charge, will
inspect the main trunk or lateral sanitary sewer lines to determine any general stoppage. If the village main trunk or lateral sewers are clear,
the property owner, at his own expense, shall cause the condition to be rectified, regardless of the cause of the obstruction. Whenever
possible, the village will assist property owners in emergency situations provided the property owners agree in advance to pay for services
rendered by the village. Charges shall be based upon rates on file in the department of public works covering labor and materials. (1987
Code)
Chapter 6
COMBINED WATERWORKS AND SEWERAGE SYSTEM
8-6-1: COMBINED WATERWORKS AND SEWERAGE SYSTEM ESTABLISHED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 198/387
A. The existing waterworks system in its entirety, together with all additions, improvements and extensions thereto that may hereafter be made
and the existing sewerage system in its entirety, together with all additions, improvements and extensions thereto that may hereafter be made,
of the Village, be and the same are hereby declared to be a combined system, and said combined waterworks and sewerage system shall be
maintained and operated as a single utility, and charges or rates shall be established for the use of such combined system, which shall be
reasonable and commensurate with the service performed by said combined system, and shall be sufficient to pay the cost of operation and
maintenance of said system, to provide an adequate depreciation fund and to pay the principal of and interest upon all revenue bonds that are
payable from the revenues of said combined system.
B. All property, real, personal and mixed, comprising the now existing waterworks system and the now existing sewerage system, as in the
preambles to Ordinance 88-5 more fully described, be and the same is hereby found, determined and declared to constitute the properties of
the combined waterworks and sewerage system of the Village.
C. From and after the effective date of this Section said existing waterworks system and said existing sanitary sewerage system shall be owned
and operated by the Village as a combined utility, known as the combined waterworks and sewerage system of the Village, and all
improvements and extensions to said waterworks or sewerage system, either or both, shall be considered as improvements and extensions to
said combined utility; and all the properties, assets, obligations and liabilities, of all kinds, of said waterworks system and of said sewerage
system, existing, outstanding and accruing or to accrue, shall be held, used, confessed and acknowledged as the properties, assets,
obligations and liabilities of said combined utility. (Ord. 88-5, 5-2-1988)
Chapter 7
CABLE REGULATIONS
8-7-1: ADOPTION OF REGULATIONS:
The regulations duly adopted by the Federal Communications Commission governing cable television service, particularly cable rate regulations,
known as chapter I of title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations, specifically subpart N, sections 76.900 to 76.985 attached hereto and made a
part hereof, as they relate to the franchising authority's power and duties in regulating basic cable service rates and equipment rates, are
incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein. (Ord. 94-4, 2-7-1994)
8-7-2: REVIEW OF SUBMITTALS:
The Village President, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, may appoint a Cable Review Committee consisting of not more than
three (3) members who shall be members of the Board of Trustees.
The Committee shall initially receive and review any submittal from the cable operator under the regulations referred to above and any complaint
regarding cable operations.
With respect to any submittals by the cable operator, the Committee shall review the submittal to determine if it is in accordance with the
regulations. If it is in compliance with the regulations, the Committee shall advise the President and Village Board regarding the procedures and
timetables required for their review pursuant to the regulations. If the submittal is not in compliance with the regulations, the Committee shall so
advise the cable operator, allowing it a reasonable period of time to cure any deficiencies.
With respect to complaints, the Committee shall review the complaint to determine jurisdiction for hearing the complaint pursuant to the
regulations. The Committee shall provide complaint forms for any complainant who so requests them. (Ord. 94-4, 2-7-1994)
8-7-3: HEARINGS:
Prior to rendering any decision regarding a cable operator's initial rate review for basic tier service and equipment or request for rate increase, or
for change of status, the President and Board of Trustees shall schedule a public hearing within the time allowed for action pursuant to the
regulations.
Notice of such hearing shall be by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the Village to be published once, not more than thirty (30)
days nor less then fifteen (15) days, prior to the hearing.
All persons appearing at said hearing shall have a reasonable opportunity to be heard and to submit comments. (Ord. 94-4, 2-7-1994)
8-7-4: DECISIONS:
A. The Village shall issue a written decision in a ratemaking proceeding whenever it disapproves an initial rate for the basic service tier or
associated equipment in whole or in part, disapproves a request for a rate increase in whole or in part, or approves a request for an increase
in whole or in part over the objections of interested parties. A franchising authority is not required to issue a written decision that approves an
unopposed existing or proposed rate for the basic service tier or associated equipment.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 199/387
B. Public notice must be given of any written decision required in subsection A of this Section, including releasing the text of any written decision
to the public. (Ord. 94-4, 2-7-1994)
8-7-5: CONFLICTS:
All ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. To the extent allowed by law, this Chapter and regulations attached hereto preempt the
franchise agreement currently in effect. (Ord. 94-4, 2-7-1994)
Chapter 8
TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE
8-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
GROSS CHARGES: The amount paid to a telecommunications retailer for the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications
within the Village, and for all services rendered in connection therewith, valued in money whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash,
credits, services, and property of every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of such
telecommunications, the cost of the materials used, labor or service costs, or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended, the
amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid. "Gross charges" for private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel
point within the Village, and charges for that portion of the interstate interoffice channel provided within the Village. However, "gross charges"
shall not include:
A. Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made under: 1) the fee imposed by this Chapter, 2) additional charges added
to a purchaser's bill under section 9-221 or 9-222 of the Public Utilities Act, 3) amounts collected under section 8-11-17 of the Illinois
Municipal Code, 4) the tax imposed by the Telecommunications Excise Tax Act, 5) 911 surcharges, or 6) the tax imposed by section 4251 of
the Internal Revenue Code;
B. Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside the Village;
C. Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of data or information or subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or
information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes, but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data
processing equipment, tabulating equipment, or accounting equipment and also includes the usage of computers under a time-sharing
agreement;
D. Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such
charges are disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;
E. Charges to business enterprises certified under section 9-222.1 of the Public Utilities Act to the extent of such exemption and during the
period of time specified by the Village;
F. Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, and only to the extent that the charges between the parent corporation
and wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the corporations and not the
generation of profit other than a regulatory required profit for the corporation rendering such services;
G. Bad debts ("bad debt" means any portion of a debt that is related to a sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or
excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under applicable Federal income tax standards; if the portion of the
debt deemed to be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that portion during the reporting period in which the
payment is made);
H. Charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated telecommunications devices; or
I. Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided to the Village.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: Any Municipal street, alley, water or public right of way dedicated or commonly used for utility purposes, including utility
easements wherein the Village has acquired the right and authority to locate or permit the location of utilities consistent with telecommunications
facilities. "Public right of way" shall not include any real or personal Village property that is not specifically described in the previous sentence and
shall not include Village buildings and other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the public right of way.
RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE (Or Any Like Term): Means and includes any retailer having or maintaining
within the State of Illinois, directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities, transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse, or other place
of business, or any agent or other representative operating within this State under the authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 200/387
whether such place of business or agent or other representative is located here permanently or temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary
is licensed to do business in this State.
SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying, or furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in
connection therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned
subsidiaries, when the gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater than the gross charge paid to the
retailer for their use or consumption and not for sale.
SERVICE ADDRESS: The location of telecommunications equipment from which telecommunications services are originated or at which
telecommunications services are received. If this is not a defined location, as in the case of wireless telecommunications, paging systems,
maritime systems, air-to-ground systems, and the like, "service address" shall mean the location of the customer's primary use of the
telecommunications equipment as defined by the location in Illinois where bills are sent.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: Includes, but is not limited to, messages or information transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone
service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange services, private line services, specialized mobile radio
services, or any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber
optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, "telecommunications" shall also include
"wireless telecommunications" as hereinafter defined. "Telecommunications" shall not include value added services in which computer processing
applications are used to act on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission.
"Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of
the service provided by him or her to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the end-to-end communications. Retailer access
charges, right of access charges, charges for use of intercompany facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision and
used as a component of, or integrated into, end-to-end telecommunications service shall not be included in gross charges as sale for resale.
"Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of cable services through a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications Act of
1984 (47 USC section 521 and following) as now or hereafter amended or cable or other programming services subject to an open video system
fee payable to the Village through an open video system as defined in the Rules of the Federal Communications Commission (47 CDF 76.1550
and following) as now or hereafter amended.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: A. Any telecommunications retailer; and
B. Any person that is not a telecommunications retailer that installs, owns, operates or controls equipment in the public right of way that is
used or designed to be used to transmit telecommunications in any form.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER OR RETAILER OR CARRIER: Means and includes every person engaged in the business of making sales
of telecommunications at retail as defined in this Section. The Village may, in its discretion, upon application, authorize the collection of the fee
hereby imposed by any retailer not maintaining a place of business within this State, who, to the satisfaction of the Village, furnishes adequate
security to ensure collection and payment of the fee. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer to pay the fee upon all of the gross
charges for telecommunications in the same manner and subject to the same requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of business within
the Village.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS: Includes cellular mobile telephone services, personal wireless services as defined in section 704(c) of the
Telecommunications Act of 1996 (Public Law No. 104-104), 42 USC section 332(c)(7), as now or hereafter amended, including all commercial
mobile radio services, and paging services. (Ord. 97-9, 10-20-1997)
8-8-2: REGISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDERS:
A. Every "telecommunications provider" as defined by this Chapter shall register with the Village within thirty (30) days after the effective date of
this Chapter or becoming a telecommunications provider, whichever is later, on a form to be provided by the Village, provided, however, that
any telecommunications retailer that has filed a return pursuant to subsection 8-8-4C of this Chapter shall be deemed to have registered in
accordance with this Section.
B. Every telecommunication provider who has registered with the Village pursuant to subsection A of this Section has an affirmative duty to
submit an amended registration form or current return as required by subsection 8-8-4C of this Chapter, as the case may be, to the Village
within thirty (30) days from the date of the occurrence of any changes in the information provided by the telecommunications provider in the
registration form or most recent return on file with the Village. (Ord. 97-9, 10-20-1997)
8-8-3: MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE:
A. A Village telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee is hereby imposed upon all telecommunications retailers in the amount of one
percent (1%) of all gross charges charged by the telecommunications retailer to service addresses within the Village for telecommunications
originating or received in the Village.
B. Upon the effective date of the infrastructure maintenance fee authorized in this Chapter, the Village infrastructure maintenance fee authorized
hereunder shall be the only fee or compensation for the use of all public rights of way within the Village by telecommunications retailers.
Imposition of the infrastructure maintenance fee provided under this Chapter does not, however, serve as a limitation on the levying of any
taxes or imposition of any fees otherwise authorized by law.
C. The Village telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee authorized by this Section shall be collected, enforced, and administered as
set forth in Section 8-8-4 of this Chapter. (Ord. 97-9, 10-20-1997)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 201/387
8-8-4: COLLECTION, ENFORCEMENT, AND ADMINISTRATION:
A. A telecommunications retailer shall charge to and collect from each customer an additional charge in an amount equal to the Village
infrastructure maintenance fee attributable to that customer's service address.
B. Unless otherwise approved by the Village Collector the infrastructure maintenance fee shall be remitted by the telecommunications retailer to
the Village not later than the last day of the month subsequent to the month in which a bill is issued to the customer; provided however, that
the telecommunications retailer may retain an amount not to exceed two percent (2%) of the Village infrastructure maintenance fee collected
by it to reimburse itself for expenses incurred in accounting for and remitting the fee.
C. Remittance of the Municipal infrastructure fee to the Village shall be accompanied by a return, in a form to be prescribed by the Village
Collector which shall contain such information as the Village Collector may reasonably require.
D. Any infrastructure maintenance fee required to be collected pursuant to this Chapter, and any such infrastructure maintenance fee collected by
such telecommunications retailer shall constitute a debt owed by the telecommunications retailer to the Village. The charge imposed under
subsection A of this Section by the telecommunications retailer pursuant to this Chapter shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the
telecommunications retailer who provides such services until paid and, if unpaid, is recoverable at law in the same manner as the original
charge for such services.
E. If it shall appear that an amount of infrastructure maintenance fee has been paid that was not due under the provisions of this Chapter, whether
as a result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any infrastructure maintenance fee due, or to
become due, under this Chapter, from the telecommunications retailer who made the erroneous payment; provided, however, the Village
Collector may request and the telecommunications retailer shall provide, written substantiation for such credit. However, no claim for such
credit may be made more than three (3) years after the date of the erroneous payment, unless: 1) the credit is used only to offset a claim of
underpayment made by the Village within the applicable statutory period of limitations, and 2) the credit derives from an overpayment made by
the same telecommunications retailer during the applicable statutory period of limitations.
F. Amounts paid under this Chapter by telecommunications retailers shall not be included in the tax base under any of the following acts as
described immediately below:
1. "Gross charges" for purposes of the Telecommunications Excise Tax Act;
2. "Gross receipts" for purposes of the municipal utility tax as prescribed in section 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code;
3. "Gross charges" for purposes or the municipal telecommunications tax as prescribed in section 8-11-17 of the Illinois Municipal Code;
4. "Gross revenue" for the purposes of the tax on annual gross revenue of public utilities as prescribed in section 2-202 of the Public Utilities
Act.
G. The Village shall have the right, in its discretion, to audit books and records of all telecommunications retailers subject to this Chapter to
determine whether the telecommunications retailer has properly accounted to the Village for the Village infrastructure maintenance fee. Any
underpayment of the amount of the Village infrastructure maintenance fee due to the Village by the telecommunications retailer shall be paid
to the Village plus five percent (5%) of the total amount of the underpayment determined in an audit plus any costs incurred by the Village in
conducting the audit, in an amount not to exceed five percent (5%) of the total amount of the underpayment determined in an audit. Said sum
shall be paid to the Village within twenty one (21) days after the issuance of an invoice for same.
H. The Village Collector, or his or her designee, may promulgate such further or additional regulations concerning the administration and
enforcement of this Chapter consistent with its provisions, as may be required from time to time and shall notify all telecommunications
retailers that are registered pursuant to Section 8-8-2 of this Chapter of such regulations. (Ord. 97-9, 10-20-1997)
8-8-5: COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS:
Nothing in this Chapter shall excuse any person or entity from obligations imposed under any law, including, but not limited to:
A. Generally applicable taxes; and
B. Standards for construction on, over, under or within, use or repair of the public rights of way, including standards relating to freestanding towers
and other structures upon the public rights of way, as provided; and
C. Any liability imposed for the failure to comply with such generally applicable taxes or standards governing construction on, over, under, or
within, use of or repair of the public rights of way; and
D. Compliance with any other ordinance or provision of this Code concerning uses or structures not located on, over, or within the rights of way.
(Ord. 97-9, 10-20-1997)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 202/387
8-8-6: EXISTING FRANCHISE AND LICENSES:
Any franchise, license, or similar agreements between telecommunications retailers and the Village entered into before the effective date of this
Chapter regarding the use of public rights of way shall remain valid according to and for their stated terms except for any fees, charges or other
compensation to the extent waived. (Ord. 97-9, 10-20-1997)
8-8-7: PENALTIES:
Any telecommunications provider who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be
subject to fine in accordance with the general penalty provisions of this Code. (Ord. 97-9, 10-20-1997)
8-8-8: ENFORCEMENT:
Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or further remedies that the Village may have for enforcement of this Chapter.
(Ord. 97-9, 10-20-1997)
8-8-9: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this Chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity
of the remaining portions hereof. (Ord. 97-9, 10-20-1997)
8-8-10: CONFLICT:
This Chapter supersedes all chapters, ordinances or parts of chapters or ordinances adopted prior hereto which are in conflict herewith, to the
extent of such conflict. (Ord. 97-9, 10-20-1997)
8-8-11: WAIVER AND FEE IMPLEMENTATION:
A. The Village hereby waives all fees, charges, and other compensation that may accrue after the effective date of the waiver, to the Village by a
telecommunications retailer, pursuant to any existing Village franchise, license, or similar agreement with a telecommunications retailer during
the time the Village imposes the telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee. This waiver shall only be effective during the time the
infrastructure maintenance fee provided for in this Chapter is subject to being lawfully imposed on the telecommunications retailer and
collected by the telecommunications retailer from the customer.
B. The Village Clerk shall send a notice of the waiver by certified mail, return receipt requested, to each telecommunications retailer with whom
the Village has a franchise.
C. The Village infrastructure maintenance fee provided for in this Chapter shall become effective and imposed on the first day of the month not
less than ninety (90) days after the Village provides written notice by certified mail to each telecommunications retailer with whom the Village
has an existing franchise, license or similar agreement that the Village waives all compensation under such existing franchise, license or
similar agreement during such time as the fee is subject to being lawfully imposed and collected by the retailer and remitted to the Village. The
infrastructure maintenance fee shall apply to gross charges billed on or after the effective date as established in the preceding sentence. (Ord.
97-9, 10-20-1997)
Chapter 9
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN RIGHTS-OF-WAY
8-9-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and procedures for constructing facilities on rights-of-way within the Village's
jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the Village
rights-of-way and the Village as a whole.
B. Intent: In enacting this chapter, the Village intends to exercise its authority over the rights-of-way in the Village and, in particular, the use of the
public ways and property by utilities, by establishing uniform standards to address issues presented by utility facilities, including, without
limitation:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 203/387
1. Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys, parkways and other public ways and places;
2. Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
3. Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the Village's utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in rights-of-way or public
property;
4. Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees, from the installation of utility facilities;
5. Protect against increased stormwater runoff due to structures and materials that increase impermeable surfaces;
6. Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are installed;
7. Preserve open space, particularly the tree lined parkways that characterize the Village's residential neighborhoods;
8. Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the rights-of-way; and
9. Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties adjacent to utility facilities locations.
C. Facilities Subject To This Chapter: This chapter applies to all facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way
within the jurisdiction of the Village. A facility lawfully established prior to the effective date of this chapter may continue to be maintained,
repaired and operated by the utility as presently constructed and located, except as may be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise,
license or similar agreement.
D. Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements: The Village, in its discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a franchise,
license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the village rights of
way. Utilities that are not required by law to enter into such an agreement may request that the village enter into such an agreement. In such
an agreement, the village may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with this chapter.
E. Effect Of Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements:
1. Utilities Other Than Telecommunications Providers: In the event that a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise,
license or similar agreement with the village, such franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such
agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
2. Telecommunications Providers: In the event of any conflict with, or inconsistency between, the provisions of this chapter and the provisions
of any franchise, license or similar agreement between the village and any telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise,
license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
F. Conflicts With Other Chapters: This chapter supersedes all chapters or parts of chapters adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to
the extent of such conflict.
G. Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
chapter, the utility shall comply with the requirements of this chapter to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws or
regulations.
H. Sound Engineering Judgment: The village shall use sound engineering judgment when administering this chapter and may vary the standards,
conditions, and requirements expressed in this chapter when the village so determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of
the village to regulate its rights of way for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 2008-06, 2-4-2008)
8-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter and unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section. Any term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed to it in 92 Illinois administrative code section 530.30, unless the
context clearly requires otherwise.
AASHTO: American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
ANSI: American National Standards Institute.
ASTM: American Society for Testing and Materials.
APPLICANT: A person applying for a permit under this chapter.
BACKFILL: The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a trench or pit.
BORE OR BORING: To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor.
CABLE OPERATOR: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(5).
CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(6).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 204/387
CABLE SYSTEM: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(7).
CARRIER PIPE: The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be transported.
CASING: A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as: carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices.
CLEAR ZONE: The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may
consist of a shoulder, a recoverable slope, a nonrecoverable slope, and a clear run out area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic
volumes and speeds, and on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO "Roadside Design Guide".
COATING: Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for protection against external corrosion.
CODE: The municipal code of the village of Broadview.
CONDUCTOR: Wire carrying electrical current.
CONDUIT: A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
CONSTRUCTION OR CONSTRUCT: The installation, repair, maintenance, placement, alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or
abandonment in place of facilities.
COVER: The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
CROSSING FACILITY: A facility that crosses one or more right of way lines of a right of way.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS: The village director of public works or his or her designee.
DISRUPT THE RIGHT OF WAY: For the purposes of this chapter, any work that obstructs the right of way or causes a material adverse effect on
the use of the right of way for its intended use. Such work may include, without limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement
(whether temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil,
and shall not include the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.
EMERGENCY: Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety of the public using or in the vicinity of the right of way or
immediate maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by the utility.
ENCASEMENT: Provision of a protective casing.
EQUIPMENT: Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used to facilitate construction of facilities.
EXCAVATION: The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying bare by digging.
EXTRA HEAVY PIPE: Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
FACILITY: All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including, but not limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas,
vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles, conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables, and appurtenances thereto) located on,
over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights of way under this chapter. For purposes of this chapter, the term "facility" shall not include
any facility owned or operated by the village.
FREESTANDING FACILITY: A facility that is not a crossing facility or a parallel facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump, or meter station.
FRONTAGE ROAD: Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent to the highway where it is precluded by control of access to a
highway.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any substance or material which, due to its quantity, form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is
determined by the village director of public works to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or
to the ecological balance of the environment, including, but not limited to, explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or
gases, poisons, etiology (biological) agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance determined to be hazardous or toxic under any federal or
state law, statute or regulation.
HIGHWAY: A specific type of right of way used for vehicular traffic including rural or urban roads or streets. "Highway" includes all highway land
and improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges, drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and
appurtenances necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.
HIGHWAY CODE: The Illinois highway code, 605 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-101 et seq., as amended from time to time.
HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois cable
and video competition law, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
ICC: Illinois commerce commission.
IDOT: Illinois department of transportation.
JULIE: The joint utility locating information for excavators utility notification program.
JACKING: Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means with or without boring.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 205/387
JETTING: Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to create a cavity ahead of the pipe.
JOINT USE: The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two (2) or more utilities.
MAJOR INTERSECTION: The intersection of two (2) or more major arterial highways.
OCCUPANCY: The presence of facilities on, over or under right of way.
PARALLEL FACILITY: A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to the centerline of a right of way.
PARKWAY: Any portion of the right of way not improved by street or sidewalk.
PAVEMENT CUT: The removal of an area of pavement for access to facility or for the construction of a facility.
PERMITTEE: That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to sections 8-9-4 and 8-9-5 of this chapter.
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES: Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline,
distillates, propane, butane, or coal slurry.
PRACTICABLE: That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than that which is simply convenient.
PRESSURE: The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
PROMPT: That which is done within a period of time specified by the village. If no time period is specified, the period shall be thirty (30) days.
PUBLIC ENTITY: A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government, whether at local, state or federal level.
RESTORATION: The repair of a right of way, highway, roadway, or other area disrupted by the construction of a facility.
RIGHT OF WAY OR RIGHTS OF WAY: Any street, alley, other land or waterway, dedicated or commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or
other similar purposes, including utility easements, in which the village has the right and authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of
facilities other than those of the village. "Right of way" or "rights of way" shall not include any real or personal village property that is not
specifically described in the previous two (2) sentences and shall not include village buildings, fixtures and other structures or improvements,
regardless of whether they are situated in the right of way.
ROADWAY: That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying, or furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in
connection therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned
subsidiaries, when the gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater than the gross charge paid to the
retailer for their use or consumption and not for sale.
SECURITY FUND: That amount of security required pursuant to section 8-9-10 of this chapter.
SHOULDER: A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency
vehicular stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT: A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted engineering principles, practices and experience.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area
telephone service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange service, private line services, mobile radio
services, cellular mobile telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging service and any other form of mobile or portable one-way
or two-way communications, and any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between or among points by
wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. "Private line" means a dedicated nontraffic sensitive service for a
single customer that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel, or a group of such channels, from one or
more specified locations to one or more other specified locations. "Telecommunications" shall not include value added services in which computer
processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code and protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission.
"Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of
the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the end to end communications.
"Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of cable services through a cable system as defined in the cable communications act of
1984 (47 USC section 521 and following), as now or hereafter amended, or cable or other programming services subject to an open video system
fee payable to the village through an open video system as defined in the rules of the federal communications commission (47 CFR section
76.1500 and following), as now or hereafter amended.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: Any person that installs, owns, operates or controls facilities in the right of way used or designed to be
used to transmit telecommunications in any form.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER: Means and includes every person engaged in making sales of telecommunications at retail as defined
herein.
TRENCH: A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an underground facility.
UTILITY: The individual or entity owning or operating any "facility" as defined in this section.
VENT: A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors from an underground casing.
VIDEO SERVICE: That term as defined in section 21-201 (v) of the Illinois cable and video competition law of 2007, 220 Illinois Compiled
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 206/387
Statutes 21-201(v).
VILLAGE: The village of Broadview.
WATER LINES: Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
WET BORING: Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material. (Ord.
2008-06, 2-4-2008)
8-9-3: ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
Every utility that occupies right of way within the village shall register on January 1 of each year with the director of public works, providing the
utility's name, address and regular business telephone and telecopy numbers, the name of one or more contact persons who can act on behalf of
the utility in connection with emergencies involving the utility's facilities in the right of way and a twenty four (24) hour telephone number for each
such person, and evidence of insurance as required in section 8-9-8 of this chapter, in the form of a certificate of insurance. (Ord. 2008-06, 2-4-
2008)
8-9-4: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES:
A. Permit Required: No person shall construct (as defined in this chapter) any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within any
village right of way which: 1) changes the location of the facility, 2) adds a new facility, 3) disrupts the right of way (as defined in this chapter),
or 4) materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility on, over, above, along, under, across or within the right of way,
without first filing an application with the village director of public works and obtaining a permit from the village therefor, except as otherwise
provided in this chapter. No permit shall be required for installation and maintenance of service connections to customers' premises where
there will be no disruption of the right of way.
B. Permit Application: All applications for permits pursuant to this chapter shall be filed on a form provided by the village and shall be filed in such
number of duplicate copies as the village may designate. The applicant may designate those portions of its application materials that it
reasonably believes contain proprietary or confidential information as "proprietary" or "confidential" by clearly marking each page of such
materials accordingly.
C. Minimum General Application Requirements: The application shall be made by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall contain,
at a minimum, the following:
1. The utility's name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers;
2. The applicant's name and address, if different than the utility, its telephone and telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and its interest in the
work;
3. The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the
applicant with respect to the application;
4. A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The
scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on
those matters likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
5. Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the village:
a. A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the "Illinois Manual
On Uniform Traffic Control Devices", to prevent injury or damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian
and vehicular traffic; and
b. An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and
hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant. The intended response shall include notification to the
village and shall promote protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with ICC regulations for emergency
contingency plans constitutes compliance with this section unless the village finds that additional information or assurances are needed;
6. Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed, including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and
specifications comply with applicable codes, rules, and regulations;
7. Evidence of insurance as required in section 8-9-8 of this chapter;
8. Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in section 8-9-10 of this chapter;
9. Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this chapter (see section 8-9-21 of this chapter); and
10. Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the village.
D. Supplemental Application Requirements For Specific Types Of Utilities: In addition to the requirements of subsection C of this section, the
permit application shall include the following items, as applicable to the specific utility that is the subject of the permit application:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 207/387
1. In the case of the installation of a new electric power, communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video service or
natural gas distribution system, evidence that any "certificate of public convenience and necessity" or other regulatory authorization that the
applicant is required by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to obtain, has been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority;
2. In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size, design, construction class, and operating pressures;
3. In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the Illinois environmental protection agency, division of public water supplies,
have been satisfied;
4. In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and water pollution requirements of the Illinois environmental protection agency,
division of water pollution control and the metropolitan water reclamation district, have been satisfied; or
5. In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the
design standard to be followed.
E. Applicant's Duty To Update Information: Throughout the entire permit application review period and the construction period authorized by the
permit, any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be submitted by the utility in writing to the village within thirty
(30) days after the change necessitating the amendment.
F. Application Fees: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this chapter
shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), or as otherwise supplemented or amended from time to
time by the village. No application fee is required to be paid by any electricity utility that is paying the municipal electricity infrastructure
maintenance fee pursuant to the electricity infrastructure maintenance fee act. (Ord. 2008-06, 2-4-2008)
8-9-5: ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS:
A. Village Review Of Permit Applications: Completed permit applications, containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the village
director of public works within a reasonable time after filing. If the application does not conform to the requirements of applicable ordinances,
codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the village director of public works shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If
the village director of public works is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this chapter and applicable ordinances,
codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the village director of public works shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. In all instances, it
shall be the duty of the applicant to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the village director of public works, that the construction proposed under
the application shall be in full compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
B. Additional Village Review Of Applications Of Telecommunications Retailers:
1. Pursuant to section 4 of the telephone company act, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 65/4, a telecommunications retailer shall notify the
village that it intends to commence work governed by this chapter for facilities for the provision of telecommunications services. Such notice
shall consist of plans, specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the purpose and intent of the facilities, and shall be
provided by the telecommunications retailer to the village not less than ten (10) days prior to the commencement of work requiring no
excavation and not less than thirty (30) days prior to the commencement of work requiring excavation. The village director of public works
shall specify the portion of the right of way upon which the facility may be placed, used and constructed.
2. In the event that the village director of public works fails to provide such specification of location to the telecommunications retailer within
either: a) ten (10) days after service of notice to the village by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work not involving excavation
for new construction or b) twenty five (25) days after service of notice by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work involving
excavation for new construction, the telecommunications retailer may commence work without obtaining a permit under this chapter.
3. Upon the provision of such specification by the village, where a permit is required for work pursuant to section 8-9-4 of this chapter the
telecommunications retailer shall submit to the village an application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and documentation
available regarding the facility to be constructed. Such application shall be subject to the requirements of subsection A of this section.
C. Additional Village Review Of Applications Of Holders Of State Authorization Under The Cable And Video Competition Law Of 2007:
Applications by a utility that is a holder of a state issued authorization under the cable and video competition law of 2007 shall be deemed
granted forty five (45) days after submission to the village, unless otherwise acted upon by the village, provided the holder has complied with
applicable village codes, ordinances, and regulations. (Ord. 2008-06, 2-4-2008)
8-9-6: EFFECT OF PERMIT:
A. Authority Granted; No Property Right Or Other Interest Created: A permit from the village authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain
activities in accordance with this chapter on village rights of way, and does not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to
impinge upon the rights of others who may have an interest in the rights of way.
B. Duration: No permit issued under this chapter shall be valid for a period longer than six (6) months unless construction is actually begun within
that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion.
C. Preconstruction Meeting Required: No construction shall begin pursuant to a permit issued under this chapter prior to attendance by the
permittee and all major contractors and subcontractors who will perform any work under the permit at a preconstruction meeting. The
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 208/387
preconstruction meeting shall be held at a date, time and place designated by the village with such village representatives in attendance as
the village deems necessary. The meeting shall be for the purpose of reviewing the work under the permit, and reviewing special
considerations necessary in the areas where work will occur, including, without limitation, presence or absence of other utility facilities in the
area and their locations, procedures to avoid disruption of other utilities, use of rights of way by the public during construction, and access and
egress by adjacent property owners.
D. Compliance With All Laws Required: The issuance of a permit by the village does not excuse the permittee from complying with other
requirements of the village and applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations. (Ord. 2008-06, 2-4-2008)
8-9-7: REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS:
In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and
specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the village within ninety (90)
days after the completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans shall specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities
deviate from the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the permit also deviates from the requirements of this chapter, it shall be
treated as a request for variance in accordance with section 8-9-21 of this chapter. If the village denies the request for a variance, then the
permittee shall either remove the facility from the right of way or modify the facility so that it conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings
or plans therefor. (Ord. 2008-06, 2-4-2008)
8-9-8: INSURANCE:
A. Required Coverages And Limits: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, each utility occupying right of way or
constructing any facility in the right of way shall secure and maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring the utility as named
insured and naming the village, and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents, and employees as additional insureds on the policies
listed in subsections A1 and A2 of this section:
1. Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-operations, explosion, collapse, and, underground hazard (commonly referred to
as "X", "C", and "U" coverages) and products-completed operations coverage with limits not less than:
a. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death to each person;
b. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for property damage resulting from any one accident; and
c. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for all other types of liability;
2. Automobile liability for owned, nonowned and hired vehicles with a combined single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal
injury and property damage for each accident;
3. Workers' compensation with statutory limits; and
4. Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per employee and per accident.
If the utility is not providing such insurance to protect the contractors and subcontractors performing the work, then such contractors and
subcontractors shall comply with this section.
B. Excess Or Umbrella Policies: The coverages required by this section may be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any
excess or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a following form basis such that when any loss covered
by the primary policy exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy becomes effective to cover such loss.
C. Copies Required: The utility shall provide copies of any of the policies required by this section to the village within ten (10) days following
receipt of a written request therefor from the village.
D. Maintenance And Renewal Of Required Coverages: The insurance policies required by this section shall contain the following endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30) days after
receipt by the Village, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice addressed to the Village President of
such intent to cancel or not to renew.
Within ten (10) days after receipt by the village of said notice, and in no event later than ten (10) days prior to said cancellation, the utility shall
obtain and furnish to the village evidence of replacement insurance policies meeting the requirements of this section.
E. Self-Insurance: A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage and limit requirements required by subsection A of this
section. A utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of
additional insureds under subsection A of this section, or the requirements of subsections B, C and D of this section. A utility that elects to selfinsure
shall provide to the village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage and limit
requirements required under subsection A of this section, such as evidence that the utility is a "private self-insurer" under the workers'
compensation act.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 209/387
F. Effect Of Insurance And Self-Insurance On Utility's Liability: The legal liability of the utility to the village and any person for any of the matters
that are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance required by this section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or selfinsurance
or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder.
G. Insurance Companies: All insurance provided pursuant to this section shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers
legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the state of Illinois. All insurance carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated "A-" or
better and of a class size "X" or higher by A.M. Best Company. (Ord. 2008-06, 2-4-2008)
8-9-9: INDEMNIFICATION:
By occupying or constructing facilities in the right of way, a utility shall be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the village and its
elected and appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and representatives harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims,
demands, judgments, damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting
from or alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the utility or its
affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or occupancy of the rights of way, and in
providing or offering service over the facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this chapter or by a
franchise, license, or similar agreement; provided, however, that the utility's indemnity obligations hereunder shall not apply to any injuries,
claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses arising out of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this chapter
by the village, its officials, officers, employees, agents or representatives. (Ord. 2008-06, 2-4-2008)
8-9-10: SECURITY:
A. Purpose: The permittee shall establish a security fund in a form and in an amount as set forth in this section. The security fund shall be
continuously maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee's sole cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized
under the permit. The security fund shall serve as security for:
1. The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements of this chapter;
2. Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the village occasioned by the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations,
orders, permits and other directives of the village issued pursuant to this chapter; and
3. The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims, costs, or expenses that the village may pay or incur by reason of any action
or nonperformance by permittee in violation of this chapter including, without limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work
the permittee is required by this chapter to perform that the village must perform itself or have completed as a consequence solely of the
permittee's failure to perform or complete, and all other payments due the village from the permittee pursuant to this chapter or any other
applicable law.
B. Form: The permittee shall provide the security fund to the village in the form, at the permittee's election, of cash, a surety bond in a form
acceptable to the village, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form acceptable to the village. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided
pursuant to this subsection shall, at a minimum:
1. Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the village and the permittee;
2. Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by the village of any amounts covered by it; and
3. Shall provide a location convenient to the village and within the state of Illinois at which it can be drawn.
C. Amount: The dollar amount of the security fund shall be sufficient to provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right of way to at
least as good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the permit, as determined by the village director of public works, and
may also include reasonable, directly related costs that the village estimates are likely to be incurred if the permittee fails to perform such
restoration. Where the construction of facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in phases in multiple locations in the village, with
each phase consisting of construction of facilities in one location or a related group of locations, and where construction in another phase will
not be undertaken prior to substantial completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the village director of public works may, in the
exercise of sound discretion, allow the permittee to post a single amount of security which shall be applicable to each phase of the
construction under the permit. The amount of the security fund for phased construction shall be equal to the greatest amount that would have
been required under the provisions of this subsection for any single phase.
D. Withdrawals: The village, upon fourteen (14) days' advance written notice clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal
rights under this subsection, may withdraw an amount from the security fund, provided that the permittee has not reimbursed the village for
such amount within the fourteen (14) day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee:
1. Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee hereunder;
2. Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and unpaid;
3. Fails to reimburse the village for any damages, claims, costs or expenses which the village has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of
any action or nonperformance by the permittee; or
4. Fails to comply with any provision of this chapter that the village determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the
security fund.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 210/387
E. Replenishment: Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of written notice from the village that any amount has been withdrawn from the security
fund, the permittee shall restore the security fund to the amount specified in subsection C of this section.
F. Interest: The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued on the amount in the security fund be returned to the permittee by the
village, upon written request for said withdrawal to the village, provided that any such withdrawal does not reduce the security fund below the
minimum balance required in subsection C of this section.
G. Closing And Return Of Security Fund: Upon completion of the work authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of
the security fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to
compensate the village for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this chapter or other applicable law. In the event of any
revocation of the permit, the security fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the property of the village to the extent
necessary to cover any reasonable costs, loss or damage incurred by the village as a result of said revocation, provided that any amounts in
excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to the permittee.
H. Rights Not Limited: The rights reserved to the village with respect to the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the village, whether
reserved by this chapter or otherwise authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said security fund shall
affect any other right the village may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the village shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with
respect to any of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated. (Ord. 2008-06, 2-4-2008)
8-9-11: PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
A. Village Right To Revoke Permit: The village may revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this chapter for one or more of the following
reasons:
1. Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete statements in the permit application;
2. Noncompliance with this chapter;
3. Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights of way
presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare; or
4. Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in accordance with the permit and approved plans.
B. Notice Of Revocation Or Suspension: The village shall send written notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this
chapter stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the alternatives available to permittee under this section.
C. Permittee Alternatives Upon Receipt Of Notice Of Revocation Or Suspension: Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension
from the village, the permittee shall have the following options:
1. Immediately provide the village with evidence that no cause exists for the revocation or suspension;
2. Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the village, the deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such correction
to the village within five (5) working days after receipt of the written notice of revocation; or
3. Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights of way and restore the rights of
way to the satisfaction of the village providing written proof of such removal to the village within ten (10) days after receipt of the written
notice of revocation.
The village may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the time periods provided in this subsection.
D. Stop Work Order: In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation or suspension, the village may issue a stop work order immediately upon
discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within subsection A of this section.
E. Failure Or Refusal Of The Permittee To Comply: If the permittee fails to comply with the provisions of subsection C of this section, the village or
its designee may, at the option of the village: 1) correct the deficiencies; 2) upon not less than twenty (20) days' notice to the permittee,
remove the subject facilities or equipment; or 3) after not less than thirty (30) days' notice to the permittee of failure to cure the noncompliance,
deem them abandoned and property of the village. The permittee shall be liable in all events to the village for all costs of removal. (Ord. 2008-
06, 2-4-2008)
8-9-12: CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER'S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS:
A. Notification Of Change: A utility shall notify the village no less than thirty (30) days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the right of
way or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the
former owner under the permit, if any, and applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, including this chapter, with respect to the work
and facilities in the right of way.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 211/387
B. Amended Permit: A new owner shall request that any current permit be amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a
new or amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and
conditions of the permit if the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the village's right of way.
C. Insurance And Bonding: All required insurance coverage or bonding must be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer.
(Ord. 2008-06, 2-4-2008)
8-9-13: GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
A. Standards And Principles: All construction in the right of way shall be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations,
and commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the
principles and standards set forth in the following IDOT publications, as amended from time to time:
1. "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction";
2. "Supplemental Specifications And Recurring Special Provisions";
3. "Highway Design Manual";
4. "Highway Standards Manual";
5. "Standard Specifications For Traffic Control Items";
6. "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" (92 Ill. adm. code section 545);
7. "Flagger's Handbook"; and
8. "Work Site Protection Manual For Daylight Maintenance Operations".
B. Interpretation Of Municipal Standards And Principles: If a discrepancy exists between or among differing principles and standards required by
this chapter, the village director of public works shall determine, in the exercise of sound engineering judgment, which principles apply and
such decision shall be final. If requested, the village director of public works shall state which standard or principle will apply to the
construction, maintenance, or operation of a facility in the future. (Ord. 2008-06, 2-4-2008)
8-9-14: TRAFFIC CONTROL:
A. Minimum Requirements: The village's minimum requirements for traffic protection are contained in IDOT's "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic
Control Devices" and this code.
B. Warning Signs, Protective Devices, And Flaggers: The utility is responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices and
flaggers, when necessary, meeting applicable federal, state, and local requirements for protection of the public and the utility's workers when
performing any work on the rights of way.
C. Interference With Traffic: All work shall be phased so that there is minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
D. Notice When Access Is Blocked: At least forty eight (48) hours prior to beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any
residence, business or institution, the utility shall notify the resident, business or institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of
such work; provided, however, that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to section 8-9-20 of this chapter, the utility shall provide
such notice as is practicable under the circumstances.
E. Compliance: The utility shall take immediate action to correct any deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the utility's
attention by the village. (Ord. 2008-06, 2-4-2008)
8-9-15: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
A. General Requirements: In addition to location requirements applicable to specific types of utility facilities, all utility facilities, regardless of type,
shall be subject to the general location requirements of this subsection.
1. No Interference With Village Facilities: No utility facilities shall be placed in any location if the village director of public works determines that
the proposed location will require the relocation or displacement of any of the village's utility facilities or will otherwise interfere with the
operation or maintenance of any of the village's utility facilities.
2. Minimum Interference And Impact: The proposed location shall cause only the minimum possible interference with the use of the right of
way and shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property
owners who adjoin said right of way.
3. No Interference With Travel: No utility facility shall be placed in any location that interferes with the usual travel on such right of way.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 212/387
4. No Limitations On Visibility: No utility facility shall be placed in any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the right of way.
5. Size Of Utility Facilities: The proposed installation shall use the smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals,
and/or cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of location, for the particular application.
B. Parallel Facilities Located Within Highways:
1. Overhead Parallel Facilities: An overhead parallel facility may be located within the right of way lines of a highway only if:
a. Lines are located as near as practicable to the right of way line and as nearly parallel to the right of way line as reasonable pole alignment
will permit;
b. Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable from the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (2') (0.6 m) behind the
face of the curb, where available;
c. Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (4') (1.2 m)
outside the outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
d. No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
e. Any ground mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right of way line or as near as possible to the right of way
line.
2. Underground Parallel Facilities: An underground parallel facility may be located within the right of way lines of a highway only if:
a. The facility is located as near the right of way line as practicable and not more than eight feet (8') (2.4 m) from and parallel to the right of
way line;
b. A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound
engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit without disrupting the pavement); and
c. In the case of an underground power or communications line, the facility shall be located as near the right of way line as practicable and
not more than five feet (5') (1.5 m) from the right of way line and any above grounded appurtenance shall be located within one foot (1')
(0.3 m) of the right of way line or as near as practicable.
C. Facilities Crossing Highways:
1. No Future Disruption: The construction and design of crossing facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of village highways
may require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to
the roadbed resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities.
2. Cattle Passes, Culverts, Or Drainage Facilities: Crossing facilities shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities.
3. Ninety Degree Crossing Required: Crossing facilities shall cross at or as near to a ninety degree (90) angle to the centerline as practicable.
4. Overhead Power Or Communication Facility: An overhead power or communication facility may cross a highway only if:
a. It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC's rules entitled, "construction of electric power and communication lines" (83
Ill. adm. code 305);
b. Poles are located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right of way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and
c. Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
5. Underground Power Or Communication Facility: An underground power or communication facility may cross a highway only if:
a. The design materials and construction methods will provide maximum maintenance free service life; and
b. Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is provided in the initial installation.
6. Markers: The village may require the utility to provide a marker at each right of way line where an underground facility other than a power or
communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number.
Markers may also be eliminated as provided in current federal regulations (49 CFR section 192.707 (1989)).
D. Facilities To Be Located Within Particular Rights Of Way: The village may require that facilities be located within particular rights of way that
are not highways, rather than within particular highways.
E. Freestanding Facilities:
1. The village may restrict the location and size of any freestanding facility located within a right of way.
2. The village may require any freestanding facility located within a right of way to be screened from view.
F. Facilities Installed Aboveground: Aboveground facilities may be installed only if:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 213/387
1. No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
2. New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
3. The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of
aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, selfsupporting
armless, single pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and cable. Existing utility poles and light standards
shall be used wherever practicable; the installation of additional utility poles is strongly discouraged.
G. Facility Attachments To Bridges Or Roadway Structures:
1. Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means of
accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent
poles, cable supports and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or roadway structure. Facilities transmitting
commodities that are volatile, flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under significant pressure or potential, present high
degrees of risk and such installations are not permitted.
2. A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the
impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be
based upon the following considerations:
a. The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property
in the event of damage to or failure of the facility;
b. The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway structure in the transportation system;
c. The alternative routings available to the utility and their comparative practicability;
d. The proposed method of attachment;
e. The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the proposed facility;
f. The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
g. The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
h. The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared to the risk involved.
H. Appearance Standards:
1. The village may prohibit the installation of facilities in particular locations in order to preserve visual quality.
2. A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to the
right of way user or to adjacent residents and property owners, and if it does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed.
(Ord. 2008-06, 2-4-2008)
8-9-16: CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS:
A. Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Construction Methods:
1. Boring Or Jacking:
a. Pits And Shoring: Boring or jacking under rights of way shall be accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the
village director of public works from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or jacking shall be excavated no more than forty eight (48)
hours in advance of boring or jacking operations and backfilled within forty eight (48) hours after boring or jacking operations are
completed. While pits are open, they shall be clearly marked and protected by barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected, supported,
braced, and maintained so that it will safely support all vertical and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking
operation.
b. Wet Boring Or Jetting: Wet boring or jetting shall not be permitted under the roadway.
c. Borings With Diameters Greater Than Six Inches: Borings over six inches (6") (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger
and following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside diameter of the following pipe by more than one inch (1")
(25 mm).
d. Borings With Diameters Six Inches Or Less: Borings of six inches (6") or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided
with auger, or auger and following pipe method.
e. Tree Preservation: Any facility located within the drip line of any tree designated by the village to be preserved or protected shall be bored
under or around the root system.
2. Trenching: Trenching for facility installation, repair, or maintenance on rights of way shall be done in accord with the applicable portions of
section 603 of IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction".
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 214/387
a. Length: The length of open trench shall be kept to the practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipe/line testing. Only onehalf
(1/2) of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless special permission is obtained from the village director of public
works.
b. Open Trench And Excavated Material: Open trench and windrowed excavated material shall be protected as required by chapter 6 of the
"Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices". Where practicable, the excavated material shall be deposited between the roadway
and the trench as added protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved portion of the roadway. Where right
of way width does not allow for windrowing excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material shall be hauled to
an off road location.
c. Drip Line Of Trees: The utility shall not trench within the drip line of any tree designated by the village to be preserved.
3. Backfilling:
a. Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation of facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using
methods and materials in accordance with IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction". When excavated material
is hauled away or is unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
b. For a period of three (3) years from the date construction of a facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore
any backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so ordered by the director of public works, the utility, at its
expense, shall remove any pavement and backfill material to the top of the installed facility, place and properly compact new backfill
material, and restore new pavement, sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to the proper grades, as determined by the director of public works.
4. Pavement Cuts: Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed
to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this subsection A4 is permitted under section 8-9-21 of this chapter, the following
requirements shall apply:
a. Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled and compacted as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10
gradation, as designated by the director of public works.
b. Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be
provided immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the
village.
c. All saw cuts shall be full depth.
d. For all rights of way which have been reconstructed with a concrete surface/base in the last seven (7) years, or resurfaced in the last
three (3) years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to be an emergency repair or other work considered
necessary and unforeseen before the time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a JULIE locate.
5. Encasement:
a. Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous
either by one piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the village.
b. The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right of way line. No aboveground vent pipes shall
be located in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of the highway.
c. In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or village
approved jointed pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is installed prior to highway construction and carrier
pipe is continuous or mechanical joints are of a type approved by the village. Bell and spigot type pipe shall be encased regardless of
installation method.
d. In the case of gas pipelines of sixty (60) psig or less, encasement may be eliminated.
e. In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines with installations of more than sixty (60) psig, encasement may be eliminated
only if: 1) extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or repair and 2) cathodic protection of the pipe is provided.
f. If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does
not disrupt the right of way.
6. Minimum Cover Of Underground Facilities: Cover shall be provided and maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for
minimum cover for the type of facility:
Type Of Facility Minimum Cover
Electric lines 30 inches (0.8 m)
Communication, cable or video service lines 18 to 24 inches (0.46 m to 0.6 m, as determined by village)
Gas or petroleum products 30 inches (0.8 m)
Water line Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection
Sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or drainage line Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 215/387
B. Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Facilities:
1. Electric Power Or Communication Lines:
a. Code Compliance: Electric power or communications facilities within village rights of way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained
in conformity with the provisions of 83 Illinois administrative code part 305 (formerly general order 160 of the Illinois commerce
commission) entitled "rules for construction of electric power and communications lines", and the national electrical safety code.
b. Overhead Facilities: Overhead power or communication facilities shall use single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of
poles shall be used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the installation so guys and braces will not be needed.
Variances may be allowed if there is no feasible alternative and if guywires are equipped with guy guards for maximum visibility.
c. Underground Facilities:
(1) Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing, provided that special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage
when crossing improved entrances and side roads.
(2) If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be
eliminated only if: a) the crossing is installed by the use of "moles", "whip augers", or other approved methods which compress the
earth to make the opening for cable installation or b) the installation is by the open trench method which is only permitted prior to
roadway construction.
(3) Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the national electrical safety code.
d. Burial Of Drops: All temporary service drops placed between November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known
as snow drops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting, unless otherwise permitted by the village. Weather
permitting, utilities shall bury all temporary drops, excluding snow drops, within ten (10) business days after placement.
2. Underground Facilities Other Than Electric Power Or Communication Lines: Underground facilities other than electric power or
communication lines may be installed by:
a. The use of "moles", "whip augers", or other approved methods which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
b. Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;
c. Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or
d. Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is not possible by other means.
3. Gas Transmission, Distribution And Service: Gas pipelines within rights of way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a village
approved manner and in conformance with the federal code of the office of pipeline safety operations, department of transportation, part 192
- transportation of natural and other gas by pipeline: minimum federal safety standards (49 CFR section 192), IDOT's "Standard
Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
4. Petroleum Products Pipelines: Petroleum products pipelines within rights of way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI standard
code for pressure piping (liquid petroleum transportation piping systems ANSI-B 31.4).
5. Water Lines, Sanitary Sewer Lines, Storm Water Sewer Lines Or Drainage Lines: Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and
drainage lines within rights of way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of the current "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer
Main Construction In Illinois".
6. Ground Mounted Appurtenances: Ground mounted appurtenances to overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right of
way, shall be provided with a vegetation free area extending one foot (1') (305 mm) in width beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The
vegetation free area may be provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or similar material approved by the
director of public works. With the approval of the director of public works, shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be used in place of
vegetation free area. The housing for ground mounted appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the surroundings.
C. Materials:
1. General Standards: The materials used in constructing facilities within rights of way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the
appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", the requirements of the
Illinois commerce commission, or the standards established by other official regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.
2. Material Storage On Right Of Way: No material shall be stored on the right of way without the prior written approval of the village director of
public works. When such storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross arms, or other materials shall be distributed along the
right of way prior to and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public or an obstacle to right of way maintenance or
damage to the right of way and other property. If material is to be stored on right of way, prior approval must be obtained from the village.
3. Hazardous Materials: The plans submitted by the utility to the village shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the
construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.
D. Operational Restrictions:
1. Construction operations on rights of way may, at the discretion of the village, be required to be discontinued when such operations would
create hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations may also be required to be discontinued or restricted
when conditions are such that construction would result in extensive damage to the right of way or other property.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 216/387
2. These restrictions may be waived by the director of public works when emergency work is required to restore vital utility services.
3. The hours of construction are from seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. unless otherwise permitted by the village.
E. Location Of Existing Facilities: Any utility proposing to construct facilities in the village shall contact JULIE and ascertain the presence and
location of existing aboveground and underground facilities within the rights of way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The village will
make its permit records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying possible facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested
by the village or by JULIE, a utility shall locate and physically mark its underground facilities within forty eight (48) hours, excluding weekends
and holidays, in accordance with the Illinois underground facilities damage prevention act1. (Ord. 2008-06, 2-4-2008)
8-9-17: VEGETATION CONTROL:
A. Electric Utilities; Compliance With State Laws And Regulations: An electric utility shall conduct all tree trimming and vegetation control
activities in the right of way in accordance with applicable Illinois laws and regulations, and additionally, with such local franchise or other
agreement with the village as permitted by law.
B. Other Utilities; Tree Trimming Permit Required: Tree trimming that is done by any other utility with facilities in the right of way and that is not
performed pursuant to applicable Illinois laws and regulations specifically governing same, shall not be considered a normal maintenance
operation, but shall require the application for, and the issuance of, a permit, in addition to any other permit required under this chapter.
1. Application For Tree Trimming Permit: Applications for tree trimming permits shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by
competent workers with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an
expiration date in the interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished.
2. Damage To Trees: Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for
cancellation of the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The village will require compensation for trees extensively
damaged and for trees removed without authorization. The formula developed by the International Society of Arboriculture will be used as a
basis for determining the compensation for damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The village may require the removal and
replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave them in an unacceptable condition.
C. Specimen Trees Or Trees Of Special Significance: The village may require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees
of special significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side arm extensions, covered wire or other means.
D. Chemical Use:
1. Except as provided in the following subsection, no utility shall spray, inject or pour any chemicals on or near any trees, shrubs or vegetation
in the village for any purpose, including the control of growth, insects or disease.
2. Spraying of any type of brush killing chemicals will not be permitted on rights of way unless the utility demonstrates to the satisfaction of the
director of public works that such spraying is the only practicable method of vegetation control. (Ord. 2008-06, 2-4-2008)
8-9-18: REMOVAL, RELOCATION, OR MODIFICATIONS OF UTILITY FACILITIES:
A. Notice: Within ninety (90) days following written notice from the village, a utility shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or
permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any utility facilities within the rights of way whenever the corporate
authorities have determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably necessary for the construction, repair,
maintenance, or installation of any village improvement in or upon, or the operations of the village in or upon, the rights of way.
B. Removal Of Unauthorized Facilities: Within thirty (30) days following written notice from the village, any utility that owns, controls, or maintains
any unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the rights of way shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or
appurtenances from the rights of way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances:
1. Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
2. If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant of a license or franchise, if required;
3. If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance of a required permit in violation of this chapter; or
4. If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted by the permittee's license or franchise.
C. Emergency Removal Or Relocation Of Facilities: The village retains the right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights
of way of the village, as the village may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety
emergency. If circumstances permit, the municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall
notify the utility, if known, after cutting or removing a facility.
D. Abandonment Of Facilities: Upon abandonment of a facility within the rights of way of the village, the utility shall notify the village within ninety
(90) days. Following receipt of such notice the village may direct the utility to remove all or any portion of the facility if the village director of
public works determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare. In the event that the village does
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 217/387
not direct the utility that abandoned the facility to remove it, by giving notice of abandonment to the village, the abandoning utility shall be
deemed to consent to the alteration or removal of all or any portion of the facility by another utility or person. (Ord. 2008-06, 2-4-2008)
8-9-19: CLEANUP AND RESTORATION:
The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and terrain and other property within ten (10) days after any portion of the rights of
way are disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction or maintenance by the utility, all to the satisfaction of the village. This includes
restoration of entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made using materials and methods approved by the village
director of public works. Such cleanup and repair may be required to consist of backfilling, regrading, reseeding, resodding, or any other
requirement to restore the right of way to a condition substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to the commencement of the project. The
time period provided in this section may be extended by the village director of public works for good cause shown. (Ord. 2008-06, 2-4-2008)
8-9-20: MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE:
A. General: Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights of way are to be maintained by or for the utility in a manner
satisfactory to the village and at the utility's expense.
B. Emergency Maintenance Procedures: Emergencies may justify noncompliance with normal procedures for securing a permit:
1. If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the right of way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary
protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the right of way including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard
does not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required
in repair operations, adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an emergency will only be permitted when
no other means of access to the facility is available.
2. In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the village director of public works or his or her duly authorized agent of the
emergency, informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for protection of the traveling public and what will be required to make
the necessary repairs. If the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free movement of traffic, the village police shall be
notified immediately.
3. In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to the
traveling public.
C. Emergency Repairs: The utility must file in writing with the village a description of the repairs undertaken in the right of way within forty eight
(48) hours after an emergency repair. (Ord. 2008-06, 2-4-2008)
8-9-21: VARIANCES:
A. Request For Variance: A utility requesting a variance from one or more of the provisions of this chapter must do so in writing to the village
director of public works as a part of the permit application. The request shall identify each provision of this chapter from which a variance is
requested and the reasons why a variance should be granted.
B. Authority To Grant Variances: The village director of public works shall decide whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this
chapter identified in the variance request on an individual basis.
C. Conditions For Granting Of Variance: The village director of public works may authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the variance has
demonstrated that:
1. One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such as terrain features or an irregular right of way line) create a special hardship
that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
2. All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are
impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
D. Additional Conditions For Granting Of A Variance: As a condition for authorizing a variance, the Village Director of Public Works may require
the utility requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions that may or may not be expressly contained within this chapter
but which carry out the purposes of this chapter.
E. Right To Appeal: Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement, decision or determination, including denial of a variance, made by the Village
Director of Public Works under the provisions of this chapter shall have the right to appeal to the Village Board, or such other board or
commission as it may designate. The application for appeal shall be submitted in writing to the Village Clerk within thirty (30) days after the
date of such order, requirement, decision or determination. The Village Board shall commence its consideration of the appeal at the Board's
next regularly scheduled meeting occurring at least seven (7) days after the filing of the appeal. The Village Board shall timely decide the
appeal. (Ord. 2008-06, 2-4-2008)
8-9-22: PENALTIES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 218/387
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to fine in
accordance with the penalty provisions of this Code. There may be times when the Village will incur delay or other costs, including third party
claims, because the utility will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this chapter. Unless the utility shows that another allocation of
the cost of undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the utility shall bear the Village's costs of damages and its costs of installing,
maintaining, modifying, relocating, or removing the facility that is the subject of the permit. No other administrative agency or commission may
review or overrule a permit related cost apportionment of the Village. Sanctions may be imposed upon a utility that does not pay the costs
apportioned to it. (Ord. 2008-06, 2-4-2008)
8-9-23: ENFORCEMENT:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or further remedies that the Village may have for enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 2008-06, 2-4-2008)
8-9-24: SMALL CELL ANTENNAS, PERSONAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES, AND TOWERS IN THE
RIGHTS-OF-WAY:
The intent of this section is to provide comprehensive regulations related to the regulation of small cell antennas, personal wireless facilities and
towers in the right-of-way. To the extent that this section 8-9-24 conflicts with other sections of this Code, including, but not limited to, this chapter,
this section shall control. Where this section is silent, this chapter, and the other applicable provisions of this Code shall control. (Ord. 2018-10, 4-
16-2018)
8-9-24-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this section 8-9-24, the following terms will have the following meaning:
ALTERNATIVE ANTENNA STRUCTURE: Shall mean an existing pole or other structure within the public rights-of-way that can be used to
support an antenna and is not a utility pole or a Village-owned infrastructure.
ANTENNA: Shall mean communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio signals used in the provision of any type of
wireless communications services.
APPLICANT: Shall mean any person or entity submitting an application to install personal wireless telecommunication facilities or structures to
support the facilities within a public right-of-way.
COLLOCATE OR COLLOCATION: Shall mean to install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a
wireless support structure or utility pole.
DISTRIBUTED ANTENNA SYSTEM (DAS): Shall mean a network or facility to which all the following apply: a) it distributes radio frequency
signals to provide wireless service; b) it meets the size limitations of a small cell facility; and c) it consists of all the following: 1) remote antenna
nodes deployed throughout a desired coverage area; 2) a high-capacity signal transport medium connected to a central hub site; and 3)
equipment located at the hub site to process or control the radio frequency signals through the antennas.
FACILITY: Shall mean all structures, devices, objects and materials (including, but not limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable
antennas, distributed antenna systems, small cell facilities, vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles, conduits, grates,
covers, pipes, cables, and appurtenances thereto) located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within rights-of-way governed by this
section. For purposes of this section 8-9-24, the term "facility" shall not include any facility owned or operated by the Village, unless otherwise
provided herein.
HISTORIC DISTRICT OR HISTORIC LANDMARK: Shall mean a building, property, or site, or group of buildings, properties, or sites that are
either: a) listed in the National Register of Historic Places or formally determined eligible for listing by the keeper of the National Register, the
individual who has been delegated the authority by the Federal Agency to list properties and determine their eligibility for the National Register, in
accordance with section VI.D.1.a.i through section VI.D.1.a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement codified at 47 CFR part 1, appendix C;
or b) designated as a locally landmarked building, property, site, or historic district by an ordinance adopted by the authority pursuant to a
preservation program that meets the requirements of the Certified Local Government Program of the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office or
where such certification of the preservation program by the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office is pending.
LANDSCAPE SCREENING: Shall mean the installation at grade of plantings, shrubbery, bushes or other foliage intended to screen the base of a
personal wireless telecommunication facility from public view.
MONOPOLE: Shall mean a structure composed of a single spire, pole or tower designed and used to support antennas or related equipment and
that is not a utility pole, an alternative antenna structure, or a Village-owned infrastructure.
PERSONAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION ANTENNA: Shall mean an antenna that is part of a personal wireless telecommunications
facility.
PERSONAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION EQUIPMENT: Shall mean equipment, exclusive of an antenna, that is part of a personal
wireless telecommunications facility.
PERSONAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY: Shall mean any antenna, equipment, and related improvements used, or designed
to be used, to provide wireless transmission of voice, data video streams, images, or other information including, but not limited to, cellular phone
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 219/387
service, personal communication service, paging and Wi-Fi antenna service.
REPLACE OR REPLACEMENT: Shall mean to substitute a new facility, in its entirety, for an existing facility.
RIGHT-OF-WAY: Shall mean land dedicated or utilized for a street, trail, sidewalk, utility, railroad or other similar purpose.
SMALL CELL FACILITY: Shall mean a personal wireless telecommunications facility consisting of an antenna and related equipment either
installed singly or as part of a network to provide coverage or enhance capacity in a limited defined area. Generally, these installations are singleservice
provider installations. Small cell facilities used to provide wireless service shall conform to the following size limitations: a) each antenna is
located inside an enclosure of not more than six (6) cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna
and all its exposed elements could fit within an enclosure of not more than six (6) cubic feet in volume; and b) all other wireless equipment
associated with the facility is cumulatively not more than twenty five (25) cubic feet in volume. The calculation of equipment volume shall not
include electric meters, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation boxes, grounding equipment, power transfer switches, cut-off
switches, and vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services.
TOWER: Shall mean any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including selfsupporting
lattice towers, guy towers, or monopole towers, and that is not a utility pole, an alternative antenna structure, or a Village-owned
infrastructure. Except as otherwise provided for by this section 8-9-24, the requirements for a tower and associated antenna facilities shall be
those required in this section 8-9-24.
UTILITY POLE: Shall mean an upright pole designed and used to support electric cables, telephone cables, telecommunication cables, cable
service cables, which are used to provide lighting, traffic control, signage or a similar function.
VARIANCE OR VARIATION: Shall mean a grant of relief by the Public Works Director or his/her designee.
VILLAGE-OWNED INFRASTRUCTURE: Shall mean infrastructure in public rights-of-way within the boundaries of the Village, including, but not
limited to, streetlights, traffic signals, towers, structures, or buildings owned, operated or maintained by the Village.
WI-FI ANTENNA: Shall mean an antenna used to support Wi-Fi broadband internet access service based on the IEEE 802.11 standard that
typically uses unlicensed spectrum to enable communication between devices.
WIRELESS FACILITY: Shall mean equipment used at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between used equipment and a
communications network, including: a) equipment associated with wireless communications; and b) radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiberoptic
cable, regular and back-up power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration. Wireless facility shall
include small cell facilities, but it shall not include structural improvements on, under or within the area in which the equipment is located or
wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or directly associated with an antenna.
WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER: Shall mean any person authorized to provide telecommunications service in the State of Illinois
that builds or installs wireless communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support structures, or utility poles and that is
not a wireless services provider but is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the application submitted to the
Village.
WIRELESS PROVIDER: Shall mean a wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services provider.
WIRELESS SERVICE: Shall mean any telecommunications service using licensed or unlicensed wireless spectrum, whether at a fixed location or
mobile, provided using distributed antenna systems or small cell facilities.
WIRELESS SERVICES: Shall mean any services provided to the general public, including a particular class of customers, and made available on
a nondiscriminatory basis using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile, using wireless facilities. (Ord. 2018-10, 4-
16-2018)
8-9-24-2: PERMIT REQUIRED; PERMIT APPLICATION:
A. Permit Required: Permits, applications, and fees related to personal wireless telecommunication facilities and applications for the same in the
rights-of-way shall be governed by this section; however, where this section is silent related to certain building permit fees or licensing fees, or
other requirements then this title and title 9, "Building Regulations", of this Code or any other applicable provisions of this Code shall control.
No person shall construct any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within any Village rights-of-way which: 1) changes the
location of the facility; 2) adds a new facility; 3) disrupts the right-of-way; or 4) materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by
the facility on, over, above, along, under, across or within the right-of-way, without first filing an application with the Public Works Department
and obtaining a permit from the Village, except as otherwise provided in this section. No permit shall be required for the installation and
maintenance of service connections to customers' premises where there will be no disruption of a right-of-way. All applications shall be subject
to site review and approval by the Public Works Director or his/her designee.
B. Permit Application: All applications for permits pursuant to this section shall be filed on a form provided by the Village and shall be filed in such
number of duplicate copies as the Village may designate.
C. Minimum General Application Requirements: The application shall be made by the applicant or its duly authorized representative and shall
contain, at a minimum, the following:
1. The applicant's name, address and telephone and facsimile numbers and a statement of the applicant's interest in the work;
2. The names, addresses, telephone and facsimile numbers and e-mail addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant
with respect to the application;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 220/387
3. A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The
scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on
those matters likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed. The scope of work shall also indicate the type of equipment or
facilities being installed and whether the equipment or facilities are new, a swap-out or exchange of facilities or equipment, or an upgrade to
existing facilities and equipment.
4. Evidence that the applicant has placed on file with the Village:
a. A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective measures and devices that will be employed, which shall be consistent with
Illinois Department of Transportation's ("IDOT") Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or damage to persons
or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular traffic; and
b. An emergency contingency plan, which shall specify the nature of potential emergencies including, without limitation, construction and
hazardous materials emergencies and the intended response by the applicant. The intended response shall include notification to the
Village and shall promote protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with Interstate Commerce Commission
("ICC") regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with this section unless the Village finds that additional
information or assurances are needed.
5. Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed, including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans and
specifications comply with applicable laws, codes, rules and regulations;
6. Evidence of insurance as required by section 8-9-24-3 of this chapter;
7. Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this section;
8. Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the Village, including, but not limited to, any information required by this
chapter or by any other applicable provisions of this Code; and
9. Evidence that any "Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity" or other regulatory authorization that the applicant is required by law to
obtain, or that the applicant has elected to obtain, has been issued by the ICC or another entity with jurisdictional authority.
D. Applicant's Duty To Update Information: Throughout the entire permit application review period and the construction period authorized by the
permit, any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be submitted by the applicant in writing to the Village within
thirty (30) calendar days after the change necessitating the amendment.
E. Application Fees: Unless otherwise provided by the applicable franchise, license or similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to
this section shall be accompanied by a fee as reasonably determined by the Village each year. No application fee is required to be paid by any
electricity utility that is paying the Municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the Electricity Infrastructure Maintenance
Fee Law2. (Ord. 2018-10, 4-16-2018)
8-9-24-3: INSURANCE REQUIRED:
A. Required Coverage And Limits: Unless otherwise provided by a franchise, license or similar agreement, each applicant or utility occupying a
right-of-way or constructing any facility in a right-of-way shall secure and maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring the
applicant as a named insured and naming the Village and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents and employees as additional
insureds on the policies listed in subsections A1 and A2 of this section:
1. Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-operations, explosion, collapse and underground hazard (commonly referred to
as "X", "C" and "U" coverages) and products-completed operations coverage with limits not less than:
a. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death to each person;
b. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for property damage resulting from any one accident; and
c. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for all other types of liability.
2. Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles with a combined single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal
injury and property damage for each accident;
3. Worker's compensation with statutory limits; and
4. Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per employee and per accident.
If the applicant is not providing such insurance to protect the contractors and subcontractors performing the work, then such contractors and
subcontractors shall comply with this section.
B. Excess Or Umbrella Policies: The coverages required by this section may be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any
excess or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a following-form basis such that when any loss covered
by the primary policy exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy becomes effective to cover such loss.
C. Copies Required: The applicant shall provide copies of any of the policies required by this section to the Village within ten (10) calendar days
following the receipt of the filing of its application.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 221/387
D. Maintenance And Renewal Of Required Coverages: The insurance policies required by this section shall contain the following endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor may the intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30)
calendar days after receipt by the Village, by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested of a written notice addressed to the
Mayor/President of such intent to cancel or not to renew.
Within ten (10) calendar days after receipt by the Village of said notice, and in no event later than ten (10) calendar days prior to said
cancellation, the applicant shall obtain and furnish to the Village evidence of replacement insurance policies meeting the requirements of this
section.
E. Self-Insurance: An applicant may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage and limit requirements required herein. Self-insurers are
not required, to the extent of such self-insurance, to comply with the requirement of the naming of additional insureds under subsection A of
this section, or to comply with the requirements of subsections B, C and D of this section. An applicant that elects to self-insure shall provide
to the Village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements under
subsection A of this section, which evidence may include that the applicant is a "private self-insurer" under the Workers' Compensation Act3.
F. Effect Of Insurance And Self-Insurance On An Applicant's Liability: The legal liability of an applicant to the Village and any person for any of the
matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance required by this section shall not be limited by such insurance policies
or self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder.
G. Insurance Companies: All insurance provided pursuant to this section shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers
legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the State of Illinois. All insurance carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated "A-" or
better and of a class size "X" or higher by A.M. Best Company. (Ord. 2018-10, 4-16-2018)
8-9-24-4: PERMITTED PLACEMENT; APPLICATION AND FEES FOR PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE IN THE RIGHTOF-
WAY:
A. Permitted Placement: Personal wireless telecommunication facilities will be permitted to be placed in rights-of-way within the jurisdiction of the
Village as attachments to existing utility poles, alternative antenna structures, or Village-owned infrastructure subject to the following
regulations:
1. Number Limitation And Co-Location: The Public Works Director or his/her designee may regulate the number of personal wireless
telecommunication facilities allowed on each utility pole or unit of Village-owned infrastructure except that no more than two (2) personal
wireless telecommunication facilities will be permitted on utility poles or alternative antenna structures of ninety feet (90') or less.
Additionally, no more than three (3) personal wireless telecommunication facilities will be permitted on utility poles or alternative antenna
structures in excess of ninety feet (90') and less than one hundred twenty feet (120'). This section 8-9-24 does not preclude or prohibit colocation
of personal wireless telecommunication facilities on towers or monopoles that meet the requirements as set forth elsewhere in this
section or as required by Federal law. In all cases, the applicant shall provide the longitude and latitude for the location(s) for which the
applicant is applying to place the personal wireless telecommunication facilities described in this section.
2. Non-Interference And Compliance With Applicable Codes: Personal wireless telecommunication facilities operating under a Federal license
shall not interfere in any way with any Village-owned or operated equipment or facilities, including emergency services or public safety
equipment, or any FCC licensed or unlicensed users already having equipment on the facility, radio or other equipment at any time and shall
not interfere in any way with FCC licensed or unlicensed users already having equipment on the facility, radio or other equipment placed in
the rights-of-way. Personal wireless telecommunication facilities shall comply with all applicable rules and requirements of the Federal
Communications Commission and all applicable Electrical Codes and all other applicable codes.
3. Separation And Clearance Requirements: Personal wireless telecommunication facilities may be attached to a utility pole, alternative
antenna structure, monopole, or Village-owned infrastructure only where such pole, structure, or infrastructure is located no closer than
twenty five feet (25') from any residential building, excluding garages, and no closer than three hundred feet (300') from any other personal
wireless telecommunication facility. These requirements shall not apply to Village-owned equipment or facilities. A separation or lesser
clearance may be allowed by the Public Works Director or his/her designee as an administrative variance to this section when the applicant
establishes that the lesser separation or clearance is necessary to close a significant coverage or capacity gap in the applicant's services or
to otherwise provide adequate services to customers, and the proposed antenna or facility is the least intrusive means to do so within the
rights-of-way.
4. Village-Owned Infrastructure: Personal wireless telecommunication facilities can only be mounted to Village-owned infrastructure including,
but not limited to, streetlights, traffic signal, towers, or buildings, if authorized by a license or other agreement between the owner or
applicant and the Village.
5. New Towers: No new monopoles or other towers to support personal wireless telecommunication facilities in excess of sixty feet (60') are
permitted to be installed on rights-of-way within the jurisdiction of the Village, unless the Village Board finds, based on clear and convincing
evidence provided by the applicant, that locating the personal wireless telecommunication facilities on the rights-of-way is necessary to
close a significant coverage or capacity gap in the applicant's services or to otherwise provide adequate services to customers, and the
proposed new monopole or other tower within the rights-of-way is the least intrusive means to do so.
6. Attachment Limitations: No personal wireless telecommunication antenna or facility within the right-of-way will be attached to a utility pole,
alternative antenna structure, tower, or Village-owned infrastructure unless all of the following conditions are satisfied:
a. Surface Area Of Antenna: The personal wireless telecommunication antenna, including antenna panels, whip antennas or dish-shaped
antennas, cannot have a surface area of more than seven (7) cubic feet in volume.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 222/387
b. Above-Ground Personal Wireless Telecommunication Facility Size: The total combined volume of all above-ground equipment and
appurtenances comprising a personal wireless telecommunication facility, exclusive of the antenna itself, cannot exceed thirty two (32)
cubic feet.
c. Personal Wireless Telecommunication Equipment: The operator of a personal wireless telecommunication facility must, whenever
possible, locate the base of the equipment or appurtenances at a height of no lower than eight feet (8') above grade.
d. Personal Wireless Telecommunication Services Equipment Mounted At Grade: If the operator of a personal wireless telecommunication
facility proposes to install a facility where equipment or appurtenances are to be installed at grade, screening must be installed to
minimize the visibility of the facility. Screening must be installed at least three feet (3') from the equipment installed at-grade and eight feet
(8') from a roadway.
e. Height: The top of the highest point of the antenna cannot extend more than ten feet (10') above the highest point of the utility pole,
alternative antenna support structure, tower or Village-owned infrastructure. If necessary, the replacement or new utility pole, alternative
support structure or Village-owned infrastructure located within the public right-of-way may be no more than ten to seventy (10 - 70) feet
higher than existing poles adjacent to the replacement or new pole or structure, or no more than ninety feet (90') in height overall,
whichever is less, and shall be of a similar look and structure of other poles within a five hundred foot (500') area.
f. Color: A personal wireless telecommunication facility, including all related equipment and appurtenances, must be a color that blends with
the surroundings of the pole, structure, tower or infrastructure on which it is mounted and use non-reflective materials which blend with
the materials and colors of the surrounding area and structures. Any wiring must be covered with an appropriate cover.
g. Antenna Panel Covering: A personal wireless telecommunication antenna may include a radome, cap, or other antenna panel covering or
shield, to the extent such covering, would not result in a larger or more noticeable facility and, if proposed, such covering must be of a
color that blends with the color of the pole, structure, tower, or infrastructure on which it is mounted.
h. Wiring And Cabling: Wires and cables connecting the antenna to the remainder of the facility must be installed in accordance with the
Electrical Code currently in effect in the Village. No wiring and cabling serving the facility will be allowed to interfere with any wiring or
cabling installed by a cable television or video service operator, electric utility or telephone utility.
i. Grounding: The personal wireless telecommunication facility must be grounded in accordance with the requirements of the Electrical Code
currently in effect in the Village.
j. Guy Wires: No guy or other support wires will be used in connection with a personal wireless telecommunication facility unless the facility
is to be attached to an existing utility pole, alternative antenna support structure, tower, or Village-owned infrastructure that incorporated
guy wires prior to the date that an applicant has applied for a permit.
k. Pole Extensions: Extensions to utility poles, alternative support structures, towers, and Village-owned infrastructure utilized for the
purpose of connecting a personal wireless telecommunications antenna and its related personal wireless telecommunications equipment
must have a degree of strength capable of supporting the antenna and any related appurtenances and cabling and capable of
withstanding wind forces and ice loads in accordance with the applicable structural integrity standards as set forth in subsection A6l of this
section. An extension must be securely bound to the utility pole, alternative antenna structure, tower, or Village-owned infrastructure in
accordance with applicable engineering standards for the design and attachment of such extensions.
l. Structural Integrity: The personal wireless telecommunication facility, including the antenna, pole extension and all related equipment,
must be designed to withstand a wind force and ice loads in accordance with applicable standards established in chapter 25 of the
National Electric Safety Code for utility poles, rule 250-B and 250-C standards governing wind, ice, and loading forces on utility poles, in
the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) in TIA/EIA section 222-G established by the Telecommunications Industry Association
(TIA) and the Electronics Industry Association (EIA) for steel wireless support structures, and the applicable industry standard for other
existing structures, which are hereby adopted for the purpose of this section. For any facility attached to Village-owned infrastructure or, in
the discretion of the Village, for a utility pole, tower, or alternative antenna structure, the operator of the facility must provide the Village
with a structural evaluation of each specific location containing a recommendation that the proposed installation passes the standards
described above. The evaluation must be prepared by a professional structural engineer licensed in the State of Illinois.
7. Signage: Other than signs required by Federal law or regulations or identification and location markings, installation of signs on a personal
wireless telecommunication facility is prohibited.
8. Screening: Screening requirements shall be treated consistently with any Village landscape requirements with the exception that the fence
height shall be a minimum of six feet (6') and a maximum of eight feet (8'). Appropriate landscaping must be located and maintained and
must provide the maximum achievable screening, as determined by the Village, from view of adjoining properties and public or private
streets. Landscape screening when permitted in the right-of-way must be provided with a clearance of three feet (3') in all directions from
the facility. The color of housing for ground-mounted equipment must blend with the surroundings. For a covered structure, the maximum
reasonably achievable screening must be provided between such facility and the view from adjoining properties and public or private
streets. In lieu of the operator installing the screening, the Village, at its sole discretion, may accept a fee from the operator of the facility for
the acquisition, installation, or maintenance of landscaping material by the Village.
9. Permission To Use Utility Pole Or Alternative Antenna Structure: The operator of a personal wireless telecommunication facility must submit
to the Village written copies of the approval from the owner of a utility pole, monopole, or an alternative antenna structure, to mount the
personal wireless telecommunication facility on that specific pole, tower, or structure, prior to issuance of the Village permit.
10. Licenses And Permits: The operator of a personal wireless telecommunication facility must verify to the Village that all concurrent licenses
and permits required by other agencies and governments with jurisdiction over the design, construction, location and operation of said
facility have been obtained and will be maintained within the corporate limits of the Village.
11. Variance Requirements: Each location of a personal wireless telecommunication facility within a right-of-way must meet all of the
requirements of this section unless a variance has been obtained. An applicant requesting a variance from one or more of the provisions of
this section must do so in writing to the Public Works Director as a part of the permit application. The request shall identify each provision of
this section from which a variance is requested and the reasons why a variance should be granted.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 223/387
a. The Public Works Director shall decide, on an individual basis, whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this section
identified in the variance request. The Public Works Director may authorize a variance only if the applicant requesting the variance has
demonstrated that:
(1) One or more conditions not under the control of the applicant (such as terrain features or an irregular right-of-way line) create a special
hardship that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
(2) All other designs, methods, materials, locations, or facilities that would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested
are impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
b. As a condition for authorizing a variance, the Public Works Director may require the applicant requesting the variance to meet reasonable
standards and conditions that may or may not be expressly contained within this section, but which carry out the purposes of this section.
c. Any applicant aggrieved by any order, requirement, decision or determination, including the denial of a variance, made by the Public
Works Director under the provisions of this section, shall have the right to appeal to the Village Board, or such other board or commission
as may be designated by the Village Board. The application for appeal shall be submitted in writing to the Village Clerk within thirty (30)
calendar days after the date of such order, requirement, decision, or determination. The Village Board shall commence its consideration
of the appeal at the Village Board's next regularly scheduled meeting occurring at least seven (7) calendar days after the filing of the
appeal. The Village Board shall timely decide the appeal.
12. Abandonment And Removal: Any personal wireless telecommunication facility located within the corporate limits of the Village that is not
operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months, shall be considered abandoned and the owner of the facility must remove same
within ninety (90) calendar days of receipt of written notice from the Village notifying the owner of such abandonment. Such notice shall be
sent by certified or registered mail, return-receipt-requested, by the Village to such owner at the last known address of such owner. In the
case of personal wireless telecommunication facilities attached to Village owned infrastructure, if such facility is not removed within ninety
(90) calendar days of such notice, the Village may remove or cause the removal of such facility through the terms of the applicable
franchise, license or similar agreement or through whatever actions are provided by law for removal and cost recovery.
13. Reimbursements For Costs: The applicant or telecommunications retailer shall be solely responsible for any and all costs incurred by the
Village associated with the installation, repair, replacement, or removal of the applicant or telecommunications provider's equipment. The
costs shall include, but are not limited to, impact fees for street closures; costs related to traffic enforcement at the site where the
installation, repair, replacement, or removal has occurred; and any costs related to returning the right-of-way to its original state prior to the
installation, repair, replacement, or removal of the applicant or telecommunications provider's equipment.
B. Application And Annual Fees:
1. Reimbursable Fees: Unless otherwise provided by the applicable franchise, license, or similar agreement, all applications for permits
pursuant to this section shall be accompanied by a fee as reasonably determined by the Village each year. The applicant shall also
reimburse the Village for any fees charged to the Village for professional services (engineering fees, legal fees, site review fees, etc.)
related to the processing of the applications. The application fees are intended to reimburse the Village for its internal administrative costs
related to processing the applications made under this section.
2. Electricity Infrastructure Maintenance Application Fee: No application fee is required to be paid by any electricity utility that is paying the
Municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the Electricity Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Law4. However, such
applicants shall remain responsible for reimbursing the Village for the cost of its professional services employed in reviewing the application.
3. Application Fees: For the installation of a distributed antenna system or small cell facility, a telecommunications retailer shall pay the
following application fees:
a. Two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for a new facility.
b. Two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for the attachment to and, if applicable, replacement of a Village-owned facility.
c. One thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for the attachment to a utility-owned facility.
4. Annual License Fee: A telecommunications retailer that obtained a permit and installed a distributed antenna system or a small cell facility
within the Village's jurisdiction shall pay the following annual license fees:
a. Three thousand six hundred dollars ($3,600.00) for a new facility.
b. Three thousand six hundred dollars ($3,600.00) per attachment to and, if applicable, replacement of a Village-owned facility.
c. One thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) per attachment to a utility-owned facility.
The Village shall invoice the telecommunications retailer for such annual fee(s) due on or about January 1 of each year, and the
telecommunications retailer shall pay such invoice within thirty (30) calendar days after its receipt thereof.
C. Penalty For Violations:
1. Any and all persons or parties who violate the terms and provisions of this section shall be subject to a minimum fine of seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) per day. Each day shall be considered a new violation.
2. Any fine levied shall be appealable pursuant to the Illinois Administrative Review Act, 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-101, et seq.
D. Conflict Of Laws: Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this section regarding the siting and installation of personal wireless
telecommunication facilities are more restrictive than comparable conditions imposed elsewhere in any other local law, ordinance, resolution,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 224/387
rule or regulation, the regulations of this section will govern; however, where this section conflicts with Federal laws or State laws pre-empting
the Village home rule powers (only applicable for home rule communities), the Federal or State laws will govern. (Ord. 2018-10, 4-16-2018)
Chapter 10
CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE
8-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC section 522(6).
COMMISSION: The Illinois commerce commission.
GROSS REVENUES: All consideration of any kind or nature, including, without limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind contributions
received by the holder for the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable service or video service within the holder's cable service or
video service area within the village.
A. Gross revenues shall include the following:
1. Recurring charges for cable or video service.
2. Event based charges for cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, pay per view and video on demand charges.
3. Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service equipment.
4. Service charges related to the provision of cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, activation, installation, and repair
charges.
5. Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, service order and service
termination charges.
6. Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges, and other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent
payments.
7. A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video
service within the village. The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the village divided by the total number of
subscribers in relation to the relevant regional or national compensation arrangement.
8. Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service
with respect to commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for promotion or exhibition of any products or services on
the holder's network, such as a "home shopping" or similar channel, subject to subsection A9 of this definition.
9. In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled or integrated functionally with other services, capabilities, or applications,
the portion of the holder's revenue attributable to the other services, capabilities, or applications shall be included in the gross revenue
unless the holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from its books and records that are kept in the regular
course of business.
10. The service provider fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b).
B. Gross revenues do not include any of the following:
1. Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad debt, subject to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi).
2. Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the state issued
authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit, or discount is attributable to cable service or video service.
3. Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues
received from services not classified as cable service or video service, including, without limitation, revenue received from
telecommunication services, information services, or the provision of directory or internet advertising, including yellow pages, white
pages, banner advertisement, and electronic publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder to noncable service or nonvideo
service in accordance with the holder's books and records and records kept in the regular course of business and any applicable laws,
rules, regulations, standards, or orders.
4. The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which the purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee from the
purchaser's subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that it will resell the service within the village and pay the fee
permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b) with respect to the service.
5. Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the subscribers or the transaction by a city, state, federal, or any other governmental
entity and collected by the holder of the state issued authorization and required to be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales and use
taxes.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 225/387
6. Security deposits collected from subscribers.
7. Amounts paid by subscribers to "home shopping" or similar vendors for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as
part of the cable service or video service.
C. Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of the revenue as
revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading the payment of the fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/21-801(b) which would otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service.
HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission pursuant to 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
SERVICE: The provision of "cable service" or "video service" to subscribers and the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has
received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
SERVICE PROVIDER FEE: The amount paid under this chapter and 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801 by the holder to a village for the
service areas within its territorial jurisdiction.
VIDEO SERVICE: Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the selection or use of such video programming
services, and which is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public right of way without regard to delivery technology,
including internet protocol technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by a commercial mobile service provider
defined in 47 USC section 332(d) or any video programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that enables users to access content,
information, electronic mail, or other services offered over the public internet. (Ord. 2008-05, 2-4-2008)
8-10-2: CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE IMPOSED:
A. Fee Imposed: A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable service or video service in the village.
B. Amount Of Fee: The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be five percent (5%) of the holder's gross revenues.
C. Notice To Village: The holder shall notify the village at least ten (10) days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service or
video service in the village.
D. Holder's Liability: The holder shall be liable for and pay the service provider fee to the village. The holder's liability for the fee shall commence
on the first day of the calendar month following thirty (30) days after receipt of the ordinance adopting this chapter by the holder. The
ordinance adopting this chapter shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on the holder's application notice sent pursuant to
220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401(b)(6) to the village.
E. Payment Date: The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on a quarterly basis, forty five (45) days after the close of the calendar
quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the
calculation of the fee.
F. Exemption: The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing cable service or video service providers that have an existing franchise
agreement with the village in which a fee is paid.
G. Credit For Other Payments: An incumbent cable operator that elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/21-301(c) with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may deduct the amount of such credit from the fees that
operator owes under subsection B of this section. (Ord. 2008-05, 2-4-2008)
8-10-3: APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES:
All determinations and calculations under this chapter shall be made pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles. (Ord. 2008-05, 2-4-
2008)
8-10-4: NO IMPACT ON OTHER TAXES DUE FROM HOLDER:
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to exempt a holder from any tax that is or may later be imposed by the village, including any
tax that is or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with respect to cable service or video service. A state issued authorization
shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the village's simplified municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax
as it applies to any telephone service provided by the holder. A state issued authorization shall not affect any requirement of the holder with
respect to payment of the local unit of government's 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges. (Ord. 2008-05, 2-4-2008)
8-10-5: AUDITS OF CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 226/387
A. Audit Requirement: The village will notify the holder of the requirements it imposes on other cable service or video service providers to submit
to an audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the same requirements the village imposes on other cable service or video
service providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder's books and records and to recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the
requirements of the village. If all local franchises between the village and cable operator terminate, the audit requirements shall be those
adopted by the village pursuant to the local government taxpayers' bill of rights act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 45/1 et seq. No acceptance
of amounts remitted should be construed as an accord that the amounts are correct.
B. Additional Payments: Any additional amount due after an audit shall be paid within thirty (30) days after the municipality's submission of an
invoice for the sum. (Ord. 2008-05, 2-4-2008)
8-10-6: LATE FEES/PAYMENTS:
All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by ordinances adopted by this municipality pursuant to the local government
taxpayers' bill of rights act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 45/1 et seq. (Ord. 2008-05, 2-4-2008)
Chapter 11
CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER PROTECTION LAW
8-11-1: CUSTOMER SERVICE AND PRIVACY PROTECTION LAW:
A. Adoption: The regulations of 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/70-501 are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the cable or
video providers offering services within the village's boundaries.
B. Amendments: Any amendment to the cable and video customer protection law that becomes effective after the effective date of this chapter
shall be incorporated into this chapter by reference and shall be applicable to cable or video providers offering services within the
municipality's boundaries. However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated
into this chapter by reference without formal action by the corporate authorities of the village. (Ord. 2008-04, 2-4-2008)
8-11-2: ENFORCEMENT:
The village does hereby pursuant to law declare its intent to enforce all of the customer service and privacy protection standards of the cable and
video protection law with respect to complaints received from residents within the village. (Ord. 2008-04, 2-4-2008)
8-11-3: PENALTIES:
The village, pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/70-501(r)(1), does hereby provide for a schedule of penalties for any material breach of
the cable and video protection law by cable or video providers in addition to the penalties provided in the law. The monetary penalties shall apply
on a competitively neutral basis and shall not exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) or each day of the material breach and shall not
exceed twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for each occurrence of a material breach per customer.
A. "Material breach" means any substantial failure of a cable or video provider to comply with service quality and other standards specified in any
provision of the law.
B. The village shall give the cable or video provider written notice of any alleged material breaches of the law and allow such provider at least
thirty (30) days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach.
C. A material breach, for the purposes of assessing penalties, shall be deemed to occur for each day that a material breach has not been
remedied by the cable or video service provider after the notice in subsection B of this section. (Ord. 2008-04, 2-4-2008)
8-11-4: CUSTOMER CREDITS:
The village hereby adopts the schedule of customer credits for violations. Those credits shall be as provided for in the provisions of 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/70-501(s) and applied on the statement issued to the customer for the next billing cycle following the violation or following
the discovery of the violation. The cable or video provider is responsible for providing the credits and the customer is under no obligation to
request the credit. (Ord. 2008-04, 2-4-2008)
Chapter 12
PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 227/387
8-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC section 522(6).
COMMISSION: The Illinois commerce commission.
GROSS REVENUES: All consideration of any kind or nature, including, without limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind contributions
received by the holder for the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable service or video service within the holder's cable service or
video service area within the village.
A. Gross revenues shall include the following:
1. Recurring charges for cable or video service.
2. Event based charges for cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, pay per view and video on demand charges.
3. Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service equipment.
4. Service charges related to the provision of cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, activation, installation, and repair
charges.
5. Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, service order and service
termination charges.
6. Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges, and other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent
payments.
7. A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service
within the village. The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the village divided by the total number of subscribers in
relation to the relevant regional or national compensation arrangement.
8. Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service
with respect to commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for promotion or exhibition of any products or services on the
holder's network, such as a "home shopping" or similar channel, subject to subsection A9 of this definition.
9. In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled or integrated functionally with other services, capabilities, or applications,
the portion of the holder's revenue attributable to the other services, capabilities, or applications shall be included in the gross revenue unless
the holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from its books and records that are kept in the regular course of
business.
10. The service provider fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b).
B. Gross revenues do not include any of the following:
1. Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad debt, subject to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi).
2. Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the state issued
authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit, or discount is attributable to cable service or video service.
3. Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues
received from services not classified as cable service or video service, including, without limitation, revenue received from telecommunication
services, information services, or the provision of directory or internet advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement,
and electronic publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder to noncable service or nonvideo service in accordance with the
holder's books and records and records kept in the regular course of business and any applicable laws, rules, regulations, standards, or
orders.
4. The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which the purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee from the
purchaser's subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that it will resell the service within the village and pay the fee permitted
by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b) with respect to the service.
5. Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the subscribers or the transaction by a city, state, federal, or any other governmental
entity and collected by the holder of the state issued authorization and required to be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales and use
taxes.
6. Security deposits collected from subscribers.
7. Amounts paid by subscribers to "home shopping" or similar vendors for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as
part of the cable service or video service.
C. Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of the revenue as
revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading the payment of the fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-
801(b) which would otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 228/387
HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission pursuant to 220
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
PEG: Public, education and governmental.
PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE: The amount paid under this chapter and 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(d) by the holder to the
village for the service areas within its territorial jurisdiction.
SERVICE: The provision of "cable service" or "video service" to subscribers and the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that
has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
SERVICE PROVIDER FEE: The amount paid under this chapter and 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801 by the holder to village for the
service areas within its territorial jurisdiction.
VIDEO SERVICE: Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the selection or use of such video programming
services, and which is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public right of way without regard to delivery technology,
including internet protocol technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by a commercial mobile service
provider defined in 47 USC section 332(d) or any video programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that enables users to access
content, information, electronic mail, or other services offered over the public internet. (Ord. 10-58, 12-20-2010)
8-12-2: PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE IMPOSED:
A. PEG Fee Imposed: A PEG access support fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable service or video service in the village in
addition to the fee imposed pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801.
B. Amount Of Fee: The amount of the PEG access support fee imposed hereby shall be one percent (1%) of the holder's gross revenues or, if
greater, the percentage of gross revenues that incumbent cable operators pay to the village or its designee for PEG access support in the
village.
C. Payment: The holder shall pay the PEG access support fee to the village or to the entity designated by the village to manage PEG access. The
holder's liability for the PEG access support fee shall commence on the date set forth in section 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(d)(1).
D. Payment Due: The payment of the PEG access support fee shall be due on a quarterly basis, forty five (45) days after the close of the
calendar quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining the
basis for the calculation of the fee.
E. Credit For Other Payments: An incumbent cable operator that elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/21-301(c) shall pay, at the time they would have been due, all monetary payments for PEG access that would have been due
during the remaining term of the agreement had it not been terminated pursuant to that section. All payments made by an incumbent cable
operator pursuant to the previous sentence may be credited against the fees that that operator owes. (Ord. 10-58, 12-20-2010)
8-12-3: APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES:
All determinations and calculations under this chapter shall be made pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles. (Ord. 10-58, 12-20-
2010)
8-12-4: NO IMPACT ON OTHER TAXES DUE FROM HOLDER:
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to exempt a holder from any tax that is or may later be imposed by the village, including any
tax that is or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with respect to cable service or video service. A state issued authorization
shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the village's simplified municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax
as it applies to any telephone service provided by the holder. A state issued authorization shall not affect any requirement of the holder with
respect to payment of the local unit of government's 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges. (Ord. 10-58, 12-20-2010)
8-12-5: AUDITS OF CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER:
A. Audit Requirement: The village will notify the holder of the requirements it imposes on other cable service or video service providers to submit
to an audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the same requirements the village imposes on other cable service or video
service providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder's books and records and to recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the
requirements of the village. If all local franchises between the village and cable operator terminate, the audit requirements shall be those
adopted by the village pursuant to the local government taxpayers' bill of rights act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 45/1 et seq. No acceptance
of amounts remitted should be construed as an accord that the amounts are correct.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 229/387
B. Additional Payments: Any additional amount due after an audit shall be paid within thirty (30) days after the village's submission of an invoice
for the sum. (Ord. 10-58, 12-20-2010)
8-12-6: LATE FEES/PAYMENTS:
All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by ordinances adopted by this village pursuant to the local government
taxpayers' bill of rights act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 45/1 et seq. (Ord. 10-58, 12-20-2010)
Chapter 13
ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND CONNECTION
8-13-1: PURPOSE/INTENT:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of Broadview through the regulation of
nonstormwater discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law. This chapter
establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with
requirements of the national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this chapter are:
A. To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 by stormwater discharges by any user.
B. To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the MS4.
C. To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring, and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance
with this chapter. (Ord. 10-32, 6-7-2010)
8-13-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following shall mean:
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY: The village and the director of public works and/or its designee.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution
prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants
directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating
procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
CLEAN WATER ACT: The federal water pollution control act (33 USC section 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY: Activities subject to NPDES construction permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance
of one acre or more. Such activities include, but are not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human
health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
ILLEGAL DISCHARGE: Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to the storm drain system, except as exempted in subsection 8-13-6A of
this chapter.
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS: An illicit connection is defined as either of the following:
A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface that allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system including, but
not limited to, any conveyances that allow any nonstormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the
storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection
had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency, or
B. Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system that has not been documented in plans,
maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY: Activities subject to NPDES industrial stormwater permits as defined in 40 CFR, section 122.26(b)(14).
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4): The system of conveyances (including sidewalks, roads with drainage systems,
municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains) owned and operated by the village and designed or
used for collecting or conveying stormwater, and that is not used for collecting or conveying sewage.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT: A permit issued by EPA (or by
a state under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC section 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States,
whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general areawide basis.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 230/387
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE: Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater.
PERSON: Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner
or as the owner's agent.
POLLUTANT: Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil
and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or
abandoned objects, ordinances, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and
fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes
and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
PREMISES: Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM: Publicly owned facilities by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including, but not limited to, any roads
with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and
human made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures.
STORMWATER: Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such
precipitation.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN: A document which describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented by a
person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to
stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable.
WASTEWATER: Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a facility. (Ord. 10-32, 6-7-2010)
8-13-3: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly
exempted by the village. (Ord. 10-32, 6-7-2010)
8-13-4: RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION:
The village shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the village may be
delegated in writing by the director of public works, and/or its designee, to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of
the village. (Ord. 10-32, 6-7-2010)
8-13-5: ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY:
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this chapter are minimum standards; therefore this chapter does not intend or imply
that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, or unauthorized discharge of pollutants. (Ord. 10-32, 6-7-
2010)
8-13-6: DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS:
A. Prohibition Of Illegal Discharges: No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw, drain,
or otherwise discharge into the MS4 any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than stormwater.
The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited except as described as follows:
1. The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this chapter: water line flushing, landscape irrigation,
diverted stream flows, rising groundwaters, uncontaminated groundwater infiltration, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, discharges from
potable water sources, foundation drains, air conditioning condensation, irrigation water, springs, water from crawl space pumps, footing
drains, lawn watering, individual residential car washing, flows from riparian habitats and wetlands, dechlorinated swimming pool
discharges, and street wash water.
2. Discharges or flow from firefighting, and other discharges specified in writing by the village as being necessary to protect public health and
safety.
3. Discharges associated with dye testing, however this activity requires a verbal notification to the village prior to the time of the test.
4. The prohibition shall not apply to any nonstormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued
to the discharger and administered under the authority of the United States environmental protection agency (EPA), provided that the
discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided
that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm drain system.
B. Prohibition Of Illicit Connections:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 231/387
1. The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.
2. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was
permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.
3. A person is considered to be in violation of this chapter if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a
connection to continue.
4. Improper connections in violation of this chapter must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved on site wastewater
management system or the sanitary sewer system, upon approval of the village.
5. Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer
system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the village requiring that
such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be
determined, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of
connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to
be documented and provided to the village. (Ord. 10-32, 6-7-2010)
8-13-7: WATERCOURSE PROTECTION:
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse
within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow
of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a
watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. (Ord. 10-32, 6-7-2010)
8-13-8: INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY DISCHARGES:
A. Submission Of NOI To Village:
1. Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such
permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the village prior to the allowing of discharges to the
MS4.
2. The operator of a facility, including construction sites, required to have an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial
activity shall submit a copy of the notice of intent (NOI) to the village at the same time the operator submits the original notice of intent to the
EPA as applicable.
3. The copy of the notice of intent may be delivered to the village either in person or by mailing it to:
Notice Of Intent To Discharge Stormwater
Village Of Broadview
2350 South 25th Avenue
Broadview, IL 60155
4. A person commits an offense if the person operates a facility that is discharging stormwater associated with industrial activity without having
submitted a copy of the notice of intent to do so to the village. (Ord. 10-32, 6-7-2010)
8-13-9: COMPLIANCE MONITORING:
A. Right Of Entry; Inspection And Sampling: The village shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this chapter as
often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this chapter.
1. If a discharger has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the
discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the village.
2. Facility operators shall allow the village ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and
copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the performance of any
additional duties as defined by state and federal law.
3. The village shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the village to conduct
monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge.
4. The village has the right to require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring
equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to
measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
5. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and, easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed
by the operator at the written or oral request of the village and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the
operator.
6. Unreasonable delays in allowing the village access to a permitted facility is a violation of a stormwater discharge permit and of this chapter.
A person who is the operator of a facility with an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity commits an
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 232/387
offense if the person denies the village reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or
required by this chapter.
B. Search Warrants: If the village has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of
a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the
overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the village may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of
competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 10-32, 6-7-2010)
8-13-10: REQUIREMENT TO PREVENT, CONTROL, AND REDUCE STORMWATER POLLUTANTS BY THE USE OF
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES:
Village will adopt requirements identifying best management practices for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to
pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the United States. The owner or operator of such activity, operation,
or facility shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the
municipal storm drain system or watercourses through the use of these structural and nonstructural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a
property or premises that is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional
structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the MS4. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid
NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance
with the provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be part of a stormwater management plan (SWMP) as necessary for compliance with
requirements of the NPDES permit. (Ord. 10-32, 6-7-2010)
8-13-11: NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS:
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response
for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or
pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the United States, said person shall take all necessary steps to
ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials said person shall
immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous
materials, said person shall notify the village in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by
phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the village within five (5) business days of the phone notice. If the discharge
of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an
on site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three (3) years.
Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 10-32, 6-7-2010)
8-13-12: VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT, AND PENALTIES:
A. Violations: It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person
who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or
may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law.
In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the village is authorized to enter upon the subject
private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The
village is authorized to seek costs of the abatement as outlined herein.
B. Warning Notice: When the village finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, or any order issued
hereunder, the village may serve upon that person a written warning notice, specifying the particular violation believed to have occurred and
requesting the discharger to immediately investigate the matter and to seek a resolution whereby any offending discharge will cease.
Investigation and/or resolution of the matter in response to the warning notice in no way relieves the alleged violator of liability for any
violations occurring before or after receipt of the warning notice. Nothing in this subsection shall limit the authority of the village to take any
action, including emergency action or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a warning notice.
C. Notice Of Violation: Whenever the village finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the
village may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person.
The notice of violation shall contain:
1. The name and address of the alleged violator;
2. The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred;
3. A statement specifying the nature of the violation;
4. A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this chapter and a time schedule for the completion of such
remedial action;
5. A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 233/387
6. A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the village by filing a written notice of appeal within ten (10) days of
service of notice of violation; and
7. A statement specifying that, should the violator fail to restore compliance within the established time schedule, the work will be done by a
designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator.
D. Notice Requirements: Such notice may require without limitation:
1. The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
2. The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
3. That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist;
4. The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property;
5. Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and
6. The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
E. Compensatory Action: In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by this chapter, the village may impose upon a
violator alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc. (Ord. 10-
32, 6-7-2010)
8-13-13: SUSPENSION OF MS4 ACCESS:
A. Emergency Cease And Desist Orders: When the village finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this
chapter, or any order issued hereunder, or that the person's past violations are likely to recur, and that the person's violation(s) has (have)
caused or contributed to an actual or threatened discharge to the MS4 or waters of the United States which reasonably appears to present an
imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, or to the environment, the village may issue an order to the violator
directing it immediately to cease and desist all such violations and directing the violator to:
1. Immediately comply with all ordinance requirements; and
2. Take such appropriate preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including immediately
halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.
Any person notified of an emergency order directed to it under this subsection shall immediately comply and stop or eliminate its
endangering discharge. In the event of a discharger's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the emergency order, the village may
take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize harm to the MS4 or waters of the United States, and/or endangerment to
persons or to the environment, including immediate termination of a facility's water supply, sewer connection, or other municipal utility
services. The village may allow the person to recommence its discharge when it has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the village that the
period of endangerment has passed, unless further termination proceedings are initiated against the discharger under this chapter. A person
that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement,
describing the causes of the harmful discharge and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the village within three (3) days
of receipt of the emergency order. Issuance of an emergency cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking
any other action against the violator.
B. Suspension Due To Illicit Discharges In Emergency Situations: The village may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a
person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and
substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or waters of the United States. If the violator fails
to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the village may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize
damage to the MS4 or waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to persons.
C. Suspension Due To The Detection Of Illicit Discharge: Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this chapter may have their MS4
access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The village will notify a violator of the proposed termination of
its MS4 access. The violator may petition the village for a reconsideration and hearing.
A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior approval
of the village.
D. Civil Penalties: In the event the alleged violator fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure
the violations described therein within seven (7) days, or such greater period as the village shall deem appropriate, after the village has taken
one or more of the actions described above, the village may impose a penalty not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each day
the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. (Ord. 10-32, 6-7-2010)
8-13-14: APPEAL OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the village. The notice of appeal must be received within ten (10) days
from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the appropriate authority or his/her designee shall take place within thirty
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 234/387
(30) days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the municipal authority or their designee shall be final. (Ord. 10-32, 6-7-
2010)
8-13-15: ENFORCEMENT MEASURES AFTER APPEAL:
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within ten (10)
days of the decision of the village upholding the decision of the authorized enforcement agency, then representatives of the village shall enter
upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It
shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated
contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. (Ord. 10-32, 6-7-2010)
8-13-16: COST OF ABATEMENT OF THE VIOLATION:
Within thirty (30) days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative
costs. If the amount due is not paid within a timely manner as determined by the decision of the municipal authority or by the expiration of the time
in which to file an appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the
amount of the assessment.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the village by reason of such violation. (Ord. 10-32, 6-7-2010)
8-13-17: VIOLATIONS DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE:
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at
the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken. (Ord. 10-32, 6-7-
2010)
8-13-18: REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE:
The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is
within the discretion of the village to seek cumulative remedies.
The village may recover all attorney fees, court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement of this chapter, including sampling and
monitoring expenses. (Ord. 10-32, 6-7-2010)
Title 9
BUILDING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
BUILDING CODES
9-1-1: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS TO EXISTING BUILDINGS:
In construing the regulations established by the code adopted herein, such regulations shall not be construed as requiring alterations in the
construction or equipment of buildings or structures in existence at the time of passage of this code, unless specific provision is made to the
contrary. (1987 Code)
9-1-2: BUILDING CODE ADOPTED:
A. Code Adopted: A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the village clerk of the village of Broadview, being
marked and designated as the international building code, 2009 edition, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby
adopted as the international building code of the village of Broadview, in the state of Illinois for regulating and governing the conditions and
maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things
and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and
structures unfit for human occupancy and use and the demolition of such structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits
and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said international building
code on file in the office of the village of Broadview are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this
subsection. (Ord. 09-27, 8-3-2009)
B. Amendments: The following sections are hereby deleted, modified or amended:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 235/387
Article 1 - Administration And Enforcement:
Sec. 100.0 Title. Delete name of jurisdiction and insert in lieu thereof village of Broadview.
Section 114.3.1 Fee Schedule. Delete in entirety, and insert in lieu thereof: Refer to local ordinances for fee schedule1.
Section 117.4 Violation Penalties. Delete in entirety and insert in lieu thereof: Refer to local ordinances for penalties2.
Section 118.2 Unlawful Continuance. Delete in entirety and insert in lieu thereof: Refer to local ordinances for penalties3.
Article 6 Special Use And Occupancy Requirements.
Section 616.0 Swimming Pools. Delete in entirety and insert in lieu thereof: Refer to local ordinances4.
Article 17 Fire Protection Systems. Delete article in entirety and insert in lieu thereof: Refer to local ordinances.
Article 19 Signs. Delete article in entirety and insert in lieu thereof: Refer to local ordinances5.
Article 20 Electric Wiring, Equipment And Systems.
Section 2000.1 Scope. Delete only last sentence thereof and insert in lieu thereof: All such installations shall conform to the provisions of
the city of Chicago electrical code, 1984, or latest edition thereof. Hereafter in this article, appendix A will refer to the Chicago electrical
code, 1984, or latest edition6.
Article 22 Plumbing Systems.
Sec. 2200.1 Scope. Delete in entirety and insert in lieu thereof: The design and installation of plumbing systems, including sanitary and
storm drainage, sanitary facilities, water supplies and storm and sewage disposal in buildings shall comply with the requirements of this
article and the Chicago plumbing code, 1984, or latest edition. Hereafter in this article, appendix A will refer to the Chicago plumbing
code, 1984, or latest edition7.
(1987 Code)
9-1-3: MECHANICAL CODE ADOPTED:
A. Adoption Of Code: A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the village clerk of the village of Broadview, being
marked and designated as the international mechanical code, 2009 edition, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby
adopted as the international mechanical code of the village of Broadview, in the state of Illinois for regulating and governing the design,
construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of
plumbing systems as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said mechanical code on file in the office of the village are hereby referred to, adopted, and
made part hereof, as if fully set forth in this subsection, with the additions, insertions, and deletions and changes, if any, prescribed herein.
(Ord. 09-29, 8-3-2009)
B. Exceptions: There shall be the following exceptions and modifications to the BOCA basic/national mechanical code:
Section M-100.1. Village of Broadview shall be inserted wherever it refers to name of jurisdiction.
Section M-114.3 The fee schedule shall be as follows:
1. New warm air furnace system with ducts $25.00
2. Replace furnace only 15.00
3. Infrared gas-fired unit or gas-fired suspended unit
First unit 15.00
Each additional unit 5.00
4. Gas-fired through the wall heaters 15.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 236/387
5. Boilers
288,000 BTU per hour or less net output rating
of boiler, complete installation 25.00
Boiler replacement only 15.00
6. Ventilating systems, mechanical supply and exhaust
Capacity 3,000 cubic feet of air per minute 20.00
Each additional 1,000 cubic feet per minute 5.00
Increase in capacity for each 1,000 cubic feet 5.00
(Capacity is the sum of supply and exhaust)
7. Refrigeration and air conditioning
Each compressor or generator unit of 5 tons
capacity or less
15.00
Over 5 tons capacity 25.00
Sec. M-117.4 Penalties shall be as set forth in section 1-4-1 of the village code providing for general penalties.
Sec. M-118.2 Penalties for unlawful continuance shall be as set forth in section 1-4-1 of the village code providing for general penalties.
(1987 Code)
9-1-4: RESIDENTIAL CODE ADOPTED:
A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the village clerk of the village of Broadview, being marked and designated
as the international residential code, 2009 edition, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the international
residential code of the village of Broadview, in the state of Illinois, on file in the office of the village of Broadview is hereby referred to, adopted,
and made a part hereof, for regulating and governing the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair equipment,
location removal and demolition of detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three
(3) stories in height with separate means of egress as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and
each and all of the regulations provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said international residential code on file therefor as if fully set out in
this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in this section. (Ord. 09-30, 8-3-2009)
9-1-5: EXISTING BUILDING CODE ADOPTED:
A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the village clerk of the village of Broadview, being marked and designated
as the existing building code, 2009 edition, as published by the international existing building code, 2009 edition, be and is hereby adopted as the
existing building code of the village of Broadview, in the state of Illinois for regulating and governing the repair, alteration, change of occupancy,
addition and relocation of existing buildings, including historic buildings, as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of
fees therefor, and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said existing building code on file in the village of
Broadview are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section on file in the office of the village of Broadview
are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if
any, prescribed in this section. (Ord. 09-26, 8-3-2009)
Chapter 2
GENERAL BUILDING REGULATIONS
9-2-1: ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICES:
9-2-1-1: BUILDING COMMISSIONER1:
A. Office Created, Appointment, Term: There is hereby created the office of building commissioner, an executive office of the village. The building
commissioner shall be appointed by the president and board of trustees and shall hold his office for the period of one year and until his
successor is appointed and qualified.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 237/387
B. Duties: It shall be the duty of the building commissioner to see to the enforcement of all provisions of this code and other ordinances relating to
building. He shall inspect all buildings or structures being erected or altered as frequently as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the
provisions of this code and other ordinances.
C. Stop Work Orders: The building commissioner shall have the power to order all work stopped on construction or alteration or repair of buildings
in the village when such work is being done in violation of any provision of this code or any ordinance relating thereto, or in violation of the
zoning title2. Work shall not be resumed after the issuance of such an order except on the written permission of the commissioner or by order
of the board of trustees; provided, that if the stop order is an oral one, it shall be followed by a written stop order within one hour. Such stop
order may be served by any police officer of the village.
D. Right Of Entry: The building commissioner shall have the power to make or cause to be made entry into any building or premises where the
work of altering, repairing or constructing any building or structure is going on at any reasonable time for the purpose of making inspections.
(1987 Code)
9-2-1-2: DEPUTY BUILDING COMMISSIONER AND BUILDING INSPECTOR:
There is hereby created the offices of deputy building commissioner and building inspector. The duties of these offices shall be prescribed from
time to time by the president and board of trustees. Said president and board of trustees may, at their discretion, appoint one person to the two
(2) positions mentioned herein or may appoint two (2) individuals to the two (2) positions. (1987 Code)
9-2-1-3: ELEVATOR INSPECTOR:
There is hereby created the office of elevator inspector. The duties and remuneration of such office shall be prescribed from time to time by the
president and board of trustees. (1987 Code)
9-2-2: BUILDING PERMIT REGULATIONS:
A. Improvements Required, Bond3: On application for any building permit, it shall be the duty of the street committee and the director of public
works and water to inspect the premises for which the application is made in order to ascertain the condition of the street, sidewalk, curb and
gutter immediately adjoining the premises, and also the surrounding area of the premises if the applicant is to build on a corner lot. It shall be
the further duty of the street committee and director of public works and water to ascertain and estimate the cost if none of the improvements,
namely streets, sidewalks, curbs and gutters, are installed on the premises for which application is made for a building permit, and before the
issuance of any building permit, the applicant must comply by installing the curb, sidewalk, gutter and street. If same cannot be installed
immediately, then applicant must deposit a performance bond with the village clerk to install the above improvements when requested to do
so.
B. Deposit Required To Protect Water System4: No permit for the erection of a new building or structure or for the repair or alteration of an
existing building or structure shall be granted unless there shall be deposited with the building commissioner the sum of twenty five dollars
($25.00) to protect the village against any loss due to damage to buffalo boxes or shutoff boxes of the water system in connection with such
work. Such deposit shall be returned to the applicant upon completion of the work after deducting the cost of repairing or replacing any shutoff
or buffalo box or the contents thereof, if any damage has been done thereto in connection with such work.
C. Diagonal Parking: Whenever any building permit is issued for any of the four (4) corners of any block fronting on Roosevelt Road in the village,
the applicant for permit shall provide for diagonal, off street parking between the edge of the pavement and sidewalk on the side street
adjoining Roosevelt Road. Plans and specifications for providing diagonal, off street parking space for automobiles, as prepared by the village
engineer, shall be on file with the village clerk for public inspection. (1987 Code)
9-2-3: BUILDING PERMIT FEES AND BONDS:
A. Construction Fees: The fee to be charged for a permit to erect and construct, alter or repair any wall, structure, building or part thereof, where
such permit is required by the provisions of this chapter or the ordinances of the village shall be as follows:
Estimated Construction Cost Permit Fee
Under $1,000.00 $25.00
$1,000.00 and over $25.00 plus $20.00 per thousand of estimated cost based upon requested documentation
B. Elevator Inspections: The village board of trustees may enter into contracts with private inspectors to conduct the annual inspections for any
elevator, manlift, dumbwaiter, and/or escalators in accordance with the applicable provisions of the laws of the state of Illinois and the United
States. The owner of any building inspected shall pay the fees charged by the inspector for such inspections.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 238/387
C. Electrical Permit Fees: The permit fees for the issuance of electrical installation permits shall be governed by the 2008 national electric code
NFPA 705, with a minimum fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00).
D. Plumbing:
1. Permit Fees: Pursuant to the 2006 municipal code of Chicago for plumbing, the building commissioner or plumbing inspector shall issue a
permit upon application in all cases where the proposed installation or alteration as described in such application is found to be in conformity
with this title, and upon the payment by the applicant of a fee of fifty five dollars ($55.00) for the installation or alteration of one to five (5)
fixtures (including in addition to standard fixtures all floor drains, sump pumps and water heaters). The applicant must pay an additional fee
of ten dollars ($10.00) per additional fixture installed or altered within the same building.
2. Plumbers Certification, Bond: All plumbers who do any work in this village shall be certified by the Illinois department of public health
pursuant to the Illinois plumbing code and shall be bonded in the sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). No permit for plumbing
installations shall be issued unless there is compliance with this subsection.
E. Street Opening Bond6, Deposit: The bond required by subsection 9-4-3C of this title shall be in the sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00)
or, in the alternative, the sum of seven hundred dollars ($700.00) cash may be deposited with the village to be refunded in full upon notification
of satisfactory completion of the work.
F. Tank Burial, Permit And Fee: No tank used for the storage of gas, oil, solvent or other such material shall be buried underground without first
receiving the approval of the fire marshal, and thereafter applying for a permit from the building commissioner. Said permit application shall be
accompanied by drawings showing the proposed location of the underground tanks and by a minimum permit fee of twenty five dollars
($25.00) per tank.
G. Wrecking Permits, Fee: No building within the village may be wrecked without first applying for a wrecking permit from the building
commissioner. Said permit shall be accompanied by a fee according to the following schedule:
For any residential, garage and auxiliary buildings or structure $25.00 per building
For any commercial or industrial building or structure per estimated cost of demolition:
Estimated Cost Of Demolition Permit Fee
Under $1,000.00 $10.00
$1,000.00 and over $10.00 plus $20.00 per thousand
H. Fences: For estimated construction cost under one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), there shall be a twenty five dollar ($25.00) fee. For estimated
construction cost over one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) there shall be a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) plus twenty dollars ($20.00) per thousand
or part thereof of estimated cost.
I. Sign Permit Fees:
1. Bench Signs: Annual fee per bench: Fifty dollars ($50.00).
2. Billboard Signs: Annual license fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). Permit to be determined by the requisite electrical permit fee and
by a fee of two dollars fifty cents ($2.50) per square foot for each side or face of the sign.
3. Change Of Copy: Change of copy of sign face only will be treated as a nonilluminated sign for the fee. Each face is a separate sign.
J. Satellite Antenna: For each installation costing up to three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00), and an additional ten
dollars ($10.00) per one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or part thereof exceeding three thousand dollars ($3,000.00).
Any contractor, repairman or workman who begins work without securing the necessary permit as provided for in this chapter, shall pay as a
fine the required building permit fee, plus a surcharge of one hundred percent (100%) of the fee for failure to obtain the necessary permit.
(Ord. 09-34, 8-3-2009)
9-2-4: FENCES:
It shall be unlawful to erect any fence in the village without obtaining a permit therefor in compliance with this section.
A. Definitions:
FENCE: A barrier, consisting of wooden or metal posts, rails, wire mesh or similar material used as a boundary or means of protection or
confinement.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 239/387
FRONT YARD: That portion of the lot from the extreme front of building to the front property line.
REAR YARD: That portion of the lot from the extreme rear of building to the rear property line.
SIDE YARD: That portion of the lot on either side of the building from the side of building to the side property line; except on a corner lot, the
side yard facing the street will be considered a front yard area.
B. Permit Required: An application for a building permit for a fence shall be made to the Building Commissioner and will be accompanied by a
sketch showing property lines and location of buildings on property, indicating where fence will be installed, the type of fence and height of
fence and also accompanied by the proper permit fee.
C. Permit Fee: The permit fee shall be as set out in subsection 9-2-3H of this Chapter.
D. Fence Restrictions:
1. "A" And "B" Districts:
a. In areas zoned "A" Single-Family or "B" Multiple-Family, height of fences shall be a maximum of six feet (6') in the rear yard area and a
maximum of four feet (4') in the side yard area, except on a corner lot.
b. No fence shall be allowed in the front yard area or on a corner lot where the side yard faces the street.
2. "C" And "CC" Districts:
a. In areas zoned "C" Commercial or "CC" Industrial, height of fences shall be a maximum of eight feet (8') in rear yards and side yards.
b. No fence shall be allowed in the front yard.
Exceptions: This subsection shall not apply to school property or to publicly owned property. Any person requesting a variance from the
provisions of this Section shall apply to the President and Board of Trustees who will consider the recommendation of the Building
Commissioner and the interest of public welfare and safety.
E. Nonconforming Fences: Any fence in existence at the time this Section is enacted which does not conform to the provisions of this Section
shall, upon the sale of the property or upon fifty percent (50%) destruction of said fence, be removed or brought into conformity with this
Section.
F. Penalty: Any person found guilty of violating this Section shall be fined not less than one dollar ($1.00) nor more than two hundred dollars
($200.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed to be committed on each day in which a violation occurs or is permitted to
continue. (1987 Code)
9-2-5: OBSTRUCTING EXITS AND STAIRWAYS:
It shall be unlawful to obstruct or permit the obstruction of any stairway, aisle, corridor or exit in any office building, factory, hotel, school, church,
theater, assembly hall, lodge or other public hall, or any building used in part or wholly for any such purpose, or in any building used by two (2) or
more tenants or families, in such a manner as to interfere with the free use of such stairway, aisle or corridor or exit. (1987 Code)
9-2-6: TRAILERS AND TRAILER CAMPS:
A. Definitions: For the purpose of this Section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this
subsection:
HOUSE CAR TRAILER: Any structure for, or used for, living or sleeping purposes mounted upon wheels and capable of being transported on
wheels from place to place, either by its own power or by some vehicle attached to it; provided, however, that this definition shall not apply to
any vehicle operated over fixed rails.
TRAILER CAMP: A plot of ground where one or more house car trailers used as living or sleeping quarters may be located, regardless of
whether or not a charge is made for such accommodation.
B. Nuisance Declared: Trailer camps are hereby declared to be a nuisance. (1987 Code)
9-2-7: SATELLITE ANTENNA:
A satellite antenna is described as any reflector used to receive microwave impulses. It is also referred to herein as a "dish".
A. Permit Required, Fee: No satellite antenna shall be located, constructed or installed in the Village without a permit being issued therefor. A
permit for the installation of an antenna shall be issued by the Building Department upon presentation of an application, compliance with this
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 240/387
Section and the required permit fee.
Applications shall be accompanied by a plat showing lot lines, electrical lines, location of antenna, height, diameter of dish and surrounding
landscaping. The permit fee shall be as set out in subsection 9-2-3J of this Chapter.
B. Zoning Classification Restrictions:
1. "A" And "B" Districts: No satellite antenna shall be permitted in an area zoned "A" Single-Family Residence or "B" Multiple-Family
Residence unless:
a. The use and possession of the antenna is permitted by applicable law.
b. If the antenna consists of a dish, the dish shall be the least size required for reception as certified by the installer not to exceed eleven
feet (11') in diameter and be mounted on a concrete base. The dish shall not exceed fourteen feet (14') in height from its concrete base.
The mounting of a dish shall not be permitted on a roof or structure of any kind.
c. Construction shall conform to all Village ordinances.
d. Not more than one such dish shall be installed on any lot of record and the antenna shall service only those persons who occupy that lot.
e. The dish shall be located on the rear of the lot but not within the area for side yard requirements nor within any utility easements, and not
within ten feet (10') of any electrical lines. The color and structural quality shall blend with existing use of the property and adjacent
properties and shall be screened by landscaping. All electrical connections shall be Underwriters' Laboratory approved and the current
shall be of low voltage. Further, the connection shall follow current Chicago Electrical Code7 guidelines and be firmly grounded.
2. Other Districts: In all other zoned districts, a satellite antenna shall not be permitted unless:
a. The possession of the antenna is permitted by applicable law.
b. If the antenna consists of a dish, the dish shall be the least size required for reception.
c. Construction shall conform to all Village ordinances.
d. Not more than one such dish shall be installed on any lot of record.
e. In the case of the property abutting a residential district, the dish shall be located on the rear of the lot but not within the rear or side yard
requirements.
f. The color and structural quality of the dish shall blend with existing use of the property and adjacent properties, if it abuts a residential
district, and be screened by landscaping. All electrical connections shall be Underwriters' Laboratory approved and the current shall be of
low voltage.
C. Variations: Variations in the application of this Section may be granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals as in the cases of variations as set forth
in the Zoning Ordinance of the Village8.
D. Nonconforming Antenna: Any satellite antenna, as described by this Section, now in existence which is nonconforming to the terms of this
Section, shall be brought into compliance within twelve (12) months of the effective date of this Section. (1987 Code)
9-2-8: REGISTRATION OF CONTRACTORS; BOND, CERTIFICATE9:
Any contractor or subcontractor, whether an individual, sole proprietor, partnership or corporation, performing work in the village shall not
commence work until the contractor or subcontractor has first applied for and received an annual certificate of registration.
Applications for the certificate of registration shall be submitted on forms supplied by the building department.
All applications shall be accompanied by a registration fee in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00), and by proof of a bond in the minimum
sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00); provided however that the following contractors shall submit proof of a bond in the sums stated in
section 3-1-6 of this code: house movers; sign erectors; building wreckers.
Upon receipt of the completed application, required fee and proof of bond, the building commissioner shall issue the certificate.
The annual certificate shall be valid for the current calendar year of January 1 to December 31. (Ord. 09-34, 8-3-2009)
9-2-8-1: EFFECT ON PERMIT FEES; EXEMPTION FOR LICENSES:
The certificate of registration fee shall be in addition to any permit fee required under the terms of any ordinance of the village.
No certificate of registration or fee provided for herein shall be required of any contractor or subcontractor holding a valid business license issued
by the village. (Ord. 92-36, 10-5-1992, eff. 1-1-1993)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 241/387
9-2-8-2: ENFORCEMENT:
The building commissioner is hereby authorized to enforce the terms of this section 9-2-8. No building permit shall be issued until there has been
compliance with the provisions of this section 9-2-8. Any contractor or subcontractor employed to commence work after the building permit has
been issued shall make application as set forth herein to have a certificate issued prior to commencement of that contractor's or subcontractor's
work. The building commissioner may also take such action to issue a stop work order as provided in subsection 9-2-1-1C of this chapter. (Ord.
92-36, 10-5-1992, eff. 1-1-1993)
9-2-8-3: PENALTY:
Any person, sole proprietorship, partnership or corporation who violates the provisions of this section 9-2-8 shall be subject to a fine of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) per day for each day said violation exists. (Ord. 09-34, 8-3-2009)
9-2-9: LOCATION OF UTILITIES AND OTHER SERVICES; FEES:
A. Calls Not Involving JULIE: For calls made directly to the village and not involving JULIE as governed by section 8-9-16 of this code, the village
shall charge a fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per hour for a village employee to designate the location of utilities with a flag, stake
or other marking. There shall be a minimum charge of two (2) hours of service.
B. Pitot Testing: The village shall charge a flat rate of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per address to facilitate Pitot testing, the measurement
and/or calibration of the water flow through a water hydrant. This fee is in addition to any fee charged by an individual or business which is
hired by the property owner or renter to actually conduct the testing.
C. Hydrant Meter Use: There will be a charge of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per fifteen thousand (15,000) gallons or two hundred (200)
cubic feet of water consumed. The village shall designate which hydrant shall be utilized. Those utilizing the hydrant shall be responsible for
any water meter damage or any hydrant damage resulting from such use.
The director of public works, or other village employee designated by the village president, must approve the use or service prior to its
commencement. All required fees shall be paid in advance of any use permitted or service provided. (Ord. 2004-25, 11-15-2004)
9-2-10: BOARD UP PROVISIONS:
A. No person or entity owning, renting, possessing or controlling any building in the village shall permit the windows or doors of a building to be
covered with boards, planks of wood, iron grates or bars, except as hereinafter specifically provided.
B. For occupied buildings, use of boards or planks of wood to cover missing or broken windows or doors shall be permitted in buildings when
such windows or doors have been broken or damaged, but such boarding up is only permitted for a reasonable time to allow for repairs, not to
exceed a period of two (2) months. Where windows or doors are not missing or broken, only wire mesh may be used to cover the windows or
doors, and only for a period of sixty (60) days or less.
C. For vacant buildings, use of boards, planks of wood, or wire mesh shall be permitted for a period not to exceed six (6) months to allow for
repair, remodeling or new occupancy.
D. Violations of this section are declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated or enjoined by action of the village. (Ord. 2003-08, 11-17-
2003)
Chapter 3
ELECTRICAL REGULATIONS
9-3-1: ELECTRICAL CODE ADOPTED:
A. Adoption: A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the village clerk of the village of Broadview, being marked
and designated as the Chicago electrical code, 2013 edition, be and is hereby adopted as the electrical code of the village of Broadview. (Ord.
13-46, 8-19-2013)
B. Amendments To Code: The Chicago electrical code, 1990 edition, or latest edition thereof, is modified and amended as follows:
Service Drops.
1. Rigid galvanized or aluminum metal conduit shall be used for new and revised service drops.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 242/387
2. Service drops shall not be smaller than 100 ampere with a minimum of twelve (12) circuits.
a. Upon a change of occupancy or ownership requiring a certificate of occupancy or upon remodeling requiring a building permit taking
place, all services under 100 amp shall be upgraded to 100 amps minimum.
3. Two (2) or more number twelve (#12) branch circuits shall be used for kitchen appliances. One number twelve (#12) appliance circuit shall
be used for the laundry facilities.
4. Installations in apartment buildings with three (3) or more meters shall have one main means of disconnect. All other types of buildings shall
have only one main disconnect.
5. No service entrances cables are permitted on new or revised connections.
C. Additions: The following requirements shall be added to the Chicago electrical code, 1990 edition, or latest edition thereof:
1. Perforated copper straps will not be allowed for grounding purposes.
2. All kitchen exhaust fans shall be vented to the outside of the building.
3. All receptacles to be of the grounded type.
4. All 277-volt lighting shall require special permission from the electrical inspector.
5. An inspection will be required of all work when in the "roughed in" state, before any insulation and wall finishes are done. Twenty four (24)
hour notice is required for an inspection. If for some reason the inspection cannot be made due to a no show or work not ready for
inspection a thirty-five dollar ($35.00) fee is required for a new appointment.
6. P.V.C. shall not be allowed for new or existing services. P.V.C. may be allowed by special permission only outdoors under soil at a minimum
depth of twenty-four (24) inches under the top of the surrounding grade, and exit with rigid metal conduit. When voltage exceeds 600 volts it
shall be encased in not less than 2" of concrete. A decision for special permission will be considered after review of all information
requested by the building commissioner and the electrical inspector.
7. Romex shall not be allowed for new services.
8. Aluminum wire shall not be allowed for services or circuitry.
9. All outlets located within a distance of six (6) feet from the following are required to be of the Ground Fault Circuit Interrupter (GFCI) type:
sinks, basins, lavatories, laundry tubs, also outlets in garage, exterior walls, posts, and swimming pools and wherever the inspector deems
it necessary for the sake of safety. Upgrades to GFCI shall be required if a certificate of occupancy is requested, or upon the issuance of a
building permit for new construction or remodelling.
10. All recessed incandescent fixtures shall be provided with thermal protection, when installed in a ceiling with insulation.
11. Smoke Detectors:
a. Existing Residential Buildings:
Every dwelling unit shall have at least one approved operable smoke detector within fifteen (15) feet of all sleeping rooms, with at least
one detector per floor containing at least one habitable room or heating plant.
The owner or occupant shall furnish and install at least one approved and operable smoke detector on the uppermost ceiling area at the
top of any staircase. The detector is to be located four (4) inches from any wall. If installed on a wall the detector is to be installed from
four (4) to twelve (12) inches down from the ceiling.
All smoke detectors may be either battery or electrically powered and are to be U.L. approved.
In all rental units it is the responsibility of the tenant to maintain all battery powered smoke detectors furnished by the landlord.
b. New Construction:
All new residential buildings shall have smoke detectors permanently wired to the electric supply.
c. Hotels and motels are to comply with Chapter 13-64-180 of the 1990 Chicago Electric Code, as amended.
d. All smoke detectors shall comply with Chicago Electric Code latest edition, sections 13-64-120 through 13-64-180 and 13-96-100 through
13-196-160.
D. Permit Fees And Requirements:
1. Upon application for an electrical permit, all electrical contractors shall furnish to the Building Commissioner the following:
a. A five thousand dollar ($5,000.00) license permit bond, made to the Village, said bond to be in effect for a minimum of one year. A fifty
dollar ($50.00) contractor's registration fee good for one year and a copy of the contractor's electrical license.
b. A shop drawing or thorough description of the proposed work, to be supplemented with additional documentation if requested by the
Building Commissioner.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 243/387
c. The name of the supervising electrician on the job site.
2. In addition, the contractor shall pay the required permit fee, based upon the following schedule:
PERMIT FEE SCHEDULE
a. Services:
Minimum wiring fee $ 20.00
Temporary service 20.00
0-100 ampere 25.00
101-200 ampere 30.00
201-400 ampere 40.00
401-600 ampere 45.00
800 ampere 50.00
1,000 ampere 55.00
1,200 ampere 85.00
1,600 ampere 95.00
2,000 ampere 105.00
3,000 ampere 150.00
4,000 ampere 200.00
b. 15 And 20 Ampere 2 Wire Branch Circuits:
0-50 circuits $ 8.00 each
51 or more circuits 4.00 each
c. Branch Circuits Exceeding 20 Amperes:
30 ampere 2 wire branch circuits $ 16.00 each
40 ampere 2 wire branch circuits 16.00 each
60 ampere 2 wire branch circuits 24.00 each
30 ampere 3 wire branch circuits 32.00 each
40 ampere 3 wire branch circuits 32.00 each
60 ampere 3 wire branch circuits 48.00 each
30 ampere 4 wire branch circuits 48.00 each
40 ampere 4 wire branch circuits 48.00 each
60 ampere 4 wire branch circuits 72.00 each
d. Motor Or Current Consuming Device:
First motor up to 5 hp $ 10.00
Additional motors to 5 hp 5.00 each
Motors over 5 hp 1.00 per hp
(Change kilowatts to horsepower, 1.2 kW = 1 hp)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 244/387
e. Miscellaneous:
Temporary wiring $ 20.00
Computer cables 20.00
Communication systems visual or aural 20.00
Burglar and fire systems 20.00
Antenna systems 20.00
Vaults 20.00
(Ord. 96-6, 8-5-1996)
9-3-2: ELECTRICAL INSPECTION DEPARTMENT:
A. Department Created, Composition, Functions: There is hereby established an Electrical Inspection Department for the regulation of the
installation, alteration and use of all electrical equipment as herein provided. Said Electrical Inspection Department shall consist of the Chief
Electrical Inspector of the Village and shall be charged with the duty of enforcing the provisions of the rules and regulations relating to the
installation and use of electrical equipment as provided by this Code and Chapter, and shall function under the immediate supervision and
control of the Chief Electrical Inspector.
B. Chief Electrical Inspector:
1. Office Created, Qualifications, Appointment: There is hereby created the office of Chief Electrical Inspector. The person chosen to fill said
office shall be a competent electrician of good moral character who shall have had at least two (2) years' experience as a journeyman in the
practice of his trade or two (2) years' training in a recognized college of electrical engineering, and, in addition thereto, one year of practical
experience in electrical construction. He shall be well-versed in approved methods of electrical construction for safety to life and property,
the statutes of the State relating to electrical work, the rules and regulations issued by the Fire Marshal of Illinois under the authority of the
statutes, the electrical code, and other installation and safety rules and standards approved by the American Engineering Standards
Association; provided however, that should it not be possible to obtain any person with the aforementioned qualifications, the President and
Board of Trustees shall appoint the Building Commissioner or such other person, at their discretion, who shall be qualified to fill the office of
Chief Electrical Inspector.
2. Term Of Office, Bond, Oath: The Chief Electrical Inspector shall be appointed for one year by the President and Board of Trustees and
before entering upon the discharge of his duties, shall file a bond, with security to be approved by the Board in the sum of one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00), payable to the Village. Said bond shall be approved by the Board of Trustees and shall be conditioned upon the faithful
performance of his duties. The Chief Electrical Inspector shall also take and subscribe an oath faithfully to discharge the duties of his office,
which oath, together with the certificate of his appointment, shall be filed with the Village Clerk.
3. Powers: The Chief Electrical Inspector shall have the right during reasonable hours to enter any building in the discharge of his official
duties, or for the purpose of making any inspection or test of the installation or alteration of electrical equipment contained therein, and shall
have the authority to cause the turning off of any current where such electrical currents are dangerous to life or property or may interfere
with the work of the Fire Department.
4. Enforcement And Interpretation: The Chief Electrical Inspector, supervising enforcement of this Chapter has the responsibility for making
interpretations of the rules for deciding upon approval of equipment and materials, and for granting special permission contemplated in a
number of the rules.
5. Inspections, Certificate Of Approval: The Building Commissioner shall inspect or shall cause to be inspected all electrical equipment
installed or altered, except such electrical equipment as may be lawfully exempt and shall require that it conform to the electrical regulations
of the Chicago Electrical Code's latest edition and the Village amendments. These inspections shall be made at reasonable hours to
accommodate the hours of the Electrical Inspector's part-time availability. It shall also be unlawful to cover up any electrical installation
without having had it first inspected and approved.
a. Extra Inspections: Where extra inspections have to be made due to inaccurate or incorrect information, failure to make necessary repairs,
or faulty construction or mechanical execution of work, a fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) shall be made before the inspection. (Ord. 96-6, 8-5-
1996)
9-3-3: ELECTRICAL PERMIT1:
A. Permit Required: Upon the regular adoption of the standards and specifications, rules, and regulations, and fees referred to in subsection 9-3-
1D2 of this Chapter, the same shall at once become effective, and thereafter no electrical equipment shall be installed or altered except upon
a permit first issued by the Electrical Inspection Department.
B. Permit Fees: The permit fees for the issuance of electrical installation permits shall be governed by the 1990 Chicago Electrical Code, or latest
edition thereof, as amended herein. (Ord. 96-6, 8-5-1996)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 245/387
Chapter 4
PLUMBING REGULATIONS
9-4-1: PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED:
A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the village clerk of the village of Broadview, being marked and designated
as title 77 "public health", chapter 1 "department of public health", subchapter r "water and sewage", part 890 "Illinois plumbing code" be and is
hereby adopted as the municipal code for plumbing for the village of Broadview, in the state of Illinois for regulating and governing the installation,
condition and maintenance of plumbing for all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and
other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; providing for the issuance
of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Illinois plumbing
code on file in the office of the village of Broadview are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with
the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed herein. (Ord. 10-04, 3-15-2010)
9-4-2: PLUMBING INSPECTOR:
A. Office Created, Appointment, Qualifications: There is hereby created the office of plumbing inspector, an executive office of the village. The
plumbing inspector shall be appointed by the president and board of trustees and shall be licensed under the Illinois plumbing license law1.
B. Duties: It shall be the duty of the plumbing inspector, and he is hereby empowered, to enforce all provisions of this code and other village
ordinances relating to the installation, care and standards of plumbing. He shall make all necessary inspections and tests which may be
necessary in the performance of his duties.
C. Stop Work Order: Whenever the plumbing inspector shall find plumbing work being done in violation of this code or any village ordinance, he
shall have the power to order the work stopped until the provisions of this code or ordinances are complied with. It shall be unlawful to
continue any such work after such a stop order has been issued, except upon the written permission of the village president or of the plumbing
inspector; provided, that when such stop order is made orally, it shall be followed by a written order within one hour. (1987 Code)
9-4-3: PLUMBING PERMIT:
A. Permit Required: No person shall install, repair, connect or alter any plumbing within the village without a permit therefor from the plumbing
inspector; provided, however, that this shall not apply to minor home repairs by the owner or occupant.
B. Issuance Of Permit, Fees: The building commissioner or plumbing inspector shall issue a permit upon application in all cases where the
proposed installation or alteration as described in such application is found to be in conformity with this chapter, upon payment by the
applicant of the fees set out in subsection 9-2-3D1 of this title.
A plumbing fixture shall be any bathtub, laundry tub, sink, toilet, lavatory, shower, urinal, fountain, floor drain, sump pump, ejector pump or
water heating, cooling, or storage device.
C. Bond Required: Any application for a permit to do or install any plumbing work in connection with the village waterworks system or sewer work
or connection with the sewer works system must be accompanied by a bond as described in subsection 8-5-5B of this code. (1987 Code)
9-4-4: PLUMBING FACILITIES AND REQUIREMENTS:
A. Safety Devices For Hot Water Heaters2: Every water heater, hot water tank or vessel in which water is heated or stored under pressure or to
which a water-heating device or appliance is attached, installed, replaced or repaired in the Village, shall have installed in connection
therewith, an approved, fully automatic, combination pressure and temperature relief device. The temperature relief of such device shall be set
to operate at two hundred degrees Fahrenheit (200F) and the pressure relief shall be set to operate at seventy five (75) pounds per square
inch maximum pressure. Such relief device shall be placed either directly in the tank in a tapping provided for this purpose not over six inches
(6") down from the top of the tank, or in the hot water supply line leading from and within three inches (3") of the tank. Connections between
the relief device and the tank it is to protect shall not be less than three-quarter inch (3/4") iron pipe size. No shut-off valves shall be installed
between any relief device and the tank it is to protect, nor shall any shut-off valve be used between the heater and the tank. All such
combination temperature and pressure relief devices shall be listed by the American Gas Association and shall be of the self-closing or
sealing type and provided with lifting lever for manual operation to minimize sticking of the working parts.
B. Basements:
1. Sewer Ejector Pump Required: Basement plumbing facilities in any apartments or living units shall be connected to an automatic sewer
ejector pump which shall pump into a loop which extends for a minimum height of six feet six inches (6'6") above the basement floor. The
ejector must be readily accessible for maintenance and repair and installed in the sewer line between such plumbing facilities in the house
and the lateral sewer. The Village Board of Trustees may waive the provisions of this subsection when, after a hearing before the Building
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 246/387
Committee of the Village Board of Trustees, conditions of sewer depth, size gradient, topography and other circumstances indicate that
overloading of existing sewer facilities will not occur.
2. Overhead Plumbing Required: After December 31, 1970, all new buildings with basements, floors, rooms or occupancy areas below ground
level at the building site and served by a public or private sewer system, shall have overhead plumbing.
C. Piping Materials: All piping from the house service line to backflow devices shall be of lead, type K copper or galvanized pipe when exposed
inside the building.
D. Minimum Water Pressure: A minimum pressure to operate one closet and lavatory shall be maintained for each living unit.
E. Water-Saving3: All plumbing fixtures installed within the Broadview Water Service Area, whether inside or outside of the Village corporate
limits, must be water-saving fixtures in conformance with the requirements of Village plumbing code.
All ratings of water-saving plumbing fixtures are based on a pressure at the fixture of forty to fifty (40_50) psi.
1. Water Closets: Each water closet tank shall have a flushing capacity of three and one-half (3.5) gallons per flush.
2. Flushometer Valves: Flushometer valves or direct flush valves shall be so installed that they will be readily accessible for repairing. When
the valve is operated, it shall complete the cycle of operation automatically, opening fully and closing positively under the service pressure.
At each operation, the valve shall deliver three (3.0) gallons of water to the fixture and the fixture will be designed that this amount of water
will thoroughly flush the fixture and refill the fixture trap. Not more than one fixture shall be served by a flushometer valve or direct flush
valve and protection against backflow shall be provided.
3. Urinals: Every urinal shall be flushed by means of an approved flushing tank, flushometer valve or direct flush valve each using only three
(3.0) gallons per flush.
4. Faucets: All lavatories shall be supplied with faucets that will use only three (3.0) gallons of water per minute. Lavatories located in
restrooms for public use shall have faucets that are a metering or self-closing types.
5. Shower Heads: All shower heads will use only three (3.0) gallons of water per minute.
F. Car Washes4: All car wash installations, new or replacement, shall be equipped with a water-recycling system. (1987 Code)
9-4-5: WATER-COOLED AIR CONDITIONING AND REFRIGERATION:
9-4-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless otherwise expressly stated, whenever used in this Section, the following words shall have the meanings given to them by this Section:
AIR CONDITIONING: The cooling by water or dehumidification or both, of space for human occupancy, food preservation and industrial
processing.
AIR-CONDITIONING SYSTEM OR AIR-CONDITIONING INSTALLATION: One or more water-cooled air-conditioning units, the water for which
passes through a common meter, whether or not the units are owned by the property owner, the tenant or a combination of both. It is intended
that separate submetering for any one property owner or tenant occupying different space in the same building could create separate systems. It
is not intended that submetering of individual units serving the same space or adjacent space under one owner or tenant would create separate
systems.
INSTALLED CAPACITY: The total number of tons of refrigeration installed on one water-cooled air-conditioning system.
TON OF REFRIGERATION: The heat required to melt ice at the rate of one ton in twenty four (24) hours. One compressor horsepower shall be
considered equivalent to one ton of refrigeration.
WATER CONSERVING DEVICES: A cooling tower, spray pond, evaporation condenser or other equipment by which water is cooled and
recirculated, thereby limiting the use of water from the mains to that amount lost through evaporation.
WATER REGULATING DEVICE: A regulating valve or other device, the purpose of which is to limit the maximum use of water to a predetermined
rate. (1987 Code)
9-4-5-2: INSTALLATION REGULATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to have installed or to operate water-cooled air-conditioning equipment without first conforming to the following
regulations:
A. Permit Required: All water customers who desire to install water-cooled air conditioning and refrigeration are required to make written
application therefor and to obtain approval and a permit therefor in advance from the Building Commissioner and are required to give notice of
completion of the installation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 247/387
All customers who have installed water-cooled air-conditioning equipment prior to the effective date hereof shall, in lieu of a permit, notify the
Building Commissioner of such existing installation. Failure to give notice shall be considered a violation of this Section.
B. Permit Fee: The fee for the permit provided for herein shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00).
C. Water Conservation Devices Required: All water-cooled air-conditioning units shall be equipped with water conservation devices so that water
from the Village mains shall be used for make-up and flushing purposes only. Any water-cooled air-conditioning system is prohibited from
using water from the mains in excess of two-tenths (0.2) gallons per minute per ton. Each such air-conditioning system shall be submetered
using a water meter acceptable to the Village.
D. System Installed Prior To These Regulations Must Be Connected: All water-cooled air-conditioning units installed prior to the effective date
hereof, and contrary thereto, must be converted, modified or adjusted to comply with the provisions of this Section within six (6) months of the
effective date hereof.
E. Location: Whenever it shall be necessary, for the proper operation of a water-cooled air-conditioning system having a rated heat removal
capacity in excess of twenty thousand (20,000) British thermal units per hour, to install any portion of such air-conditioning equipment therefor,
including, but not limited to, condensers or compressors, outside the building whose atmosphere said system is intended to cool, such
equipment shall be located in "A" Single-Family Residence Districts and "B" Multiple-Family Residence Districts to the rear of such building
and shall not exceed an area of eighteen (18) square feet, nor be more than five feet (5') high. Nothing herein shall be construed to regulate
the installation of water-cooled air-conditioning systems in any use district not specified hereinabove. (1987 Code)
9-4-5-3: INSPECTIONS:
The Director of Public Works and Water and persons designated by him shall at all reasonable hours have free access to premises supplied with
water for air-conditioning purposes to examine the equipment and to ascertain if there is more water being used than allowed by this Section.
(1987 Code)
9-4-5-4: APPEALS:
Whenever the Building Commissioner shall reject or refuse to approve any plan or specification for, or the mode or manner of construction
proposed to be used in, the installation of any water-cooled air-conditioning equipment, or when it is claimed that the provisions of this Section do
not apply, or when it is claimed that the true intent and meaning of this Section have been misconstrued or improperly interpreted, the owner or
any person aggrieved may appeal to the Board of Trustees. No public advertising shall be required as a condition precedent to such appeal and
the decision of the Board of Trustees shall be final. (1987 Code)
9-4-5-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this Section 9-4-5 shall be fined not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each
offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (1987 Code)
Chapter 5
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
9-5-1: ADOPTION:
A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the village clerk of the village of Broadview, being marked and designated
as the international property maintenance code, 2009 edition, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the
international property maintenance code of the village of Broadview, in the state of Illinois for regulating and governing the conditions and
maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and
conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures
unfit for human occupancy and use and the demolition of such structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection
of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said international property maintenance code
on file in the office of the village of Broadview are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with the
additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed herein.
Section 101.1 "Title", of the international property maintenance code is hereby repealed and replaced with the following:
101.1 Title
These regulations shall be known as the international property maintenance code of the village of Broadview herein referred to as "this
code."
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 248/387
Section 103.5 "Fees", of the international property maintenance code is hereby repealed.
Section 112.4 "Failure To Comply", of the international property maintenance code is hereby repealed and replaced with the following:
112.4 Failure To Comply
Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to
perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00).
Section 302.4 "Weeds" of the international property maintenance code is hereby repealed and replaced with the following:
302.4 Weeds
All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess of eight (8) inches. All noxious weeds shall
be prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs provided; however this term
shall not include cultivated flowers and gardens.
Upon failure of the owner or agent having charge of a property to cut and destroy weeds after service of a notice of violation, they shall be
subject to prosecution in accordance with section 106.3 and as prescribed by the authority having jurisdiction. Upon failure to comply with
the notice of violation any duly authorized employee of the jurisdiction or contractor hired by the jurisdiction shall be authorized to enter
upon the property in violation and cut and destroy the weeds growing thereon, and the costs of such removal shall be paid by the owner or
agent responsible for the property.
Section 304.14 "Insect Screens", of the international property maintenance code is hereby repealed and replaced with the following:
304.14 Insect Screens
During the period of January 1 to December 31, every door, window and other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms,
food preparation areas, food service areas or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are
processed, manufactured, packaged or stored shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch (16
mesh per 25 mm), and every screen door used for insect control shall have a self closing device in good working condition.
Section 602.3 "Heat Supply", of the international property maintenance code is hereby repealed and replaced with the following:
602.3 Heat Supply
Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases, or lets one or more dwelling units or sleeping units on terms, either expressly
or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat during the period from October 1 to May 1 to maintain a temperature of
not less than 68 degrees F (20 degrees C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms.
Exceptions:
1. When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor design temperature for the locality, maintenance of the minimum room
temperature shall not be required provided that the hearing system is operating at its full design capacity. The winter outdoor design
temperature for the locality shall be as indicated in appendix D of the international plumbing code.
2. In areas where the average monthly temperature is above 30 degrees F (-1 degree C) a minimum temperature of 65 degrees F (18
degrees C) shall be maintained.
Section 602.4 "Occupiable Work Spaces", of the international property maintenance code is hereby repealed and replaced with the following:
602.4 Occupiable Work Spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat during the period from October 1 to May 1 to
maintain a temperature of not less than 65 degrees F (18 degrees C).
Exceptions:
1. Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or special temperature conditions.
2. Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical activities.
(Ord. 09-33, 8-3-2009)
9-5-2: LOCAL MODIFICATIONS:
The following additions to, deletions and modifications of the basic/national existing structures code, first edition, 1984 (or latest edition), as
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 249/387
specified, shall become a part of this chapter:
Section E.S.-100.1: Insert village of Broadview, Illinois in the second line of this section, to replace (name of jurisdiction).
Section E.S.-104.1: Add a sentence to the end of this section to read:
For the purposes of administration and enforcement of this code, the village of Broadview building commissioner or his nominee shall act as
code official.
Section E.S.-110.2: Delete the contents of this section and substitute in lieu thereof the following:
Any person, firm or corporation, who shall violate any provision of this code shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less
than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), and any failure to pay any such fine shall be subject to
imprisonment for a term not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days for any offense. Each day the violation continues after due notice has
been served, in accordance with the terms and provisions hereof, shall be deemed a separate offense.
In addition to the fines and penalties enumerated above, the court, in its discretion, may impose court supervision upon the defendant for a
period not to exceed six (6) months upon such terms and conditions as the court shall deem proper.
Section E.S.-111.2: Insert president of the village of Broadview with the consent of the board of trustees in the last line of this section to replace
(chief executive of the jurisdiction).
Section E.S.-112.1: Delete the contents of this section.
Section E.S.-112.4: Insert thirty in the second line of this section, to replace (number).
Section E.S.-201.0: Delete applied meanings of the following words and terms: all under dwellings, family, hotel, motel, rooming house, and yard.
Section E.S.-301.0: Add the following under this section:
E.S.-301.12: Access to garbage storage area: It shall be the responsibility of owners of property to remove snow and ice in such a manner
as to allow ready access to garbage storage areas for tenants and scavenger services.
E.S.-301.13: General Maintenance Of Exterior Premises: The owner and operator shall keep the exterior of all premises and every structure
thereon including but not limited to walls, roofs, cornices, chimneys, drains, towers, porches, landings, fire escapes, stairs, store fronts,
signs, windows, doors, awnings and marquees in good repair, and all surfaces thereof shall be kept painted or protected with other
approved coating or material where necessary for the purpose of preservation and avoiding a blighting influence on adjoining properties. All
obsolete signs shall be removed. All surfaces shall be maintained free of broken glass, loose shingles, crumbling mortar or brick, peeling
paint or other conditions reflective of deterioration or inadequate maintenance, to the end that the property itself may be preserved safely,
fire hazards eliminated, and adjoining properties and the neighborhood protected from blighting influences.
(1987 Code)
E.S.-301.14: Lawns And Hedges: All premises shall be appropriately maintained and lawns, hedges, bushes, trees, and other vegetation
shall be kept trimmed and from becoming overgrown and unsightly where exposed to public view or where such vegetation may constitute a
blighting influence on adjoining property. Violations of this section are subject to the penalty provisions contained in title 1, chapter 13 of this
code, with each day of a continuing violation constituting a separate offense. However, this provision shall not preclude the maintenance of
undeveloped or underdeveloped land in its natural state.
(Ord. 2005-22, 8-8-2005)
E.S.-403.4: Dwelling Unit Limitations: Add new section E.S.-403.4: Cellars: No cellar space shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling
unit.
Section E.S.-504.4: Add 504.4.1:
All water heaters shall be equipped with the proper size relief valve for that heater as per section 834.62 of the Chicago plumbing code. The
stem of the relief valve is to be immersed in the top six inches (6") of the tank and the discharge pipe to be same size as the opening in the
relief valve and to within six inches (6") of the floor.1
Section E.S.-506.1: Add:
Water being drained from those areas including sump pumps and swimming pools is not to be drained on any adjoining property.
Section E.S.-602.0: Electrical Facilities: Add the following under this section:
E.S.-602.4: Minimum Service: Sixty (60) ampere service is the minimum size service permitted. Any service less than sixty (60) amperes is
substandard and inadequate and must be replaced. One hundred (100) ampere service is the minimum size new or replacement service
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 250/387
permitted.
E.S.-602.5: Fuses/Circuit Breakers: Maximum fuse/circuit breaker sizes consistent with safety shall be posted conspicuously on the inside
cover of all fuse/circuit breaker boxes, and no fuses/circuit breakers shall be installed in excess of the stated maximum.
E.S.-602.6: Shock Hazards: All existing or potential short circuits or breaks in any electric line shall be immediately corrected and all obvious
shock hazards shall be removed or corrected.
E.S.-602.7: Fixtures And Outlets: Every fixture and outlet shall function properly and be securely fastened in place.
E.S.-602.8: Temporary Wiring: No temporary wiring shall be used, with the exception of extension cords which run directly from portable
electric appliances or fixtures to convenience outlets, and which do not lie underneath floor covering materials or extend through doorways,
or similar apertures through structural elements.
(1987 Code)
Section PM-103.1, as modified, shall be deleted in its entirety, and inserted in lieu thereof shall be the following:
Section PM-103.1 - Enforcement. For the purposes of administration and enforcement of this code, the village building commissioner shall
act as code official, and the building commissioner and such inspectors as designated by the building commissioner, shall be code
enforcement officers.
Section PM-109.2 of the property maintenance code, as modified, shall be deleted in its entirety and, inserted in lieu thereof shall be the following:
Section PM-109.2 - Penalty: Any person, firm or corporation accused of violating any section of this code, shall first be issued a written
warning to correct the violation within seven (7) days of the date of the warning.
If upon reinspection, the violation is corrected, no further action will be taken. If, upon reinspection the violation still exists, the building
commissioner or building inspector shall issue a notice of property maintenance code violation requiring a court appearance by the violator
in thirty (30) days.
Any person, firm or corporation may settle or compromise the violation by paying the village of Broadview the sum of twenty dollars ($20.00)
and showing proof of correction of the purported violation within seven (7) days after the date of the notice, or by paying to the village of
Broadview the sum of thirty dollars ($30.00) and showing proof of correction of the purported violation after said seven (7) day period and
prior to the court date set forth in the notice of violation.
In the event the purported violation is not so corrected, settled or compromised, then any person, firm or corporation, upon being found
guilty of a violation of this code, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00). Each day that a violation continues,
after due notice as provided herein, shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. 87-14, 10-19-1987)
Chapter 6
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
9-6-1: DANGEROUS BUILDINGS DECLARED A NUISANCE:
Any building or part thereof, or any structure of like nature, in a condition dangerous to the occupants, or those passing, or to any adjacent
buildings by reason of bad condition of walls, overloaded floors, defective heating apparatus, vibrations from machinery, defective flues, confined
or cramped stairways, insufficient exits, narrow or dark passageways, or which is unsafe or dangerous for the purpose for which it is used or
intended to be used, or is in danger of being set on fire from any defect in its construction, or is especially dangerous in case of fire by reason of
its dilapidated condition or defective construction, or from other causes, or which may be prejudicial to the public health or the health of the
inhabitants of the neighborhood, shall be deemed and is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. (1987 Code)
9-6-2: REPORT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS, INSPECTIONS:
Whenever it shall come to the knowledge of the Building Commissioner or whenever complaint shall be made to him in writing by any two (2)
reputable citizens, that any building, wall or structure within the Village is in such dangerous condition as described in the preceding Section, the
Building Commissioner shall forthwith report the same to the Board of Trustees.
The Building Commissioner shall inspect or cause to be inspected all buildings reported unsafe and shall make or cause to be made and
preserved records of all such inspections. For the purpose of making such inspections, the Building Commissioner shall have the right to visit,
enter and inspect from time to time, at all reasonable hours, any building or structure in the Village which such officer has reason to believe is in a
dangerous or defective condition in regard to its construction or through damage by fire, accident, lack of repair or decay. (1987 Code)
9-6-3: ACTION BY VILLAGE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 251/387
A. Removal Or Repair Of Building: If it shall appear to the Board of Trustees, after due investigation of the report required by Section 9-6-2 of this
Chapter, that such building, wall or structure is in such dangerous condition, and the owner or his agent, or the lessee or occupant thereof, if
within his power or duty so to do, shall fail within a reasonable time, to be fixed by the Board of Trustees, and after notice thereof in writing
served on such owner or his agent or upon such lessee or occupant, by such officer of the Village as the Board of Trustees shall direct,
specifying wherein such building is unsafe, defective or unlawful, to make the same safe in such way as the Board of Trustees may direct, the
building, wall or structure shall, upon the order of the Board of Trustees, be torn down and removed by the Building Commissioner or made
safe as the Board of Trustees may order.
B. Buildings To Be Placarded: Every building which shall appear to the Building Commissioner to be especially dangerous in case of fire by
reason of bad conditions of walls, overloaded floors, defective construction, decay or other causes, shall be held to be an unsafe building, and
the Building Commissioner, in addition to preceding as provided in subsection A of this Section, shall also affix a notice of the dangerous
character of the building in a conspicuous place on the exterior wall thereof, and any person removing, defacing or disturbing such notice so
affixed shall be liable to the penalties provided for in Section 1-4-1 of this Code for any violation thereof.
C. Right Of Immediate Action: In case the Building Commissioner finds any building or part of a building in such condition as to endanger life, or
liable to cause serious accident, and that such danger may be averted by the immediate application of precautionary measures, the officer
shall have and exercise the power (without the preliminary direction of the Board of Trustees), to take such precautionary measures as in his
opinion may be necessary to render any building or part thereof safe; provided, the owner, lessee, occupant or agent of the building refuses or
neglects to take such precautionary measures after being notified so to do by the officer. The decision and order of the officer shall be
absolute and final.
D. Buildings To Be Vacated: The Building Commissioner may order that no person shall be permitted to enter, occupy or use a dangerous building
or any portion thereof until the same shall have been made safe, and may post such order in a conspicuous place on the exterior wall of such
building. No person shall enter, occupy or use (except for the purpose of repairing and making the same safe) any building or portion thereof
after the posting of such notice until such building or portion thereof shall have been made safe.
E. Suspension, Revocation Of Licenses: Pursuant to subsection D of this Section, if the building or portion thereof found dangerous shall be
devoted to any purpose requiring a license, the President may suspend the license pending the period of making repairs; and he may revoke
the license in case of failure on the part of the owner or party having an interest in such unsafe building or portion thereof, to make same safe
without delay and at their expense. (1987 Code)
9-6-4: BUILDINGS IN FIRE LIMITS:
A. Restriction: No building of frame construction shall be erected, nor shall any frame addition be made to any existing building within the fire
limits of the Village1. No frame building within the fire limits shall be remodeled or substantially altered, except in case such changes serve to
reduce the fire hazard.
B. Repairs: Buildings of frame construction within the fire limits which have been damaged by fire or other agencies to an extent greater than fifty
percent (50%) of their value shall not be repaired or replaced, except by buildings of other than frame construction. Frame buildings which
have been damaged by fire or other agencies to an extent not greater than fifty percent (50%) of their value may be repaired, provided there is
no increase in the size of such buildings over their original dimensions, and provided that combustible roof coverings shall not be used.
C. Roofs And Walls: All buildings within the fire limits shall have roof coverings of tile, slate, metal, approved asbestos shingles or other roofings
of like grade which would rank as Class A or B under test specifications of the National Board of Fire Underwriters and no building shall be
constructed within the fire limits unless its exterior walls are built of nonflammable material. (1987 Code)
9-6-5: COST OF REPAIRS OR DEMOLITION:
An itemized account of the expense of tearing down and removing the dangerous structure, or of putting the same into safe condition shall be
kept by the Building Commissioner and shall be presented to the owner of the structure or his agent, or to such lessee or occupant for payment,
and in case such owner, lessee or occupant, as the case may be, shall fail or refuse, upon demand, to pay the same, then the same may be
recovered from such owner, lessee or occupant in an action of debt in the name of the Village.
If the work has been done and expense incurred by the Village in connection with dangerous buildings, a bill of the cost shall be rendered by the
Village to the owner, lessee, occupant or agent of the property. The Village may refuse to issue a permit for the reconstruction, alteration or repair
of any building or portion thereof on the property involved until the expenditure incurred by the Village on account of the work and material
supplied has been repaid. (1987 Code)
Footnote 1: See Section 5-2-7 of this Code.
Chapter 7
MOVING BUILDINGS1
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 252/387
9-7-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No building shall be moved on or across any public street, walk, alley or other public place within the Village by any person, except upon a permit
duly issued by the Village. (1987 Code)
9-7-2: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
Any person desiring to move any building within the Village shall obtain a permit after application therefor, presented to the Building
Commissioner, upon a form to be used for such purpose.
Before the permit required by this Chapter shall be granted to any person, the application therefor shall designate or describe the building
proposed to be moved, where located, the place to which it is proposed to be moved, the route to be taken and the time probably required for
such moving. In addition to the signing of such application, the applicant shall furnish to the Building Commissioner the written consent of the
owners, or their duly authorized agents, of the majority of the frontage on both sides of the street where it is proposed to locate such building,
lying between the nearest intersecting streets. If, upon consideration of such application and such inspection as the Building Commissioner may
deem necessary, it shall appear to said Commissioner that the work proposed to be done is in accordance with the provisions of this Code and
other ordinances of the Village, the Building Commissioner, upon the payment to the Village of the fees and deposits provided for herein shall
grant the permit sought for such purpose. (1987 Code)
9-7-3: PERMIT FEE, DEPOSITS:
Before the issuance of a permit, the applicant shall pay to the Village a sum of money in payment for the occupancy of the street or streets
through which the building is proposed to be moved, said fee to be fifty cents ($0.50) per foot from Village boundaries or within Village limits, but
not to exceed one thousand two hundred fifty dollars ($1,250.00) with a minimum limit of five hundred dollars ($500.00). There shall also be
deposited, in addition to the fee herein provided for, the sum of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) to reimburse the Village and any public utility
company for the cost of removing and replacing all overhead wires, cables and appurtenances and for the making of the necessary repairs
thereto. The applicant shall also deposit with the Village the sum of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) to reimburse the Village for any damage that
might occur to any public structures in any street, alley or public place over which the building may be moved. (1987 Code)
9-7-4: INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS2:
Before any person to whom such permit may be issued shall enter upon the moving of any building so authorized to be moved by such permit, he
shall obtain from some reliable insurance company, policies of liability insurance indemnifying the Village for any damage or injury resulting to any
of the workmen or employees of such person engaged in the moving of such building, and also indemnifying the Village for any damages or injury
suffered by any other person resulting from the moving of such building. (1987 Code)
9-7-5: WARNING LIGHTS REQUIRED AT NIGHT:
On each and every night while such building remains on the public streets or alleys of the Village, from dusk to sunrise, the person to whom such
permit shall be issued shall place and cause to be maintained at the center and each end of such building, red lights, which lights shall be plainly
visible during the period above mentioned. (1987 Code)
9-7-6: PROHIBITED ACTS:
A. Obstructing Intersections And Railroad Crossings: No building which shall be authorized to be moved in accordance with the terms of this
Chapter shall be permitted to stand or remain in the intersection of any streets, or of any street and public alley, or upon any railroad or railway
crossing at any time during the course of its removal.
B. Injury To Pavement: It shall be unlawful for any person to whom such permit shall be issued, to drive stakes in any pavement, public alley or at
any railroad or railway crossing. (1987 Code)
9-7-7: COMPLIANCE WITH CODE PROVISIONS:
No permit to move any building within the Village shall be granted unless the construction and proposed use of such building on the proposed
new site shall conform to the requirements of this Chapter and of the zoning regulations3. (1987 Code)
Footnote 1: See Title 3, Chapter 12 of this Code.
Footnote 2: See Section 3-1-6 of this Code and Section 9-2-8 of this Title.
Footnote 3: See Title 10 of this Code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 253/387
Chapter 8
SIGNS AND BILLBOARDS
(Rep. by Ord. 2001-24, 10-15-2001)
Chapter 8A
ROOSEVELT ROAD CORRIDOR
9-8A-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is established to create the standards for a comprehensive and balanced system of sign regulations for the following purposes:
A. To encourage, as a means of communication in the village, the employment of signs which are:
1. Compatible with their surroundings.
2. Appropriate to the type of activity to which they pertain.
3. Expressive of the identity of individual proprietors.
4. Legible in the circumstances in which they are seen.
5. Respectful of the reasonable rights of other sign owners.
B. To preserve, protect and promote the public health, safety and welfare.
C. To improve pedestrian and traffic safety.
D. To maintain and enhance community appearance and the village's ability to attract sources of economic development by promoting the
reasonable, orderly and effective display of signs.
E. To minimize the possible adverse effect of signs on nearby public and private property.
F. To preserve the value of private property by assuring the compatibility of signs with surrounding land uses.
G. To ensure that signs are designed as integral architectural elements of the building and site to which they principally relate. (Ord. 2000-03, 3-
20-2000)
9-8A-2: SCOPE:
No sign on property adjacent to Roosevelt Road shall be constructed, erected, converted, altered, rebuilt, enlarged, remodeled, relocated or
expanded until a permit for such sign has been obtained in accordance with the standards and procedures set out in this chapter. However, no
permit shall be required for routine maintenance as defined herein. (Ord. 2000-03, 3-20-2000)
9-8A-3: DEFINITIONS:
The definitions noted below apply uniquely to this chapter and supersede any conflicting definitions found in the zoning ordinance. Many of these
definitions are graphically depicted in section 9-8A-20 of this chapter.
ANIMATED SIGN: Any sign that uses movement or change of lighting to depict action or create a special effect or scene.
AWNING: A structure made of cloth, metal or other material affixed to a building in such a manner that the structure may be permanently affixed
or affixed in such a manner that it may be raised or retracted to a position against the building.
AWNING SIGN: Any sign that is painted, printed or otherwise placed on the outer surface of an awning in such a manner that the awning forms
the background surface of the sign.
BANNER SIGN: Any temporary sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is attached to a pole or building and secured on at least two (2)
sides. National flags, state or municipal flags, shall not be considered banners.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 254/387
CANOPY AND MARQUEE SIGNS: A sign that is mounted or painted on, or attached to, a canopy or marquee.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN: A sign or portion thereof with characters, letters, or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged. A sign on which
the message changes more than eight (8) times per day shall be considered an animated sign and not a changeable copy sign for purposes of
this chapter. A sign on which the only copy that changes is an electronic or mechanical indication of time or temperature shall be considered a
"time and temperature" portion of a sign and not a changeable copy sign for purposes of this chapter.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN, ELECTRONIC: A type of sign or portion thereof that is capable of displaying words, symbols or alphanumeric
characters which are defined by a small number of matrix elements using different combinations of light emitting diodes (LEDs), fiber optics, light
bulbs or other illumination devices that can be electronically or automatically programmed and may be changed by remote or automatic means.
The following terms for such electronic changeable copy signs shall be defined as follows:
A. Dissolve: A mode of message transition on an electronic changeable copy sign accomplished by varying the light intensity or pattern,
where one message gradually appears to dissipate and lose legibility simultaneous to the gradual appearance and legibility of a subsequent
message.
B. Fade: A mode of message transition on an electronic changeable copy sign accomplished by varying the light intensity, where one
message gradually reduces intensity to the point of not being legible and a subsequent message gradually increases intensity to the point of
legibility.
C. Nits: A luminance unit equal to one candle per square meter measured perpendicular to the rays from the source.
D. Scroll: A mode of message transition on an electronic changeable copy sign where the message is changed by the apparent vertical
movement of the letters or graphic elements of the message.
E. Static: Graphics on an electronic changeable copy sign having no motion or movement of any type.
F. Travel: A mode of message transition on an electronic changeable copy sign where the message is changed by the apparent horizontal
movement of the letters or graphic elements of the message.
G. Transition: A visual effect used on an electronic changeable copy sign to change from one message to a subsequent message.
COMMERCIAL MESSAGE: Any sign wording, logo, or other representation that, directly or indirectly, names, advertises, or calls attention to a
business, product, service, or other commercial activity.
COMPREHENSIVE SIGN PLAN: A sign plan approved by the planning commission indicating the size and location of all signs to be located in a
unified business center.
CONSTRUCTION SIGN: A sign announcing the impending construction of a project, limited to displaying the name of the project, the developer,
the financial institution providing the finance, the designer(s), the general contractor, a phone number where more information may be obtained,
and a date announcing the planned completion of the project.
ERECT: To build, construct, attach, hang, rehang, place, affix, or relocate and includes the painting or lettering of a sign.
EXTERNAL ILLUMINATION: Illumination of a sign which is produced by an artificial source of light which is not contained within the sign itself.
FACADE: Any side, surface or wall below the roof of a building which is parallel or within forty five degrees (45) of parallel with a parcel's
frontage on a public thoroughfare, which faces toward and relates to that public thoroughfare. If a building has a complex shape, then all walls or
surfaces facing in the same direction, or nearly the same direction, are part of a single facade.
FLAG: Any fabric or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns, or symbols, used as a symbol of a government, political subdivision, or other
entity.
FLASHING SIGN: A directly or indirectly illuminated sign where the source of illumination is not maintained constant or stationary in the intensity
or color at all times when such sign is in use.
FOR SALE/FOR LEASE/FOR RENT SIGNS: A sign which directs attention to a housing, office, or retail development with space for sale, lease or
rent.
FREESTANDING SIGN: Any sign not attached to a building; primarily ground signs, pole signs, pylon signs, and portable signs.
GARAGE/YARD SALE SIGN: Any sign used in residential zoning districts to advertise the sale of used, unwanted household goods.
GASOLINE STATION: A premises where motor fuels are sold for direct use by motor vehicles.
GRADE: Established or finished elevation measured at the centerline of the adjacent street.
GROUND SIGN: Any detached sign which has its bottom portion erected upon or mounted on a base that is permanently set on the ground that
is at least as wide as the bottom side of the sign. Ground signs are also commonly known as monument signs.
HISTORIC SIGN: A sign at least thirty (30) years old and which, by reason of unique design, size configuration, or its product's/company's long
association with the village, is of extraordinary local significance, makes a contribution to the cultural, historic, or aesthetic quality of the village's
streetscape.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 255/387
IDENTIFICATION SIGN: A sign where the text gives the name and address of a building, business, development, or establishment. Such a sign
may also be wholly or partly devoted to a readily recognized symbol.
ILLUMINATED SIGN: Any sign which is lit by an artificial (usually electric) light source.
INFLATABLE SIGN: Any sign or inflatable device of more than two (2) cubic feet in capacity designed to be filled with air or a gas lighter than air,
displayed to attract the attention of the public. This definition shall include balloons and balloon signs.
INSTRUCTIONAL SIGN: A sign, generally informational, that has a purpose secondary to the use of the lot on which it is located, such as "no
parking", "entrance", "loading only", and other similar directives.
INTERNAL ILLUMINATION: The illumination of a sign which is produced by an artificial source of light concealed or contained within the sign
itself, and which becomes visible in darkness through the translucent portion of the sign face.
MARQUEE: Any hood or roof like structure of permanent construction supported entirely by the building, and projecting from the building's wall.
MOVIE OR LIVE ENTERTAINMENT THEATER: A fully enclosed building with fixed or movable seats arranged in an auditorium fashion, where
motion pictures or live entertainment acts are presented.
NONCONFORMING SIGN: Any sign that does not conform to the requirements of this chapter.
OFF SITE SIGN: Any general outdoor advertising sign, which is designed to advertise or direct attention to a business or activity conducted or a
product, commodity, service, real property, entertainment, or facilities offered or sold elsewhere than on the same lot or within the same building
upon which the sign is located or to which it is affixed, or which directs persons to a location different from where the sign is installed. The term
"billboard" shall be included in this definition.
OFFICER: The building inspector of the village of Broadview.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization, singular or plural, of any kind.
POLE SIGN: A sign mounted on one or more freestanding pole(s) or pylons.
POLITICAL SIGN: Any sign displayed in conjunction with an official election or referendum, used on behalf of candidates for elected public office
or to advocate a position on referenda.
PORTABLE SIGNS: Any sign attached to or mounted upon a frame intended to be moved from place to place.
PROJECTING SIGN: A sign wholly or partly dependent upon a building for support, and which projects more than twelve inches (12") in a
perpendicular fashion from such building.
RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE SIGN: A sign used to advertise the sale, lease or rent of an individual home, apartment or property located in a
residential zoning district.
RESIDENTIAL SIGN: Any sign located in a district zoned for residential uses that contains no commercial message except advertising for goods
or services legally offered on the premises where the sign is located.
ROOF SIGN: A sign mounted on the roof of a building.
SIGN: A name, identification, description, display, message, or illustration which is affixed to, or represented directly or indirectly upon a building,
structure, or piece of land, and which directs attention to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization, or business.
SIGN CONTRACTOR: A person or entity who performs work for compensation in connection with the erection, construction, enlargement,
alteration, repair, moving, improvement, maintenance, conversion or manufacture of any sign.
SIGN STRUCTURE: The sign and all parts associated with its mounting.
SIGN SUPPORTS: All structural features by which a sign is held up, including, for example, poles, braces, guys, and anchors.
SIGN SURFACE AREA: The total exposed surface within a continuous perimeter composed of a single rectangle enclosing the extreme limits of
characters, lettering, illustrations, ornamentations, or other figures, together with any material, or color used as an integral part of the display or to
differentiate the sign from the background on which it is placed.
SUSPENDED SIGN: A sign that is suspended from the underside of a horizontal plane surface and is supported by such surface.
TEMPORARY SIGN: Any sign designed, constructed, or erected to display a message for a limited duration of time. Such signs include, but are
not limited to, banner, beacon or searchlight, garage/yard sale, grand opening, political, portable, real estate, and special event signs, as well as
any other sign which by its definition and application in this chapter is designated as a temporary sign.
UNIFIED BUSINESS CENTER: Premises containing three (3) or more individual offices or businesses sharing a common building.
VILLAGE: The village of Broadview, Cook County, Illinois.
VILLAGE BOARD: The mayor and trustees of the village of Broadview.
WALL SIGN: Any sign attached parallel to and supported by a wall or building, and within six inches (6") of such wall, or painted on the wall
surface of any building.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 256/387
WINDOW AREA: Any transparent area on a facade through which the interior of a premises may be viewed from outside.
WINDOW SIGN: Any sign which is affixed or placed so that its message or image is read as a part of the total composition of a window area.
ZONING LOT OR LOTS: A single tract of land which is designated by its owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed or built upon as a
single unit, under single control or ownership. It may be a single parcel separately described in a deed or plat which is recorded in the office of the
county recorder of deeds, or it may include parts of or a combination of such parcels when adjacent to one another and used as one lot. (Ord.
2000-03, 3-20-2000; amd. Ord. 13-02, 1-22-2013)
9-8A-4: EXEMPTIONS:
The following signs shall be exempt from all but the maintenance and public safety requirements of this chapter:
A. Government Signs: Any public notice, warning, directional, and other instructional or regulatory signs required by a valid and applicable
federal, state, or local law, regulation, or ordinance.
B. Interior Signs: Any sign inside a building, not attached to a window or door, which cannot be read from vehicles passing on adjoining streets.
C. Nonsign Decorations: Temporary displays, including holiday lights, decorations, painted window areas, works of art, flags (not exceeding 50
square feet), memorial signs, religious or historic symbols, and other displays with no commercial message.
D. Traffic Control Signs: Traffic control signs on private property, such as stop, yield, and similar signs which meet Illinois department of
transportation standards, and which contain no commercial message.
E. Memorial Signs: Memorial signs or tablets listing names of buildings and date of erection, when cut into any masonry surface or inlaid so as to
be part of the building or when constructed of bronze or other incombustible material.
F. Directional And Warning Signs: Signs, not exceeding five (5) square feet in area, which provide instruction, direction or warning and are located
entirely on the property to which they pertain to identify restrooms, public telephones, walkways, parking lot entrances and exits, and features
of a similar nature or with respect to warnings, "no trespassing", "no dumping", and similar warning signs. Parking lot entrance and exit signs
shall not exceed five feet (5') in height.
G. Business Nameplates: Nonelectrical nameplates denoting the business name of an occupation legally conducted on the premises, provided
that the sign area does not exceed two (2) square feet in area, provided that no more than one sign per principal use may be erected.
H. Vending Machine Signs: Permanent, no flashing signs on vending machines, gasoline pumps, ice containers, automated teller machines, or
other similar machines. Such signs shall relate only to that which is dispensed by the machine. Such signs may be illuminated only on the
front. Logos, names or other promotional information shall be considered the permitted sign. (Ord. 2000-03, 3-20-2000)
9-8A-5: ADMINISTRATION:
A. Administrative Officer: The building inspector of the village is designated to administer this section.
B. Permit Requirements:
1. Permit Required: Unless otherwise exempted in this chapter, no sign shall be erected, structurally or graphically altered, or relocated
without having first obtained a valid permit for such sign, issued by the village. No permit shall be required for routine maintenance of a sign.
2. Permit Application: Application for permits to erect, construct, or alter a sign shall be submitted on a form and in the manner prescribed by
the building inspector. Each application shall be signed by the owner of the sign and the owner of the property upon which it is to be located.
Applications for permits shall be accompanied by such information as may be required to assure compliance with all applicable regulations.
Information shall be submitted in eight and one-half inch by eleven inch (81/2" x 11") format for easy duplication. Submission requirements
shall include:
a. Name, address and telephone number of the applicant;
b. A drawing or drawings indicating the location of the building, structure or lot to which or upon which the sign or advertising structure is to
be attached or erected;
c. A drawing or photograph showing the position of the sign or advertising structure in relation to structures;
d. Two (2) prints of the drawings and specifications, and color renderings for the proposed sign or advertising structure, including the
methods of construction, illumination, materials and attachment to the buildings or in the ground. Such drawings must include all text and
graphics proposed on the sign, drawn to scale with dimensions; legal nonconforming signs can satisfy this requirement by submitting a
photograph of the sign;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 257/387
e. If required by the building inspector, a copy of a statement by a registered professional engineer indicating that said sign meets structural
and wind pressure requirements, and will not pose a public health or safety threat;
f. Name of person, firm, corporation or association responsible for erecting the sign or advertising structure;
g. Written consent of the owner or agent of the zoning lot on which the sign or advertising structure is to be erected;
h. A completed application for any electrical permit required to be issued for said sign or advertising structure;
i. A master sign plan documenting all existing signs on the zoning lot, including their type and area, location, and the occupant of the site to
which each sign pertains;
j. Any additional information as the building inspector shall require to show full compliance with this and all other applicable chapters of this
code; and
k. A landscape plan, including proposed location, quantity, size, and species of required landscape improvements.
C. Application Review Procedures:
1. The following procedure must be followed for approval of a sign permit:
a. Village Board Approval: Applications for all new permanent signs, not previously located on the zoning lot, or changes to existing signs,
shall be submitted to the building inspector for review and recommendations. Such recommendations shall be referred to the village
board for final consideration.
b. Building Inspector Approval: Applications for all temporary signs requiring a permit shall be reviewed and approved or denied by the
building inspector.
c. Planning Commission: Appeals from decisions of the building inspector, and all variances to this chapter shall be considered by the
planning commission. All recommendations of the planning commission shall be referred to the village board for final consideration.
D. Inspection Procedures:
1. Preinstallation Inspection: The person responsible for the installation of a sign shall schedule with the building inspector a preinstallation
inspection prior to installing any sign requiring a permit. Such inspection shall include a footing inspection, if applicable, and confirmation of
the other details of mounting and placement.
2. Final Inspection: The person responsible for the installation of a sign shall notify the building inspector upon completion of the work to
schedule a final inspection.
3. Six Month Deadline: If the work authorized under a permit has not been completed within six (6) months after the date of issuance, the
permit shall be null and void.
E. Variations: It is the intent of this section to permit variations from the requirements of this chapter only so as to recognize unusual hardships
and make reasonable accommodations for them.
1. Petition For Variation: A petition for a variation from any provision(s) of this chapter may be made by any person having a proprietary
interest in the sign for which such variation is requested.
a. Petition Contents: A petition for a variation shall be filed in writing with the building inspector and shall be accompanied by such
documents and information as are necessary to clearly exhibit the practical difficulty for which the variation is necessary, including:
(1) The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the petitioner, the owner of the property on which the sign is to be erected or
affixed, the owner of the sign, and the person responsible for erecting or affixing the sign.
(2) A description of the requested variation, including reference to the section of this chapter from which relief is requested.
(3) Justification of the requested variation.
(4) The location of the premises on which the sign is to be erected or affixed.
(5) A site plan of the premises involved, showing accurate placement thereon of the proposed sign.
(6) A print of the drawings and specifications describing the sign to be erected or affixed and method of construction and attachment to
the building or in the ground. Such drawings and specifications shall include details of dimensions, materials, color, and weight.
(7) The written consent of the owner of the premises on which the sign is to be erected or affixed.
(8) A fee, as determined by ordinance adopted by the village board from time to time, to be paid at the time of filing of the petition for
variation.
2. Hearing: The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the petition for variation within thirty (30) days of receipt of a completed
written application.
a. Hearing Notice: Notice shall be given of the time, place and purpose of the public hearing.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 258/387
b. Required Attendance: The petitioner or its authorized representatives shall attend the meetings of the board at which the variation is to be
heard.
c. Decision: Within fifteen (15) working days of the close of the required public hearing on the variation, unless otherwise agreed to by the
petitioner, the planning commission shall prepare and submit written findings, and by a majority vote, issue a recommendation to grant,
deny, wholly or in part, or modify said variation. Such recommendation will then be referred to the village board for final consideration.
3. Standards: Variations shall only be approved to overcome an exceptional condition which poses practical difficulty or particular hardship in
such a way as to prevent the display of a sign as intended by this chapter or to preserve a historic sign with unique visual character. No
variation shall be granted unless the board finds that the petition meets each of the following standards:
a. Unique Hardship: The proposed variation will not merely serve as a convenience to the applicant, but will alleviate some demonstrable
and unusual hardship which would result if the strict letter of the regulations were carried out and which is not generally applicable to
other property within the village.
b. Reasonable Return: The property in question cannot yield a reasonable return if permitted to be used only under the conditions allowed
by the regulations in this chapter.
c. Hardship Not Self-Created: The alleged hardship has not been created by the petitioner nor any person presently having a proprietary
interest in the premises.
d. Consistent With Public Welfare: The proposed variation will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other
property or improvements in the neighborhood. The proposed variation will not by itself or with other signs contribute to the creation of
visual distraction which may lead to personal injury or a substantial reduction in the value of property.
e. Graphic Effectiveness Demonstrated: The petitioner has demonstrated that all reasonable efforts (utilizing color, contrast, lettering
legibility, illumination, and graphic composition) have been made to increase the reading effectiveness of the proposed sign within the
normal requirements of this chapter.
f. Consistent With Sign Ordinance Intent: The proposed variation is in harmony with the intent, purpose, and objectives of this chapter.
4. Conditions: Such conditions and restrictions may be imposed on the premises to be benefited by a variation as may be necessary to comply
with the standards set forth herein, to reduce or minimize any injurious effect of such variation on other property in the neighborhood, and to
implement the general intent, purpose, and objectives of this chapter.
5. Revocation: In any case where a variation has been granted, and where no work pertinent thereto has been initiated within six (6) months
from the date of approval of the requested variation, then without further action said variation shall become null and void. (Ord. 2000-03, 3-
20-2000)
9-8A-6: GENERAL STANDARDS:
A. Applicable Regulations: In addition to the provisions of this chapter, all signs must conform to the regulations and standards of all other
applicable chapters of this code.
B. Commercial Message Location: A sign which displays a commercial message is permitted only on the premises where the business,
profession, accommodation, commodity, service, entertainment, or other commercial activity represented on the sign is located.
C. Obstruction To Doors, Windows, Or Fire Escapes: No sign or advertising structure shall be erected, relocated or maintained so as to prevent or
inhibit free ingress to, or egress from any door, window or fire escape, or inhibit the use of fire protection systems. No sign or advertising
structure shall be attached to a standpipe or fire escape. No sign shall interfere with any opening required for ventilation.
D. Glass Limitation: Any glass forming a part of any sign shall be safety glass or its equivalent as approved by the building inspector, and of such
thickness as required to withstand wind loads.
E. Movable Sign Parts: No sign or its parts shall be permitted to be movable or rotating, nor shall any sign have illuminated effects which convey
the illusion of movement.
F. Items Secured: All manually movable items on a sign, such as covers to service openings, shall be secured by latches.
G. Location:
1. No freestanding sign shall be located within a triangular area established at the intersection of two (2) streets or a street and a driveway in
which nothing is erected, planted, placed, or allowed to grow so as to limit or obstruct the sight distance of motorists. Such a triangle shall
have legs of twenty five feet (25') along the rights of way when two (2) streets intersect, and ten feet (10') along the right of way and
driveway when a street and driveway intersect.
2. No sign shall be allowed to encroach upon the public right of way or public property, except as permitted under section 9-8A-14 of this
chapter.
3. No sign facing the side or rear lot line of an abutting residentially zoned lot shall be located within fifty feet (50') of that residential lot line.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 259/387
H. Illuminated Signs: All illuminated signs shall be subject to the following requirements:
1. Signs shall be shaded wherever necessary to avoid casting bright light upon property located in any residential district or upon any public
street or park. Any illuminated sign located on a lot adjacent to or across the street from any residential district, which sign is visible from
such residential district, shall not be illuminated between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
2. Internally illuminated signs shall permit light to shine fully through only the lettering and graphic elements of the sign. The background for
such lettering and graphics shall be opaque or translucent and shall transmit light at a level substantially less than that transmitted through
the lettering and graphics.
I. Traffic Safety: In order to ensure reasonable traffic safety, it shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any fluttering, undulating, swinging, rotating,
blinking, or flashing sign or attention gathering device. No sign or advertising structure shall be erected, installed or maintained in such a
manner as to obstruct free and clear vision, or as to distract the attention of the driver of any vehicle by reason of position, shape, color or
lighting thereof.
No sign or advertising structure shall be erected or maintained in such a manner as to be likely to interfere with, obstruct the view of, or
imitate, resemble, or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device. Accordingly, no sign or advertising structure shall make use
of the words "stop", "go", "slow", "look", "caution", "warning", "danger", or any similar word, phrase, symbol, or character, or employ any red,
yellow, orange, green or other colored lamp or light, in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic.
J. Sign Area Bonus: The replacement of nonconforming signs shall be encouraged through a bonus of ten percent (10%) applied to the allowable
area for individual signs if permits for the replacement of all legal nonconforming signs on a premises are requested and approved prior to
January 1, 2001.
K. Landscaping Requirements: The following requirements must be included on plans that are submitted as a part of a sign permit application:
1. For every one square foot of gross sign area, there shall be provided one square foot of landscape area adjacent to the sign.
2. The required landscape area shall complement the sign and consist of plantings such as deciduous or evergreen shrubs, flowering plants,
and ground cover. Sodded or seeded areas shall not qualify as part of the landscaped area.
3. All landscape areas shall be mulched to conserve moisture and minimize weed growth.
4. It shall be the duty of the property owner to maintain all such landscaped areas in a neat and proper manner. (Ord. 2000-03, 3-20-2000)
9-8A-7: COMPUTATIONS:
The following principles shall control the computation of sign area and sign height:
A. Computation Of Area Of Individual Signs: The area of a sign face shall be the total exposed surface within a continuous perimeter composed
of a single rectangle enclosing the extreme limits of characters, lettering, illustrations, ornamentations, or other figures, together with any
material, or color used as an integral part of the background of the display, or to differentiate the sign from the background on which it is
placed, but not including any supporting framework, bracing, or decorative fence or wall when such fence or wall otherwise meets zoning
ordinance regulations and is clearly incidental to the display itself.
B. Computation Of Area Of Multi-Faced Signs: The sign area for a sign with more than one face shall be computed by adding together the area of
all sign faces visible from any one point. When two (2) identical sign faces are placed back to back, so that both faces cannot be viewed from
any point at the same time, and when such sign faces are part of the same sign structure and are not more than forty two inches (42") apart,
the sign area shall be computed by the measurement of one of the faces.
C. Computation Of Height: The height of a sign shall be the measurement from the top of the highest element of the sign to: 1) the average level
of the finished ground surface, exclusive of any filling or mounding, around any sign located more than twenty five feet (25') from a street right
of way; 2) the established street elevation when the sign is located within twenty five feet (25') from one street right of way; or 3) the average
of all street elevations when the sign is located within twenty five feet (25') from more than one street right of way. (Ord. 2000-03, 3-20-2000)
9-8A-8: SIGNS ALLOWED IN RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS:
The following signs shall be permitted in residential zoning districts, and shall be subject to all applicable standards:
A. Exempt signs as specified in section 9-8A-4 of this chapter.
B. The following temporary signs as specified and regulated in section 9-8A-12 of this chapter:
1. Window signs.
2. Residential real estate signs.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 260/387
3. Political signs.
4. Garage/yard sale signs.
5. Construction signs.
C. One identification sign, not to exceed fifty (50) square feet in total surface area for the following uses: religious institution, private or public
school, and facilities constructed and maintained by any taxing district. Such a sign may be illuminated, shall not exceed ten feet (10') in
height, and shall be set back a minimum of ten feet (10') from any lot line. Two (2) such identification signs may be erected at entrances to the
facility if the permitted square footage is divided equally into two (2) symmetrical signs, provided that all other provisions of this chapter are
met. (Ord. 2000-03, 3-20-2000)
9-8A-9: SIGNS ALLOWED IN NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS:
The following signs shall be permitted in nonresidential zoning districts, and shall be subject to all applicable standards:
A. Freestanding Signs: Freestanding signs shall be permitted, subject to the following provisions:
1. Number: There shall be a limit of one freestanding sign per lot, shopping center, shopping center outlot, or unified business center; i.e.,
either one pole sign or one ground sign which shall be erected for the purpose of identifying the establishment.
2. Height: No pole sign shall exceed twenty feet (20') in height from grade, and no ground sign shall exceed ten feet (10') in height from grade.
3. Surface Area: No pole or ground sign shall exceed a maximum surface area of one hundred (100) square feet.
4. Setback: No pole sign shall be located closer than ten feet (10') to any property line. No ground sign shall be located closer than five feet
(5') to any property line. Such signs shall be placed no closer than eighteen feet (18') to any building or structure it identifies and shall not
obscure any architectural features of a building, such as entrances, display windows, or decorative cornices when viewed from any street.
5. Ground Clearance: All pole signs shall maintain a ground clearance of seven feet (7') from the grade to the bottom side of the sign.
6. Scale And Proportion: A pole or ground sign shall be compatible with the building or buildings it identifies, and the sign may not be of such a
size that it visually overpowers the building on the site.
7. Overhang: No pole sign may overhang any part of a structure, parking or loading space, driveway, or maneuvering aisle.
8. Illumination: Pole signs may only be internally illuminated. Ground signs may be internally or externally illuminated.
9. Tenant Identification Panels: Provision for identifying tenants within a shopping center or unified business center as part of the permitted
square footage of the sign identifying the shopping center or unified business center as a whole shall be permitted, provided that there shall
be a limit of two (2) panels or divisions of said sign for such purposes.
10. Menu Board Signs: In addition to the one permitted freestanding sign, one freestanding single-faced menu board sign shall be permitted
per lot or outlot for restaurants with drive-through facilities, provided that such sign does not exceed twenty four (24) square feet in surface
area or eight feet (8') in height. Such sign may only be internally illuminated. Menu board signs shall be permitted only in business zoning
districts.
B. Wall Signs: Wall signs shall be permitted, subject to the following provisions:
1. Location: A wall sign shall be erected upon the wall of the building facade having its principal frontage upon a public street. A wall sign may
be on the building facade other than the principal frontage if it faces a nonresidential district and the total square footage does not exceed
the total permitted on the principal frontage. In no case shall a wall sign be permitted that faces the side of any adjoining lot located in a
residential zoning district.
2. Number: A maximum of one wall sign per establishment shall be permitted, erected for the purpose of identifying the establishment, subject
to the following provisions:
a. No wall signs shall be permitted for individual tenants in a multi-story or multi-tenant office building, unless specifically authorized as part
of an approved PUD at the time of approval of said PUD.
b. A corporate logo shall be permitted, but shall count as the permitted wall sign if it is not incorporated into the wall sign.
3. Height: The maximum height of a wall sign shall be thirty feet (30') from grade, or two (2) stories, whichever is less, but in no case shall any
portion of such sign be extended above the roofline.
4. Surface Area: The surface area of a wall sign shall not exceed two (2) square feet per one linear foot of building front, or one hundred fifty
(150) square feet, whichever is less.
5. Projection: No wall sign shall project from the building wall more than twelve inches (12").
6. Shape: The outlined shape and silhouette of a wall sign shall be simple and compatible with the building facade it is mounted on. Shapes
that disrupt the architectural order and composition of a building facade are not acceptable.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 261/387
7. Scale And Proportion: Wall signs shall be harmonious in scale and proportion with the building facade they are mounted to and with the
architectural elements of the building, such as windows, cornices, sign friezes, and bays. A wall sign shall not visually overpower those
elements nor detract from the composition of the building facade.
8. Overhang: The edges of wall signs shall not overhang the top of bays or equivalent architectural features of building facades.
9. Illumination: Wall signs may be internally or wash lighting illuminated. Wash lighting shall be accomplished by individual fixtures recessed in
horizontal housing above the sign or by gooseneck lights shielded by metal shades. Wash lighting fixtures must be positioned at least three
feet (3') apart and provide even lighting.
10. Corner Units: Establishments occupying a corner unit in a building shall be entitled to have two (2) wall signs, one per wall, each adhering
to all of the other standards in this subsection, provided that:
a. The primary wall sign shall be deemed to be that which is located on the side of the unit that has the legal address or the principal
entrance for the general public.
b. The surface area of the secondary wall sign shall not exceed that of the primary wall sign.
c. The location of the secondary wall sign is not adjacent to any residential dwelling unit or vacant property located in a residential zoning
district.
d. Both sides of the corner unit face a public street. Signs facing a service drive, loading dock entrance, or the like shall be prohibited.
11. Mansard Roofs: Signs to be erected upon mansard roofs shall be treated as wall signs, and shall be single-faced. In no case shall the roof
or a portion of the roof itself be illuminated.
C. Canopy, Under-Canopy, And Marquee Signs: Canopy, under-canopy, and marquee signs shall be permitted subject to the following provisions:
1. Number: There shall be a limit of one canopy or one marquee sign per lot or per establishment, erected for the purpose of identifying the
establishment, except as otherwise provided for in this subsection, and provided that no wall signs are directed to the same street frontage.
2. Location: Canopy/marquee signs may be mounted on the face (vertical edges only) of the canopy/marquee proper.
3. Signable Area: The signable area for canopy/marquee signs shall not extend beyond the canopy/marquee face on which the sign is located.
No sign or portion of a sign shall exceed the borderline of any outer edge of said canopy/marquee. No sign shall be placed on or over the
roof of said canopy/marquee.
4. Surface Area: The surface area of a canopy/marquee sign shall not exceed ten (10) square feet, or thirty percent (30%) of the signable wall
area of a canopy/marquee attached to the building front, whichever is greater. A multiple bay canopy/marquee, such as drive-up lanes at a
financial institution, may have a sign for each bay, provided that the sum total of all such signs does not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the
surface area of the face of the canopy/marquee that faces a public street or private drive.
5. Projection: No canopy/marquee sign shall project more than eight inches (8") from the canopy/marquee proper.
6. Ground Clearance: A clearance of eight feet (8') shall be maintained from the lowest point on the canopy/marquee to the grade or walkway
under said canopy/marquee.
7. Shape: The outlined shape and silhouette of a canopy/marquee sign shall be simple and compatible with the building it is mounted on.
Shapes that disrupt the architectural order and composition of a building facade are not acceptable.
8. Scale And Proportion: Canopy/marquee signs shall be harmonious in scale and proportion with the building they are mounted to and with
the architectural elements of the building, such as windows, cornices, sign friezes, and bays. A canopy/marquee sign shall not visually
overpower those elements nor detract from the composition of the building facade.
9. Material: Canopy/marquee signs shall be constructed of a noncombustible type material.
10. Illumination: Canopy/marquee signs may only be internally illuminated.
11. Under Canopy Signs: In addition to the signs permitted in this subsection, one under canopy sign shall be permitted to be erected above a
general public entrance into the establishment in order to identify said establishment, provided that:
a. A minimum clearance of eight feet (8') from the walkway is maintained.
b. Such signs shall be placed perpendicular to the building, with the top edge of the sign fastened to the bottom edge of the canopy.
c. Such signs shall not exceed three (3) square feet in surface area.
d. Such signs may only be internally illuminated.
e. A limit of one sign per establishment shall be permitted.
D. Awning Signs: Awning signs shall be permitted subject to the following provisions:
1. Location: Individual letters, words, or symbols may be directly affixed or applied to any surface of an awning, generally by painting, printing,
or weaving. Signs shall not be constructed of or applied to other material which is then fastened to the awning.
2. Surface Area: Provided that no wall signs or canopy/marquee signs are directed to the same street frontage, the surface area of an awning
sign shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the exterior surface area of an awning. If wall, canopy, or marquee signs are directed to the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 262/387
same street frontage, the sign letters shall not exceed eight inches (8").
3. Ground Clearance: A clearance of eight feet (8') shall be maintained from the lowest point on the awning to the grade or walkway under
said awning.
4. Illumination: Awning signs shall not be illuminated. (Ord. 2000-03, 3-20-2000)
9-8A-10: PERMITTED EXTRA SIGNS:
A. Criteria: Certain business operations are hereby found to be unique with respect to their sign requirements and therefore justified to be
permitted to have extra signs, in addition to those specified in section 9-8A-9 of this chapter, as specified below. These include:
1. Gasoline Stations: Gasoline stations are unique because their primary functions are performed out of doors in a manner prescribed by state
statute.
2. Movie And Live Entertainment Theaters: These theaters are unique because of the rapid turnover of the name of their entertainment
product.
3. Unified Business Centers: Unified business centers are unique because of the concentrated development and their centralized ownership
characteristics.
B. Gasoline Stations: In addition to the signs permitted by other sections of this chapter, the following signs are permitted uniquely to gasoline
stations:
1. Two (2) signs per pump island which designate the function of the island as "self-service" or "full service". Such signs shall not have more
than two (2) faces and shall not exceed three (3) square feet per face.
2. One sign displaying the price of fuel sold, with a maximum surface area of six (6) square feet per fuel type. Such signs shall not have more
than two (2) faces.
3. One nonilluminated sign identifying the service performed in each service bay may be placed over the opening to each bay. Such signs
shall have one face and shall not exceed three (3) square feet each.
4. One nonilluminated nameplate identifying the owner or operator is permitted adjacent to the doorway of the station. Such nameplate shall
have one face and shall not exceed two (2) square feet in area.
5. Temporary signs advertising batteries, tires, oil or other products which are directly related to motor vehicles, if the signs are located directly
adjacent to a display of the product(s) described. Such signs may have two (2) faces; however, their total area shall not exceed fifteen (15)
square feet.
6. One sign over each pump stand not to exceed twenty four inches (24") in height with length governed by the length of the pump itself.
7. One wall sign on a detached car wash building, provided that it conforms to all other provisions for wall signs as stated in this section.
8. Any signs required by state or federal government.
C. Movie And Live Entertainment Theaters: In addition to the signs permitted by other sections of this chapter, the following sign is permitted
uniquely to theaters:
1. Each theater may have one sign of up to fifty (50) square feet which will accommodate changeable lettering copy.
2. A theater's changeable copy sign may have two (2) faces if it is freestanding, but both faces must be parallel and located no more than two
feet (2') apart.
3. A theater's changeable copy sign may be located on a marquee, provided it does not project above or beyond the structural limits of such
marquee.
4. Otherwise, a theater's changeable copy sign shall conform to the regulations for the sign type to which it most nearly resembles.
D. Unified Business Centers: In addition to the signs permitted by other sections of this chapter, the following additional signs are permitted
uniquely to unified business centers:
1. A unified business center may have one identification sign for the center in addition to the signs permitted for each separate business. The
permitted area of such identification sign shall be based upon a ratio of five (5) square feet per one acre of the site, up to a maximum of one
hundred fifty (150) square feet. Tenant identification panels are permitted as part of the permitted square footage of the center identification
sign. Every unified business center is permitted an identification sign of eight (8) square feet. Otherwise, unified business center
identification signs shall conform to the regulations of the sign type to which they most closely resemble.
2. Unified business centers may have common directory signs to guide pedestrians to individual businesses on the site. Such signs shall be
limited to one square foot per business listed on the sign. Centers must have a minimum of ten (10) businesses to qualify to have one
directory sign and may have one additional sign for each ten (10) businesses. (Ord. 2000-03, 3-20-2000)
9-8A-11: UNIFIED BUSINESS CENTER SIGN PLAN:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 263/387
No permit shall be issued for a sign to be located in a unified business center until a comprehensive sign plan has been approved for the center
and the sign complies with the provisions thereof.
A. Unified Business Center Sign Plan Approval: Approval of a unified business center sign plan shall be at the discretion of the village board, after
review and recommendation of the planning commission, and in accordance with the criteria noted herein.
B. Application Content: In addition to the requirements listed for permit applications in subsection 9-8A-5B of this chapter, the application for a
unified business center sign plan shall include a format for all signs to be used in the center, including their maximum size, color, location,
illumination details, lettering type, and mounting details.
C. Criteria: The criteria used by the village in its review of the proposed unified business center sign plan shall include:
1. Scale And Proportion: Every sign shall have good scale and proportion in its design and in its visual relationship to the other signs, buildings
and surroundings.
2. Integral Elements: The signs in the plan shall be designed as integral architectural elements of the building and site to which they principally
relate and shall not appear as incongruous "add ons" or intrusions.
3. Harmony: The colors, materials and lighting of every sign shall be harmonious with the building and site to which it principally relates.
4. Effective Composition: The number of graphic elements and letters shall be held to the minimum needed to convey each sign's message
and shall be composed in proportion to the area of the sign's face.
5. Compatibility: Each sign shall be compatible with signs within the proposed unified business center.
6. Unified Image: The effect of the signs proposed in the plan shall be the establishment of a unified image for the center. (Ord. 2000-03, 3-20-
2000)
9-8A-12: TEMPORARY SIGNS:
A. General Provisions: The following general provisions shall apply to all temporary signs:
1. Permit Required: An application is required for all temporary signs, except for construction signs, window signs, residential real estate signs,
and political signs. Upon application, the building inspector may issue permits for temporary signs or displays related to grand openings,
special promotions, going out of business, emergency information, and similar purposes.
2. Duration: Unless a specific duration for a particular temporary sign type is noted in subsection B of this section, temporary signs must be
removed within fifteen (15) days from the date of activation. Temporary sign permits may be renewed twice within a calendar year.
3. Location: All temporary signs shall be erected only on the property of the permittee, unless the permittee is a nonprofit organization, and
shall be set back a minimum of five feet (5') from any public right of way.
4. Illumination: No temporary sign shall be illuminated.
5. Construction: All temporary signs shall be anchored and supported in a manner which reasonably prevents the possibility of the signs
becoming hazards to the public health and safety as determined by the building inspector.
6. Number: Unless a specific number of signs is listed for a particular temporary sign type, only one temporary sign shall be permitted per
zoning lot or business.
B. Temporary Sign Types: Temporary signs shall be limited in use to the following types of signs:
1. Freestanding Signs: Freestanding signs shall be permitted subject to the following provisions:
a. Height: Freestanding signs shall not exceed eight feet (8') in height from grade.
b. Material: Freestanding signs shall be constructed of wood, metal, or other durable material and reasonably supported in or on the ground
by adequate bracing.
c. Surface Area: Freestanding signs shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet in surface area per face, and may be single faced or double
faced.
2. Banner Signs: Banner signs shall be permitted subject to the following provisions:
a. Height: Banner signs shall not exceed the height of the first floor of the building, or twelve feet (12') from grade, whichever is greater.
b. Location: Banner signs without a permanent frame shall be affixed only to building walls. Banner signs with a permanent frame may also
be affixed to poles.
c. Number: One banner sign shall be permitted per zoning lot or business. If banner signs are mounted with a permanent frame, additional
banner signs are permitted at a ratio of one sign per seventy five feet (75') of lot frontage.
d. Surface Area: Banner signs shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet in surface area.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 264/387
3. For Sale/For Lease/For Rent Signs: For sale/for lease/for rent signs shall be permitted subject to the following provisions:
a. Duration: A permit for a new development identification sign may be effective for no more than a period of three (3) years, or until ninety
percent (90%) of the units originally for sale or lease have been sold or leased for the first time, whichever comes first.
b. Height And Location: Such signs shall be located on the property advertised for sale, lease or rent and set back a minimum of ten feet
(10') from any property line, with a maximum height of fifteen feet (15').
c. Removal: The permit applicant shall be required to remove the for sale/for lease/for rent sign upon expiration of the permit as noted
above. To guarantee removal, an acceptable bond or letter of credit of one hundred fifteen percent (115%) of the cost of dismantling the
sign shall be provided to the Village at the time of permitting.
d. Size: The maximum surface area of such a sign shall be one hundred (100) square feet.
4. Residential Real Estate Signs: Residential real estate signs shall be permitted subject to the following provisions:
a. Location: The sign is located upon the property that is offered for sale, lease, or rent, or has been sold.
b. Message: The sign content shall be limited to the words "For Sale", "For Lease", "For Rent", "Open House", or "Sold" or substantially
similar terminology; the name, address, and phone number of the individual realtor or agent; and the name and logo of the realtor's
franchise or brokering office.
c. Number: Only one sign shall be permitted for each building, dwelling unit, or lot.
d. Removal: The sign shall be removed within seven (7) days after the real estate closing, or lease or rental transaction is completed, except
that "Open House" signs shall be erected and removed on the day of the event.
e. Size And Height: The sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet in surface area. The sign shall not exceed four feet (4') in height from
grade.
5. Window Signs: Window signs shall be permitted subject to the following provisions. No permit is required for window signs.
a. Location: Window signs shall be affixed only to the interior surface of the glass and shall not be located on any windows above the first
floor of the building.
b. Surface Area: Such signs shall not exceed thirty five percent (35%) of the window surface area for each building face. Signs shall not be
affixed in such a manner that a safety hazard to customers or staff of the establishment is created by the obstruction of vision. The Chief
of Police or his designee(s) shall be empowered to require the removal or relocation of any such sign deemed to be a safety hazard.
6. Beacons Or Searchlights: Beacons or searchlights may be permitted in connection with grand openings or special events, provided:
a. Direction Of Illumination: Lights must be oriented skyward not breaking an angle of forty five degrees (45) from the ground.
b. Duration: The sign(s) may be displayed for no more than fifteen (15) days. Upon expiration of said fifteen (15) days, the use of said sign
shall be discontinued and no inflatable sign advertising the same business or establishment shall be reinstalled or reerected for a period
of six (6) months.
c. Number: Only one unit shall be permitted per zoning lot. (Ord. 2000-03, 3-20-2000)
7. Political Signs: Political signs shall be allowed without permit, provided that: (Ord. 2016-37, 9-6-2016)
a. Duration: (Rep. by Ord. 2016-37, 9-6-2016)
b. Location: The sign shall be placed on private property and set back from any public right-of-way.
c. Number: There shall be no limit on the number of political signs permitted; provided, however, that the quantity of signs displayed does
not create a safety hazard to traffic by distracting motorists or interfering with safe pedestrian flow, in which case the Chief of Police
and/or the Building Commissioner shall be authorized to require that the number of signs be reasonably reduced.
d. Size And Height: In residential districts, the sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet in surface area. The sign shall not exceed four feet
(4') in height from grade. In nonresidential districts, the sign shall not exceed nine (9) square feet in surface area. The sign shall not
exceed six feet (6') in height from grade. (Ord. 2016-37, 9-6-2016)
8. Garage/Yard Sale Signs: See title 4, chapter 12 of this Code. (Ord. 2001-20, 9-10-2001)
9. Construction Signs: Construction signs shall be permitted, provided that:
a. Duration: Signs shall not be installed prior to issuance of a building permit and shall be removed within seven (7) days of issuance of an
occupancy permit.
b. Location: The sign shall be placed on private property on the premises of the construction and set back a minimum of ten feet (10') from
any public right-of-way.
c. Number: One sign shall be permitted per zoning lot.
d. Size And Height: In nonresidential and multi-family zoning districts, the sign shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet in surface area.
The sign shall not exceed ten feet (10') in height from grade. The same standard shall apply to religious institutions, private or public
schools, golf courses and facilities constructed and maintained by any taxing district located in a Single-Family Zoning District. For
residential uses in a Single-Family Zoning District, the sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet in surface area and shall not exceed four
feet (4') in height from grade. (Ord. 2000-03, 3-20-2000)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 265/387
9-8A-13: LEGAL NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
A. Signs Existing On Effective Date: For any sign existing in the Village on January 18, 2000, an application for a sign permit must be submitted
to the Building Commissioner before February 1, 2001. Applications for permits for existing signs submitted before February 1, 2001, shall be
exempt from the application fees adopted under authority of this chapter. (Ord. 2000-15, 11-20-2000)
B. Nonconforming Existing Signs, Permits And Terms: A sign that would be permitted under this chapter only with a sign permit, but which was in
existence on January 18, 2000, and which was constructed in accordance with Village regulations in effect on the date of its construction, but
which by reason of its size, height, location, design or construction is not in conformance with requirements of this chapter, shall be issued a
nonconforming sign permit if an application in accordance with subsection A of this section is timely filed.
Such permit shall allow the sign(s) subject to such permit, which is made nonconforming by this chapter, to remain in place and to be
maintained for a period ending no later than June 18, 2005, provided that no action is taken which increases the degree or extent of
nonconformity.
C. Loss Of Legal Nonconforming Status: A sign loses its legal nonconforming status if one or more of the following occurs:
1. Sign Altered: The sign is altered in any way, except for normal maintenance or repair;
2. Sign Relocated: The sign is relocated either on the premises or to another location;
3. Sign Unsafe: The sign fails to conform to the sections of this chapter regarding maintenance and operation, and public safety standards;
4. Sign Damaged: Damage occurs to a sign which requires repairs exceeding fifty percent (50%) of the replacement value of the sign;
5. Excessive Maintenance Costs: When any proposed change, repair, or maintenance would constitute an expense of more than twenty five
percent (25%) of the replacement value of the sign;
6. New Occupancy Permit: A change in use occurs which requires a new occupancy permit for the premises to which a legal nonconforming
sign relates.
On the date of occurrence of any of the above, the sign shall be immediately brought in compliance with this section with a new permit
secured, or shall be removed within thirty (30) days of that date.
D. Continuing Obligation: Nothing in this section shall relieve the owner or user of a legal nonconforming sign, or owner of the property on which
the legal nonconforming sign is located, from the provisions of this chapter regarding safety, maintenance, and repair of signs, provided
however, that any repainting, cleaning and other normal maintenance or repair of the sign or sign structure shall not modify the sign structure,
sign face or message in such a way which makes the sign more nonconforming.
E. Historic Signs: Other than safety requirements, the provisions of this sign code may be waived by the village board for historic signs upon
application for relief by the sign owner or by a village initiated action in accordance with the following procedure:
1. Upon filing of said application, the village board may declare a sign or group of signs to be "historic" by making findings according to the
guidelines below. Notwithstanding safety and maintenance regulations (section 9-8A-17 of this chapter), a sign so designated by the village
board shall be deemed to conform with this code.
2. Signs may be so designated upon the finding that they exhibit unique characteristics that enhance the streetscape or the historic identity of
the village or neighborhood. Such a sign contributes to the historical or cultural character of the streetscape and the community at large.
3. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the owner of a designated historic sign from removing such sign. (Ord. 2000-03, 3-20-2000)
9-8A-14: SIGNS IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY:
No signs shall be allowed in the public right of way, except for the following:
A. Permanent Signs: Permanent signs, including:
1. Public signs erected by or on behalf of a governmental body to post legal notices, identify public property, convey public information, and
direct or regulate pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
2. Informational signs of a public utility regarding its poles, lines, pipes, or facilities.
B. Emergency Signs: Emergency warning signs erected by a governmental agency, a public utility company, or a contractor doing authorized or
permitted work within the public right of way. (Ord. 2000-03, 3-20-2000)
9-8A-15: OFFICIAL, CORPORATE AND ANCILLARY FLAGS:
The display of official, corporate and ancillary flags shall be permitted subject to the following requirements. These regulations are designed to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 266/387
control the use of permanent flagpoles or staff upon which the flag is located and the relationship of the flag to the flagpole or staff. Flags and
flagpoles do not require a specific sign permit. Flags shall be permitted in all zoning districts subject to the following requirements:
A. Flags shall be displayed only on permanent flagpoles or staffs designed and constructed specifically and exclusively for flag display. No official,
corporate or ancillary flag shall be displayed on or attached in any manner to light poles, sign poles, trees, vehicles, or similar structures or
objects. The temporary display of flags where such requirements are impractical, such as a parade, holidays, or special events, shall be
deemed to be acceptable.
B. There shall be a maximum of one flagpole per one hundred feet (100') of frontage within nonresidential zoning districts.
C. Flagpoles shall be set back a minimum of ten feet (10') from the property line.
D. The display of more than two (2) flags per flagpole shall be prohibited.
E. The height of a flagpole shall be in proportion to the scale of the building to which the pole relates, and in no case shall it be higher than the
following height limitations:
Building Height Pole Height Measured From Grade
Single-family uses25 feet
All other uses:
0 to 25 feet30 feet
25.1 feet or higher35 feet
F. The vertical length of a permitted single flag on a flagpole or staff shall not exceed one-fourth (1/4) of the length of the pole or staff upon which
the flag is hung. Under no circumstances shall any flag exceed fifty (50) square feet in surface area. The official flag of the United States of
America is exempt from this size restriction.
G. Flags shall be displayed in such a manner that no portion of the flag shall project over any property line or contact any other structure when
fully extended.
H. Flags shall not be mounted on or over roofs or rooflines in any fashion. Wall mounted official and corporate flags shall be displayed from
flagpoles or staffs not to exceed ten feet (10') in length. No portion of such flagpoles or staffs shall extend above the roofline or over a property
line.
I. Official flags shall be maintained in an orderly fashion, and in clean and good condition. The official flag of the United States of America shall be
displayed in accordance with the flag code, title 36, USC, chapter 10, as amended by P.L. 344, 94th congress, approved July 7, 1976, or as
amended in the future. All other official flags should be displayed in accordance with the same standards of respect and protocol.
J. Corporate and ancillary flags shall be maintained in an orderly fashion, and in clean and good condition. Tattered or torn flags shall be removed
or replaced promptly. (Ord. 2000-03, 3-20-2000)
9-8A-16: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
All signs not expressly permitted under this chapter or exempt from regulation under section 9-8A-4 of this chapter, are prohibited in the village.
Such signs include, but are not limited to:
A. Signs containing statements, words or pictures of an obscene or pornographic nature.
B. Any sign or advertising device painted or displayed on any vehicle or trailer parked on the public right of way, public property, or private
property so as to be prominently visible from a public right of way and parked for the flagrant purpose of providing advertisement of products
or directing people to a business or activity.
C. Signs nailed, tacked or otherwise affixed to trees or other vegetation in such a way as to puncture bark.
D. Handbills, posters, notices, or similar attention gathering devices posted or affixed on traffic control boxes, signs, lamp poles, utility poles, or
traffic control support.
E. Projecting signs.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 267/387
F. Animated signs.
G. Any sign attached to a chimney, on a fence or fence type wall, retaining wall, bench, fence post, refuse enclosure, utility box, storage shed,
bus shelter, satellite dish, antenna, or other accessory structure.
H. Any exterior string of lights or exposed light bulbs, except those that are temporarily displayed in conjunction with traditionally accepted civic,
patriotic, or religious holidays for a duration not to exceed sixty (60) days.
I. Any additional or subsequent sign painted on, attached, or otherwise affixed to poles or permitted signs.
J. Portable signs.
K. Off site signs.
L. Inflatable signs. (Ord. 2000-03, 3-20-2000)
9-8A-17: MAINTENANCE AND OPERATION:
A. Maintenance And Repair: Every sign, including, but not limited to, those signs for which permits are required, shall be maintained in a safe,
presentable, and good structural condition at all times, including replacement of defective parts, painting, cleaning and other acts required to
maintain the sign, advertising structure, marquee, canopy or awning in its originally permitted and installed condition in accordance with the
following criteria and with the applicable chapters of this code:
1. Paint Or Treat: To prevent rust, peeling, flaking, fading or rotting, the owner of any sign or advertising structure shall, as required, paint all
parts and supports thereof unless the same are galvanized, stainless or otherwise treated.
2. Repairs: Broken panels, missing letters, defective illumination, torn fabric, flaking or peeling paint and other damage to a sign, advertising
structure, marquee, awning, canopy or support structure shall be repaired.
3. Clean And Sanitary: All signs or advertising structures and the area surrounding same shall be maintained by the owner thereof in a clean,
sanitary and inoffensive condition, and free and clear of all debris, rubbish and obnoxious substances, and any related grassed area or
landscaping shall be kept trimmed and in a healthy condition.
B. Obsolete Or Abandoned Signs: For any sign or advertising structure now or hereafter existing, which advertises a business, commodity,
service, entertainment, activity, or event which has been discontinued, or is located on property which has been vacant and unoccupied, the
building inspector shall give written notice requiring removal of the sign to permittee thereof, or if the permittee cannot be located, to the
owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of the building, structure or premises upon which it is found. If, after notification, the proper
person fails to remove the sign or structure within sixty (60) days after such notice the building inspector is hereby authorized to have such
sign or advertising structure removed.
C. Unsafe And Unlawful Signs: For any sign or advertising structure that is unsafe or insecure, or is a menace to the public, or has been
constructed or erected, or is being maintained in violation of the provisions of this chapter, the building inspector shall give written notice to the
permittee thereof, or if the permittee cannot be located, to the owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of the building, structure or
premises upon which it is found. If, after notification, the proper person fails to remove or alter the structure so as to comply with the standards
of this section within thirty (30) days after such notice, the building inspector is hereby authorized to have such sign or advertising structure
removed. The building inspector may summarily, and without notice, have removed any sign or advertising structure which is an immediate
safety hazard to persons or property.
D. Lien To Recover Costs: In the event of failure by any party to reimburse the village within sixty (60) days for costs incurred for repair or removal
ordered by the building inspector, the village board shall certify the charges for repair or removal to the village's legal counsel, who will then be
authorized to file a notice of lien in the office of the Cook County recorder of deeds to foreclose this lien, and to sue the owner of the real
estate, or sign permittee, or their agents, in a civil action to recover the money due for the foregoing services, plus all expenses and
reasonable attorney fees to be fixed by the court. Included in the expenses recoverable by the village are the costs of filing the notice of lien,
foreclosing said lien, and all litigation costs, together with all office and legal expense incurred in connection with the collection of the amount
due. (Ord. 2000-03, 3-20-2000)
9-8A-18: VIOLATIONS:
A. Any of the following shall be a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the enforcement remedies and penalties provided by this section,
by the zoning ordinance, and by state law:
1. To install, create, erect, or maintain any sign in a way that is inconsistent with any plan or permit governing such sign or the zoning lot on
which the sign is located;
2. To install, create, erect, or maintain any sign requiring a permit without first securing such a permit;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 268/387
3. To fail to remove any sign that is installed, created, erected, or maintained in violation of this chapter, or for which the sign permit has
lapsed.
B. Each sign installed, created, erected, or maintained in violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate violation when applying the
penalty portions of this chapter. (Ord. 2000-03, 3-20-2000)
9-8A-19: ENFORCEMENT AND REMEDIES:
A. Any violation or attempted violation of this chapter, or of any condition or requirement adopted pursuant hereto may be restrained, corrected, or
abated, as the case may be, by injunction or other appropriate proceedings pursuant to state law. A violation of this chapter shall be
considered a violation of the zoning ordinance1 of the village. The remedies of the village shall include the following:
1. Issuing a stop work order for any and all work on any signs in the same zoning lot;
2. Seeking an injunction or other order of restraint or abatement that requires the removal of the sign(s) or the correction of the nonconformity;
3. Imposing any penalties that can be imposed directly by the village under the zoning ordinance;
4. Seeking in court the imposition of any penalties that can be imposed by such court under the zoning ordinance; and
5. In the case of a sign that poses an immediate danger to the public health or safety, taking such measures as are available to the village
under the applicable provisions of the zoning ordinance and building code2 for such circumstances.
B. The village shall have such other remedies as provided for or allowed by state law for the violation of the zoning ordinance.
C. All such remedies provided herein shall be cumulative. To the extent that state law may limit the availability of a particular remedy set forth
herein for a certain violation or a part thereof, such remedy shall remain available for other violations or other parts of the same violation. (Ord.
2000-03, 3-20-2000)
9-8A-20: SIGN DIAGRAMS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 269/387
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 270/387
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 271/387
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 272/387
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 273/387
(Ord. 2000-03, 3-20-2000)
Chapter 9
SWIMMING POOLS
9-9-1: COMPLIANCE WITH CODE PROVISIONS:
Every existing private residential swimming pool and every such pool constructed, installed and maintained hereafter shall comply with all
applicable provisions of this Chapter and with all the provisions of the building code1 and other ordinances of the Village. (1987 Code)
9-9-2: ENFORCEMENT:
The Building Commissioner is hereby charged with the duty of enforcing this Chapter. For this purpose he is hereby authorized to enter upon any
premises in the Village to investigate the existence of a swimming pool and to determine whether or not any such pool complies with the
requirements of this Chapter. (1987 Code)
9-9-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this Section:
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL: A swimming pool which is used exclusively by the occupants of the property on which it is located, his family and
guests.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 274/387
SWIMMING POOL: A manmade rigid or semirigid receptacle for water, having a depth at any point greater than twenty four inches (24"), used or
intended to be used for swimming, wading or bathing, and constructed, installed or maintained in or above the ground outside any building. This
definition does not include collapsible plastic pools. (1987 Code)
9-9-4: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Permit Required: No person shall hereafter construct, cause to be constructed, operate or maintain a "swimming pool", as defined herein,
without first obtaining a permit therefor from the Building Commissioner.
B. Application For Permit: Any person desiring a permit as required herein shall file a written application with the Building Commissioner which
shall be accompanied by two (2) sets of plans and specifications sufficiently detailed to enable determination of whether the proposed pool
complies with the requirements of this Chapter. No such permit for an existing pool shall be granted by the Building Commissioner until full
compliance with this Chapter has been demonstrated. Plans shall accurately show dimensions and construction of the pool and
appurtenances and properly established distances to lot lines, buildings and any and all electrical lines, whether they be overhead or
underground.
C. Permit Fee: The fee for a permit for the erection or construction of a swimming pool shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). (1987 Code)
9-9-5: CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS:
A. Location:
1. Swimming Pool: After the effective date hereof, swimming pools shall be so constructed that there will be at least ten feet (10') between the
main building and the swimming pool, there shall be at least five feet (5') between a side or rear lot line, and there shall be at least five feet
(5') between any auxiliary building and the swimming pool. No swimming pool shall be built within any front or side yard.
2. Pool Equipment: Pumps, filters and pool water disinfecting equipment installations used in connection with a swimming pool shall be
located at a distance not less than eight feet (8') from any side property line.
B. Diving Board: Where a swimming pool has a diving board or diving apparatus for the purpose of diving into pool, there shall be a clear area of
not less than an eight foot (8') radius ahead of the furthermost projection of the diving board.
C. Structural Designs, Grade Height: Residential swimming pools shall be designed to withstand water pressure from within and to resist pressure
of the earth when the pool is empty, to a pressure of two thousand two hundred (2,200) pounds per square foot. Materials used shall be
subject to the approval of the Building Commissioner. Grade height of pools constructed hereafter shall not exceed the established grade.
1. Walk Areas: Unobstructed walk areas not less than thirty six inches (36") wide shall be provided to extend entirely around the pool. The
walk area shall be constructed of impervious material, and the surfaces shall be of such as to be smooth and easily cleaned and of nonslip
construction. The slope of the walks shall have a pitch of at least one-fourth inch (1/4") to the foot, designed so as to prevent back drainage
from entering the pools.
2. Steps Or Ladders: One or more means of egress in the form of steps or ladders shall be provided for all private residential swimming pools.
At least one such means of egress shall be located on a side of the pool at both the deep end and shallow end of the pool. Treads of steps
and ladders shall be constructed of nonslip material and at least three inches (3") wide for their full length. Steps and ladders shall have a
handrail on both sides.
3. Electrical Requirements: All electrical installations provided for, installed and used in conjunction with private residential swimming pools,
shall be in conformance with the electrical provisions of this Code2. Service drop conductors, or any other potentially dangerous open
overhead wiring, shall not cross over the swimming pool or surrounding area extending ten feet (10') horizontally from the pool edge, or
diving structure, observation stands, towers or platforms. Underground wiring shall not be permitted under the pool or under the area
extending five feet (5') horizontally from the inside wall of the pool except when installed in rigid metal conduit, intermediate metal conduit or
a nonmetallic raceway system. All exterior electrical receptacles, fixtures and equipment supplied by one hundred twenty (120) volts and
located within fifteen feet (15') of the inside walls of the pool shall be protected by a ground-fault circuit-interrupter.
All metal fences, enclosures or railings near or adjacent to private residential swimming pools, which might become electrically alive as a
result of contact with broken overhead conductors, or from any other cause, shall be effectively grounded. (1987 Code)
9-9-6: OPERATING REGULATIONS:
Every person in possession of land within the Village on which a swimming, wading or bathing pool is situated or will be built shall conform with
the following regulations:
A. Water Supply: No source of water, other than that secured from the Village water system, shall be used in private swimming pools. The
connection shall be, as required by the plumbing code3, by means of a permanent, rigid system of piping having a vacuum breaker at the start
of the delivery connection or sill cock.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 275/387
B. Recirculating And Filtering System: No swimming pool in excess of two thousand five hundred (2,500) gallons' capacity shall be installed or
operated without a recirculating and filtering system.
C. Outlets: In swimming pools thirty feet (30') in width or less, water circulation system outlets shall be located so as to provide at least one outlet
at the deepest point in the pool. If the pool width is more than thirty feet (30'), multiple outlets shall be provided and spaced not more than
thirty feet (30') apart, nor closer than four feet (4') to any wall. All pool drain outlets shall be equipped with gratings having an area of opening
not less than four (4) times the cross-sectional area of the outlet pipe. The gratings shall be of such design so they cannot be readily
removable by bathers and will not injure bathers' fingers. One outlet shall be provided for each eight hundred (800) square feet of surface
area.
D. Drainage And Connection To Sewers: Pools shall be equipped with facilities for completely emptying the pool and the discharge of the pool
water to the sewer shall be at the rate not exceeding two hundred fifty (250) gallons per minute. No direct connection shall be made to the
sewer. No water being drained shall run onto any adjoining property.
E. Drainage During Storm: Water drained from the pool shall not be discharged to the sewer system during periods of rain or storms. (1987 Code)
9-9-7: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Fences: There shall at all times be maintained on the lot or premises upon which a swimming pool is located, a fence or other structure
designed to prevent small children from wandering into the pool or pool area. Such fence shall be not less than six feet (6') in height with no
gaps or apertures, other than doors or gates, more than four inches (4") square. The aboveground portion of the pool wall may be considered
as part of the six feet (6') protection. The balance of the six feet (6') is to be mounted above the pool rim. Total height must be six feet (6').
Such fence shall be erected along the periphery of the pool walks. All gates or doors opening through such enclosure shall be equipped with a
self-closing and self-latching device designed to keep, and capable of keeping, such door or gate securely closed and locked at all times when
not in actual use; provided, however, that the door of any dwelling and forming any part of the enclosure hereinabove required need not be so
equipped.
B. Protective Covers: A suitable protective cover shall be provided and installed over all private swimming pool surfaces during the nonswimming
season or when residents are absent for a period of more than three (3) days. (1987 Code)
9-9-8: OPERATIONS AND MAINTENANCE:
A. All private residential swimming pools shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and all equipment shall be maintained in a
satisfactory operating condition during periods the pool is in use.
B. No private residential swimming pool shall be used, kept, maintained or operated in the Village if such use, keeping, maintaining or operating
shall be the occasion of any nuisance or shall be dangerous to life or detrimental to health.
C. The Building Commissioner periodically shall cause to have inspected all private swimming pools in the Village to determine whether or not the
provisions of this Code regarding health, sanitation and safety applicable thereto are being complied with. (1987 Code)
9-9-9: HOURS OF USE RESTRICTED:
No private residential swimming pool shall be made use of between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. (1987
Code)
Footnote 1: See Chapter 1 of this Title.
Footnote 2: See Chapter 3 of this Title.
Footnote 3: See Chapter 4 of this Title.
Chapter 10
PLANNING DIVISION
9-10-1: PLANNING DIVISION - BUILDING DEPARTMENT:
There is hereby established a Planning Division, which shall be part of the Building Department. The Planning Division shall employ such persons
as approved from time to time by the President and Board of Trustees. (Ord. 99-14, 12-6-1999)
9-10-2: ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 276/387
There is hereby established the position of Economic Development Director. The position shall be held by a part-time consultant or by a staff
member, with such remuneration as determined from time to time by the President and Board of Trustees.
The Economic Development Director's position shall be part of the Planning Division of the Building Department. The Director shall be appointed
by the President with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees. The Director shall report to the President and Board of Trustees. (Ord. 99-
14, 12-6-1999)
9-10-3: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
The Economic Development Director's primary duties and responsibilities shall be to foster commercial and industrial economic growth, and to
promote and preserve economic stability. The Director shall have such further specific duties as may be assigned from time to time by the
President and Board of Trustees.
The Director shall take the following factors, among others, into consideration in pursuit of these duties and responsibilities:
A. The historic equalized assessed valuation of the Village;
B. Projected revenues and expenditures required by the Village for operating costs and infrastructure improvements;
C. Incentives previously given for economic development;
D. Recommended incentives, if any, for future economic development;
E. Direct and indirect costs associated with development, which would be incurred by the Village;
F. Overall benefits and/or detriments to the Village. (Ord. 99-14, 12-6-1999)
9-10-4: PLANNING RECOMMENDATIONS:
In addition to the foregoing duties and responsibilities, the Director shall also be responsible to work with the President, Board of Trustees,
Planning Commission, Zoning Board and Building Department to review, on a regular basis, all ordinances regarding planning, zoning and
development to revise them as needed. (Ord. 99-14, 12-6-1999)
9-10-5: PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS:
The Economic Development Director shall meet with any developer or business owner who is seeking to establish any new or revised
construction or business establishment in the Village.
Any inquiries made to the Village by any potential developer or business owner shall be referred to the Economic Development Director for
processing. As soon as practicable after receiving the inquiry, the Director shall set a meeting to review, with the potential developer or business
owner, the applicable ordinances of the Village, and the goals and objectives of the Village for future economic growth and development.
The Director shall then refer the potential developer or owner to the appropriate Village departments for any necessary applications and inform
the President and Board of Trustees of such contact.
At least once per month, or more often as directed, the Director shall submit a written report to the President and Board of Trustees regarding all
such inquiries. The Director shall give an oral report to the President and Board of Trustees each month at the department head meeting. If
requested by the President and Board of Trustees, the Director shall advise the potential developer or business owner to be present at a special
committee meeting to make a presentation to the President and Board of Trustees regarding the proposal. (Ord. 99-14, 12-6-1999)
Title 10
ZONING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
TITLE AND PURPOSE
10-1-1: TITLE AND EFFECTIVE DATE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 277/387
A. Be it ordained by the village board of the village of Broadview, Illinois:
The zoning ordinance and zoning district map passed by the village board and approved by the mayor of the village of Broadview, Illinois, on
April 2, 2001, and as subsequently amended, is herewith and now adopted.
B. This title, including the zoning map made a part hereof, shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the BROADVIEW ZONING
ORDINANCE. (Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-2001)
10-1-2: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
The Broadview zoning ordinance is adopted for the following purposes:
A. To promote and protect the public health, safety, morals, comfort and general welfare of the people;
B. To divide the village of Broadview into zones or districts restricting and regulating therein the location, erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration and use of buildings, structures and land for residence, business, manufacturing and other specified uses;
C. To protect the character and the stability of the residential, business and manufacturing areas within the village of Broadview and to promote
the orderly and beneficial development of such areas;
D. To provide adequate light, air, privacy and convenience of access to property;
E. To regulate the intensity of use, and to determine the area of open spaces surrounding buildings necessary to provide adequate light and air,
and to protect the public health;
F. To establish building lines and the location of buildings designed for residential, business and manufacturing, or other uses within such areas;
G. To fix reasonable standards to which buildings or structures shall conform;
H. To prohibit uses, buildings or structures incompatible with the character of development or intended uses within specified zoning districts;
I. To prevent additions to or alteration or remodeling of, existing buildings or structures in such a way as to avoid the restrictions and limitations
imposed hereunder;
J. To limit congestion in the public streets and protect the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare by providing for the off-street
parking of motor vehicles and the loading and unloading of commercial vehicles;
K. To conserve the taxable value of land and buildings throughout the village of Broadview;
L. To prevent the overcrowding of land and undue concentration of structures, so far as is possible and appropriate in each district, by regulating
the use and bulk of buildings in relation to the land surrounding them;
M. To protect against fire, explosion, noxious fumes and other hazards in the interest of the public health, safety, comfort and general welfare;
N. To provide for the gradual elimination of nonconforming uses of land, buildings and structures which are adversely affecting the character and
value of desirable development in each district;
O. To define and limit the powers and duties of the administrative officers and bodies as provided herein; and
P. To prescribe the penalties for the violation of the provisions of this title or any amendments thereto. (Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-2001)
Chapter 2
RULES AND INTERPRETATION; DEFINITIONS
10-2-1: RULES AND INTERPRETATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 278/387
The following rules shall apply for construing or interpreting the terms and provisions of this title:
A. The words "shall", "must", and "will", are mandatory in nature, establishing an obligation or duty to comply with the particular provision. The
word "may" is permissive in nature. Words used in the present tense include the future tense. Words used in the singular number include the
plural number and the plural number includes the singular number, unless the context of the particular usage clearly indicates otherwise.
Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine gender. The term person includes individual, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company, organization, or partnership, singular or plural, of any kind.
B. In their application, the provisions of this title shall be the minimum requirements for the promotion and protection of the public health, safety,
morals and general welfare, and shall be construed to achieve the purposes for which this title is adopted.
C. This title is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant, or other private agreement. However, where the regulations of this title are more
restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements than such easement, covenant, or other private agreement, the requirements of this
title shall govern.
D. In the event of a conflict between the text of this title and any caption, figure, illustration, table, or map contained herein, the text shall control.
E. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this title shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public
health, safety, morals and welfare.
F. When a use is not specifically listed in the sections devoted to permitted uses, it shall be assumed that such uses are hereby expressly
prohibited. However, such uses may then be permitted by a written decision of the zoning administrator stating that said use is similar to and
not more objectionable than uses listed.
G. No building, structure, or use which was not lawfully existing at the time of the adoption of this title shall become or be made lawful solely by
reason of the adoption of this title. To the extent, and in any matter that said unlawful building, structure, or use is in conflict with the
requirements of this title, said building, structure, or use remains unlawful hereunder.
H. The provisions of this title are cumulative and are additional limitations upon all other laws and ordinances adopted prior to the effective date
hereof, or which may be passed hereafter governing any subject matter in this title. (Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-2001)
10-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: A subordinate building or structure, including garages, the use of which is in keeping with, and
incidental to that of the main building. Said accessory building shall clearly be located on the lot of the main building, and shall not be used for
habitation.
ADULT ARCADE: An establishment where, for any form of consideration, one or more motion picture projectors, slide projectors, or similar
machines for viewing by five (5) or fewer people each are used to show films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic
reproductions that are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT BUSINESS: Any adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult cabaret, adult hotel or motel, adult modeling studio, adult theater or motion picture
theater, adult retail establishment, adult sexual encounter center, or any other business that offers its patrons services or entertainment
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, but not
including those uses or activities, the regulation of which is preempted by state or federal law.
ADULT BUSINESS, RETAIL: Retail adult businesses shall mean the following adult businesses:
A. Adult Bookstores: An establishment: 1) having adult viewing materials as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, or 2) in
which adult viewing materials are displayed or sold for any form of consideration as a principal use of the premises, or as a section,
segment, or adjunct to some other business, but for use or viewing off the premises.
B. Adult Retail Establishments: Any retail establishment which, for money or any other form of consideration has as one of its principal
purposes or provides as its substantial stock in trade, the sale, exchange, rent, loan, trade, transfer, or provision for use or viewing off the
premises, any adult oriented merchandise.
An adult business shall not be considered a retail adult business if it also engages in business or activity that constitutes nonretail.
ADULT BUSINESSES, NONRETAIL: Nonretail adult businesses shall mean any adult businesses other than retail adult businesses.
ADULT CABARET: Any nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar establishment that regularly features persons in a state of nudity or seminudity, or live
performances, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions that include or that are characterized by the
exposure of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 279/387
ADULT HOTEL OR MOTEL: A hotel or motel or similar establishment that: a) offers public accommodations for any form of consideration where
patrons are provided closed circuit television or video transmissions, films, motion pictures, videos, slides of other photographic reproductions that
are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and has a sign visible from the
exterior of the premises advertising the availability of this adult type of entertainment; or b) offers a sleeping room for rent, allows a tenant or
occupant of a sleeping room to subrent, for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours.
ADULT MODELING STUDIO: A business which provides for any form of compensation, monetary or otherwise, figure models who, for the
purpose of sexual stimulation of patrons, display specified anatomical areas to be observed, painted, painted upon, sketched, drawn, sculptured,
photographed, or otherwise depicted by such customers.
ADULT ORIENTED MERCHANDISE: Merchandise, paraphernalia, devices, equipment or items distinguished or relating to, or which are
characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction of, specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER: A business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its principal business activities, offers for any form
of consideration, a place where two (2) or more persons may congregate, assemble or associate for the purpose of engaging in specified sexual
activities or exposing specified anatomical areas.
ADULT THEATER: Any theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar establishment where, for any form of consideration, persons in a state of nudity
or seminudity are featured, or live performances are made, which are characterized by the exposure of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas; or where films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions are shown, and in which a
substantial portion of the total presentation is devoted to the showing of material characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description
of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT VIEWING MATERIALS: Books, magazines or other periodicals, photographs, drawings, slides, films, videotapes, CD-ROMs, recording
tapes or other media, and novelty items, which are distinguished or relating to, or which are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction of,
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
AIRPORT, LANDING STRIP, HELIPORT, OR HELISTOP: Any premises which are used, or intended for use, for the landing and takeoff of aircraft;
and any appurtenant areas which are used or intended for use for airport buildings or other airport structures or rights of way, together with all
airport and structures located thereon.
ALLEY: A right of way, with a width not exceeding twenty four feet (24'), which affords a secondary means of access to abutting property.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL: Any building or portion thereof designed or used for the care, observation or treatment of domestic animals.
AUTOMOBILE LAUNDRY: A structure, the principal use of which is to allow for washing of vehicles with facilities for the cleaning, polishing, or
waxing of vehicles.
AUTOMOBILE OIL AND LUBE SHOP: Any building or structure used for automobile oil change and lubrication, and other automotive fluid
replacement.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR SHOP: The use of a site for the repair of automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, motor homes, recreational vehicles, or boats,
including sale, installation, and servicing of equipment and parts. This includes muffler shops, auto repair garages, tire sales, and installation,
wheel and brake shops, body and fender shops, and similar repair and service activities, but excludes dismantling or salvage.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION, GAS STATION: A facility limited to retail sales to the public of gasoline, motor oil, lubricants, motor fuels,
travel aides, and minor automobile accessories. In addition, such a facility may provide minor vehicle servicing, minor repairs and maintenance,
but only if rendered wholly on-site.
BARBERSHOP: Any establishment or place of business within which the practice of barbering is engaged in or carried out by one or more
barbers.
BASEMENT: A portion of a building located partly underground, but having less than half its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade
of the adjoining ground.
BEAUTY PARLOR: Any commercial establishment or other place of business wherein cosmetology is offered or practiced on a regular basis for
compensation.
BLOCK: A tract of land bounded by streets or by a combination of one or more streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights of way,
bulkhead lines, shorelines of waterways or corporate boundary lines.
BODY PIERCING: Any procedure whereby a part or parts of the human body are pierced by a sharp instrument in order to allow insertion of a
piece or pieces of jewelry, a ring(s) or other ornamental device(s) through the orifice(s) thus created. For the purposes of this regulation, ear
piercing is excluded from the definition of body piercing.
BOOTH: Any enclosure that is specifically offered to patrons of an adult business for the private viewing of any adults-only item or movie. Said
definition does not include enclosures that are used as private offices by any operator, employee or agent for attending to the tasks of their
employment and are not offered for use by the public.
BUILDABLE AREA: The area of a lot remaining after the minimum yard requirements of the zoning ordinance have been met.
BUILDING: Anything constructed for shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or movable property of any kind, and which is permanently
affixed to the land, excluding trailers or portable homes of this nature.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY OR ACCESSORY USE: An "accessory building or use" is one which:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 280/387
A. Is subordinate to and serves a principal building or principal use;
B. Is subordinate in area, extent or purpose to the principal building or principal use served;
C. Is located on the same zoning lot as the principal building or principal use served with the single exception of such accessory off-street
parking facilities as are permitted to locate elsewhere than on the same zoning lot with the building or use served.
Accessory uses include satellite dishes, fences, off-street parking areas, signs, garages, sheds, and carports. See figure 2.1 of this section.
Figure 2.1
BUILDING, DETACHED:. A principal building surrounded by open space on the same lot.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The overall height of a building measured from the established curb level to: a) the top of the roof for flat roof, b) the deck
lines for mansard roofs, and c) the average height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip, or gambrel roofs. See figure 2.2 of this section.
Figure 2.2
BUILDING LINE: A line parallel to the street right-of-way line at any story level of a building and representing the minimum distance which all or
any part of the building is set back from said right-of-way line. See figure 2.1 of this section.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A nonaccessory building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is located. See figure 2.1 of this
section.
BUILDING, RESIDENTIAL: A building arranged, designed, used, or intended to be used for residential occupancy by one or more families.
Residential buildings include, but are not limited to, the following types:
A. Single-family detached dwellings.
B. Two-family dwellings.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 281/387
C. Multiple-family dwellings.
D. A row of one- or two-family attached dwellings developed initially under single ownership or control.
BUILDING, TEMPORARY: Any building not designed to be permanently located in the place where it is or where it is intended to be placed or
affixed.
BULK: A characteristic of a given building including:
A. Size and height of buildings.
B. Location of exterior walls at levels in relation to lot lines, streets, or other buildings.
C. Floor area ratio.
D. All open spaces allocated to the building.
E. Amount of lot area provided per dwelling unit.
BUSINESS: Any lawful commercial endeavor to engage in the manufacturing, purchase, sale, lease, or exchange of goods and/or the provision of
services.
CELLAR: The portion of a building located partly or wholly underground, and having half or more than half of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below
the average grade of the adjoining ground.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY: A document signed by the building commissioner certifying that a building, structure, or land area and use
thereof has been inspected and found to comply with the building and zoning ordinances of the village.
CHILDCARE OR DAYCARE FACILITY: A state-licensed facility where a person, other than a relative or guardian, provides care and supervision
for five (5) or more children under seven (7) years of age, for less than twenty four (24) hours a day for compensation.
CHURCH OR PLACE OF WORSHIP: An institution that people regularly attend to participate in or hold religious services, meetings, and other
activities. The term "church" shall not carry a secular connotation and shall include buildings in which the religious services of any denomination
are held.
CLUB OR LODGE, PRIVATE: A nonprofit association of persons who are bona fide members paying dues, which owns, hires, or leases a
building or portion thereof, the use of such premises being restricted to members and their guests.
CONDOMINIUM PROPERTY: All land, property, and space on which is built one or more attached, individually owned residences or units.
CONTIGUOUS: In contact, adjoining or touching another object or item as distinguished from being adjacent.
COOPERATIVE: A multiple-family dwelling owned and maintained by its residents. The entire property is under common ownership.
CUBICLE: Synonymous with "booth", as defined in this section.
CURB LEVEL: The level of the established curb in front of a building or structure, measured at the center of such front. Where no curb level has
been established, it shall be deemed to be the established level of the center line of the street surface in front of a building or structure, measured
at the center line of such front.
DECIBEL: A unit of measurement of the intensity (loudness) of sound. Sound level meters which are employed to measure the intensity of sound
are calibrated in decibels.
DISTRICT: A section of the village of Broadview within which the regulations governing the use of land are the same.
DOOR: Full, complete, nontransparent closure device that obscures the view or activity taking place within the enclosure.
DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENT: An enterprise which accommodates the patrons' automobiles and from which the occupants of the automobiles
may make purchases, transact business, or view motion pictures.
DRIVE-THROUGH SERVICE: A facility which is accessory to a commercial retail establishment, personal service establishment, office, financial
institution or fast-food restaurant and is designed or intended to enable a customer, without exiting a motor vehicle moving through the premises,
to transact business with a person outside the motor vehicle.
DUPLEX: A building containing two (2) dwelling units, each of which typically has access to the outside or to a common hall, no unit is located
over the other, and each is separated from the other by one or more common fire resistant walls.
DWELLING: A residential building, or portion thereof, but not including hotels, motels, rooming houses, nursing homes, tourist homes or trailers.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 282/387
DWELLING, ATTACHED: A residential building which is joined to another dwelling at one or more sides by a party wall or walls.
DWELLING, DETACHED: A single-family residential building entirely surrounded by open space on the same lot.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A building, or portion thereof, containing more than three (3) dwelling units, designed or altered for occupancy
by three (3) or more families living independently of each other.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A building containing one dwelling unit.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms in a residential building, or residential portion of a building, which are arranged, designed, used or intended
for use by one family, and which includes cooking space and sanitary facilities reserved for the occupants thereof.
EASEMENT: Land which has been designated by lawful agreement between the owner of the land and a person, corporation or government for a
specified use.
EFFICIENCY UNIT: A dwelling consisting of one principal room together with bathroom, kitchen, hallway, closets or dining alcove directly off the
principal room, provided such dining alcove does not exceed one hundred twenty five (125) square feet.
ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION CENTER: A terminal at which electric energy is received from the transmission system and is delivered to the
distribution system only.
ELECTRIC SUBSTATION: A terminal at which electric energy is delivered to other elements of the transmission system and, generally, to the
local distribution system.
FACADE: Any side, surface or wall below the roof of a building which is parallel or within forty five degrees (45) of parallel with a parcel's
frontage on a public thoroughfare. If a building has a complex shape, then all walls or surfaces facing in the same direction, or nearly the same
direction, are part of a single facade.
FAMILY: One or more related persons or no more than four (4) persons (excluding caregivers) who need not be related by blood, marriage or
adoption, living together and maintaining a common household, but not including sororities, fraternities or other similar organizations.
FENCE, OPEN: A fence, including entrance and exit gates, designed and constructed so that the surface area of any segment of such fence
contains at least fifty percent (50%) open spaces as compared to solid material.
FENCE, SOLID: A fence, including solid entrance and exit gates, which effectively conceals from viewers in or on adjoining properties and
streets, materials stored and operations conducted behind it.
FLEA MARKET: A site either indoors or outdoors where individual stalls or spaces are provided on a short term basis for vendors to display, buy,
sell, exchange or deal in new or used goods.
FLOOR AREA RATIO: The numerical value obtained through dividing the gross floor area of a building or buildings by the net lot area on which
such building or buildings are located.
FREQUENCY: The number of oscillations per second in a sound wave, measuring the pitch of the resulting sound.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: Any accessory building or an accessory portion of the principal building which is intended for and used to store the private
passenger vehicles of the family or families resident on the premises, and in which no business, service or industry connected directly or indirectly
with the automotive vehicles is carried on, provided that not more than one-half (1/2) of the space may be rented for the private passenger
vehicles of persons not resident on the premises, except that all the space in a garage of one or two (2) car capacity may also be rented. Such a
garage shall not be used for more than one commercial vehicle and the load capacity of such vehicle shall not exceed one and one-half (11/2)
tons.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: A garage, other than a private or storage garage, which is used for the short-term parking of vehicles.
GARAGE, STORAGE: Any building or premises, other than a private or public garage, used exclusively for the parking or storage of motor
vehicles.
GROSS FLOOR AREA: The floor area of a building or buildings shall be the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of such
building or buildings, measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls or from the center line of party walls separating two (2) buildings. In
particular, "gross floor area" shall include:
A. Basement space if at least one-half (1/2) of the basement story height is above the established curb or ground level;
B. Elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor;
C. Floor space used for mechanical equipment where the structural headroom exceeds seven and one-half feet (71/2'); except equipment,
open or enclosed, located on the roof, i.e., bulkheads, water tanks, and cooling towers;
D. Attic floor space where the structural headroom exceeds seven and one-half feet (71/2');
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 283/387
E. Interior balconies and mezzanines;
F. Enclosed porches, but not terraces and breezeways;
G. Accessory buildings.
GROSS LEASABLE AREA (GLA): The gross floor area minus the following deductions:
A. Elevator shafts and stairwells;
B. Public restrooms;
C. Public lobbies, common mall areas, atriums and courtyards at points of pedestrian access to the building from the exterior.
GROUND FLOOR AREA: The lot area covered by a building measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls, but excluding open porches or
terraces, garages or carports, but including breezeways and closed porches.
GROUP HOME: Any private residence licensed by the state as a rooming and/or boarding house where ten (10) or fewer mentally or physically
challenged individuals or foster children reside with two (2) additional persons acting as houseparents or guardians.
HOME OCCUPATION: A gainful occupation or profession conducted by a member of a family residing on the premises, and where the business
or profession is conducted within the dwelling.
HOSPITAL: An institution providing physical health services, inpatient or overnight accommodations, and medical or surgical care of the sick or
injured.
HOTEL APARTMENT: A hotel in which at least fifty percent (50%) of the hotel accommodations are for occupancy by permanent guests, thirty
(30) days or more.
HOTEL, MOTEL: A building in which lodging is provided and offered to the public for compensation and which is open to transient guests and is
not a rooming or boarding house as herein defined.
IMPERVIOUS LOT COVERAGE: A measurement of development intensity determined by dividing that area of a lot which is occupied or covered
by all impervious surfaces, by the gross area of that lot.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: Any material that substantially reduces or prevents the infiltration of storm water into the ground. Impervious surface
shall include, but not be limited to, the ground area covered by buildings, driveways, parking areas, sidewalks, swimming pools, and patios
(whether covered or uncovered). See figure 2.3 of this section.
Figure 2.3
JUNKYARD: An open outdoor area where waste, used or secondhand materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed,
disassembled, or handled, including, but not limited to, scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires, and bottles. A junkyard includes an
auto wrecking yard, but does not include uses carried on entirely within enclosed buildings.
KENNEL: Any lot or premises or portion thereof on which more than four (4) dogs, cats and other household domestic animals over four (4)
months of age, are kept or on which more than two (2) such animals are boarded for compensation or kept for sale.
LIQUOR STORE: A business establishment where alcoholic liquors are kept and sold but where such alcoholic liquors are not consumed on the
premises.
LODGING ROOM: A room rented as sleeping and living quarters, but without cooking facilities and with or without an individual bathroom. In a
suite of rooms, each room shall be counted as a lodging room.
LOT: A contiguous parcel of land in identical ownership throughout, bounded by other lots or streets, and used or set aside and available for use
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 284/387
as the site of one or more buildings or other definite purpose.
LOT AREA: The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the vertical planes through front, side and rear lot lines.
LOT, CORNER: A lot which adjoins the point of intersection of two (2) or more streets and in which the interior angle formed by the street lines is
one hundred thirty five degrees (135) or less. See figure 2.4 of this section.
LOT, FLAG: A lot not fronting or abutting a public roadway and where access to the public roadway is limited to a narrow private right of way. See
figure 2.4 of this section.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner or reversed corner lot. See figure 2.4 of this section.
LOT LINE, FRONT: That boundary line of any lot which is along an existing or dedicated street lot line and which is established as a front lot line
on the plat of record filed by the owner, subdivider, or builder.
LOT LINE, REAR: The boundary of a lot which is most distant from and is, or is most nearly, parallel to the front lot line. If a rear lot line is less
than ten feet (10') long, or if the lot comes to a point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be a line at least ten feet (10') long, lying wholly within the
lot, parallel to the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE: The boundary of a lot which extends from the front lot line to the rear lot line.
LOT OF RECORD: A lot that is part of a recorded subdivision or a parcel of land that has been recorded at the county recorder's office containing
property tax records.
LOT, THROUGH: A lot which has a pair of opposite lot lines along two (2) substantially parallel streets and which is not a corner lot. On a through
lot both street lines shall be deemed front lot lines, but in the case of two (2) or more contiguous through lots, there shall be a common front lot
line. See figure 2.4 of this section.
Figure 2.4
LOT WIDTH: The horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot, measured at the front setback line.
MARQUEE, CANOPY: A roof-like structure of permanent nature, which projects from the wall of a building and may overhang the public way.
MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL: A building or premises in which freight is received or dispatched by motor vehicle.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Any self-propelled, wheeled vehicle designed primarily for transportation of persons or goods along public streets.
NET LOT AREA: The area inside of lot lines exclusive of established or existing street and alley rights of way.
NIGHTCLUB: An establishment serving food and/or liquor and providing music and space for dancing by patrons only. A nightclub shall not
include an "Adult Business".
NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: A nonconforming building or structure, legally established prior to the effective date hereof, or
subsequent amendment, which does not fully comply with the lot coverage and/or building bulk regulations of the zoning district in which it is
located.
NONCONFORMING USE: A nonconforming use is an activity using land, buildings and/or structures for purposes which were legally established
prior to the effective date hereof, or subsequent amendment, and which would not be permitted to be established as a new use in the zoning
district in which it is located by the regulations of this title.
NONCONFORMITY, LEGAL: A legal nonconformity is any land use, structure, or lot of record legally established prior to the effective date hereof,
or subsequent amendment, which would either not be permitted by or is not in full compliance with the regulations of this title.
NOXIOUS MATTER: Material which is capable of causing injury to living organisms by chemical reaction or is capable of causing detrimental
effects upon the physical or economic well-being of individuals.
NUDITY: The display of the human male or female genitalia; pubic hair; buttocks; perineum; anal or pubic regions; female breast, at or below the
areola thereof, with no covering or with a less than fully opaque covering; or, male genitalia, in a discernible turgid state, with or without covering.
NURSING HOME: An establishment for the care of children or the aged or infirm. Such a home does not contain equipment for medical and
surgical care or for the treatment of disease or injury, nor does it provide care in maternity or mental illness. (See title 4, chapter 9 of this code for
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 285/387
licensing provisions.)
OBSCENE: Any material or performance is obscene if:
A. The average person, applying contemporary adult community standards, would find that, taken as a whole, it appeals to the prurient
interest; and
B. The average person, applying contemporary adult community standards, would find that it depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way,
ultimate sexual acts or sadomasochistic sexual acts, whether normal or perverted, actual or simulated, or masturbation, excretory functions
or lewd exhibition of the genitals; and
C. Taken as a whole, it lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value1.
OBSTRUCTION: Any building or structure, or parts thereof, which is located so as to come in the way of any open area required by this title.
OCTAVE BAND: A term denoting all the frequencies between any given frequencies and double that frequency.
OCTAVE BAND FILTER: An electrical frequency analyzer designed according to standards formulated by the American Standards Association
and used in conjunction with a sound level meter to take measurements in specific octave intervals. (American standard for sound level meters.
ASS no. 224.3-1944.)
ODOR THRESHOLD VALUE: The minimum concentration of odorous material in air which can be detected as determined by manufacturing
chemists association or other qualified laboratory.
OFFICE: A room or group of rooms used for conducting the affairs of a business, profession, service industry, or government.
OPEN SALES LOT: A primary or accessory use of land where merchandise, other than automobiles or trucks, is stored, displayed, or exchanged
outside of an enclosed building or within a temporary structure, trailer, or tent.
OPEN SPACE (PUBLIC/PRIVATE): Land used for recreation, resource protection, amenity, and/or buffer yards.
OPERATOR: For purposes of an "adult business", as defined herein, any person, (whether said persons be an individual, partner, corporation,
joint stock company, fiduciary, officer, director, stockholder, employee, or manager), which conducts, maintains or owns any adult business.
ORPHANAGE: An institution for the housing and care of a child who has lost both parents or guardians.
OUTDOOR STORAGE, DISPLAY AND SALES: The placement of goods or materials outside of an enclosed structure for the purposes of
storage, advertising, or sale, including, but not limited to: vehicles, garden supplies, plants, building and landscaping supplies, raw materials, and
seasonal items such as produce and Christmas trees. This definition does not include ATMs, drive-through windows, vending machines, the
dispensing of petroleum products at service stations, or the sale of food and beverages for immediate consumption, e.g., at a sidewalk cafe or
lemonade stand.
PARTICULATE MATTER: Material, other than steam or water vapor, which is suspended or discharged into the atmosphere in finely divided form
as a liquid or solid at atmospheric pressure and temperature.
PARTY WALL: A wall starting from the foundation and extending continuously through all stories to or above the roof which separates one
building from another, and is in joint use by each building.
PATRON: For purposes of an "adult business", as defined herein, any customer, patron or visitor to an adult business who is not employed by any
operator of said establishment.
PAWNSHOPS: Any business engaged in receiving property in pledge or as security for money or other thing advanced to the pawner or pledger
and as regulated by the pawnbroker regulation act, 205 Illinois Compiled Statutes 510/1 et seq.
PERFORMANCE STANDARD: A criterion to control noise, odor, smoke, toxic or noxious matter, vibration, fire and explosive hazards, or glare or
heat generated by or inherent in uses of land or buildings.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT: A unified development in single ownership or control, and which includes two (2) or more principal buildings where
the specific requirements of a given district may be modified.
RAP PARLOR: An establishment or place primarily in the business of providing nonprofessional conversation or similar services for adults, where
explicit sexual conduct is depicted and/or sexual activity is explicitly or implicitly encouraged or tolerated.
REFUSE: All waste products resulting from human habitation except sewage.
RESEARCH LABORATORY: A building or group of buildings in which are located facilities for scientific research, investigation, testing or
experimentation, but not primarily facilities for the manufacture or sale of products.
RESTAURANT, CARRYOUT: Any business establishment whose primary purpose is to offer food and beverages for sale and served in
disposable containers for consumption off the premises, but is not necessarily a "fast food restaurant".
RESTAURANT, SIT-DOWN: Any business establishment, the primary purpose of which is to offer food and beverages for sale and served for
consumption at tables typically in nondisposable containers on the premises.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 286/387
RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline,
water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, shade trees or other special use.
RINGELMANN CHART: A chart which is described in the U.S. bureau of mines information circular 6888, and on which are illustrated graduated
shades of grey for use in estimating the light obscuring capacity of smoke.
RINGELMANN NUMBER: The number of the area on the Ringelmann chart that coincides most nearly with the light obscuring capacity of smoke.
ROOM: Synonymous with "booth", as defined in this section.
ROOMING HOUSE, BED AND BREAKFAST, BOARDING HOUSE, OR TOURIST HOME: A building, or portion thereof, containing lodging rooms
which accommodates between three (3) and ten (10) persons who are not members of the keepers' family, and where lodging rooms or meals, or
both, are provided for compensation.
SADOMASOCHISTIC ACTIVITY: Flagellation or torture by or upon a nude person; a person clad in undergarments, a mask or bizarre costume.
In addition, the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained with the intent to stimulate or arouse sexually the initiator
and/or the recipient.
SCHOOL, PRIVATE: Any school that is not operated by a public school district or college.
SCREENING: A structure erected or vegetation planted for concealing from viewers the area behind it.
SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY: A building consisting of individual, small, self-contained units that are leased or owned for the storage of
business and household goods or contractors' supplies.
SELL: Includes to solicit or receive an order for, to keep or expose for sale and to keep with intent to sell.
SENIOR CITIZEN HOUSING: One or more one-family, two-family or multiple-family dwellings or combinations of the above and related facilities
specifically designed for persons fifty five (55) years of age or older or couples where at least one person is fifty five (55) years of age or older.
This does not include a development that contains convalescent or nursing facilities.
SEXUAL CONDUCT: Ultimate sex acts (whether autoerotic, heterosexual, homosexual or otherwise), bestiality or sadomasochistic activity. In
addition, physical contact, intended to stimulate or arouse sexually the initiator and/or the recipient, with a person's unclothed genitalia, buttocks,
perineum, anal or pubic regions, or female breast.
SMOKE UNITS, NUMBER OF: The number obtained by multiplying the smoke density in Ringelmann numbers by the time of the emission in
minutes. For the purpose of this calculation, a Ringelmann density reading is made at least once every minute during the period of observation;
each reading is then multiplied by the time in minutes during which it is observed; the various products are then added together to give the total
number of smoke units observed during the total period under observation. Steam or water vapor is not considered smoke.
SOUND LEVEL METER: An instrument standardized by the American Standards Association for measurement of the intensity of sound.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: Means and includes any of the following: a) less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals,
pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areolae; or b) human male genitals in a discernibly
turgid state, even if completely or opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Specified (or specific) sexual activities means and includes any of the following: a) the fondling or other erotic
touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts; b) sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; c) masturbation, actual or simulated; d) excretory functions; or human genitalia in a state of sexual
stimulation or arousal.
STORY: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above; or if there is no floor above,
the space between the floor and the ceiling next above. A basement shall be counted as a story and a cellar shall not be counted as a story.
STORY, HALF: A space under a sloping roof which has the line of intersection of roof decking and wall not more than three feet (3') above the top
floor level, and in which space not more than sixty percent (60%) of the floor area is completed for principal or accessory use.
STREET, AVENUE, PLACE, TERRACE, OR PARKWAY: A right of way of required width which affords a primary means of access to abutting
property.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS: Any change, other than incidental repairs, in the supporting members of a building or structure such as bearing
walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any substantial change in the roof or exterior walls.
STRUCTURE: Anything erected, the use of which requires more or less permanent location on the ground or attached to something having a
permanent location on the ground. An advertising or business sign or other advertising device (see chapter 9, "Signs", of this title), if detached or
projecting, shall be construed to be a separate structure. A satellite antenna shall be construed to be a separate structure. (See section 9-2-7 of
this code for satellite antennas.)
TATTOOING ESTABLISHMENT: An establishment which engages in the practice of placing designs, letters, figures, symbols or other marks upon
or under the skin of any person, using ink or other substances that result in the permanent coloration of the skin by means of the use of needles
or other instruments designed to contact or puncture the skin.
TAVERN OR COCKTAIL LOUNGE: A business establishment where alcoholic liquors are sold to be consumed on the premises. (See title 3,
chapter 3 of this code for liquor control.)
TEMPORARY CARPORT: A nonpermanent structure designed as a shelter for motor vehicles, boats, etc. Such structures shall be easily
relocatable, shall not be permanently affixed to a foundation, and shall not otherwise require the issuance of a building permit.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 287/387
TOWNHOUSE: An attached single-family residential housing design which typically contains three (3) or more residential dwelling units, each of
which has its own front and rear access to the outside, no unit is located over another unit, and each is separated from any other unit by one or
more common fire resistant walls.
TOXIC MATERIALS: A substance, liquid, solid or gaseous, which by reason of an inherent deleterious property, tends to destroy life or impair
health.
TRAILER: Any vehicle, camper, or any portable or mobile vehicle on wheels, skids, rollers or blocks, either self-propelled or propelled by any
other means which is used for living or sleeping purposes.
TRAILER PARK: Any premises on which are parked two (2) or more trailers or any premises used or held out for the purpose of supplying to the
public a parking space for two (2) or more such trailers. It does not include sales lots on which automobiles or unoccupied trailers, new or used,
are parked for purposes of inspection or sale.
UNDERAGE: Any person under eighteen (18) years of age, the legally minimum age at which one can purchase or view adults only items2.
USE: The purpose or activity for which the land or building thereon is designed, arranged or intended or for which it is occupied or maintained.
USE, CONDITIONAL: A use of property specifically authorized by zoning ordinance, but not permitted unless certain conditions have been met. A
conditional use permit must be applied for and approved by the zoning administrator.
USE, PERMITTED: Any building, structure and use which, on the effective date of this title, complies with the applicable regulations governing
permitted uses of the zoning district in which such building, structure and use is located.
USE, PRINCIPAL: The main use of land or building as distinguished from a subordinate or accessory use.
USE, SPECIAL: A use of property that because of its unique characteristics cannot be properly classified as a permitted use or any particular
zoning district or districts. A special use permit must be applied for with the zoning administrator, reviewed by public hearing by the planning and
zoning board, and approved by the village board of trustees.
YARD: An open space on a lot which is unoccupied and unobstructed from its lowest level to the sky, except as otherwise permitted in this title. A
yard extends along a lot line and at right angles to such line to a depth or width specified in the yard regulations for the district in which such lot is
located.
YARD, FRONT: A yard extending along the full width of the established front lot line between side lot lines and from the abutting established front
street right of way line to the front building line in depth. See figure 2.5 of this section.
YARD, REAR: The portion of the yard on the same lot with the principal building located between the rear line of the principal building and the
rear lot line, and extending for the full width of the lot. See figure 2.5 of this section.
Figure 2.5
YARD, SIDE: A yard extending along a side lot line between the front and rear yards. See figure 2.5 of this section.
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR: A duly authorized village employee who administers the various codes and ordinances of the village, including, but
not limited to, this title.
ZONING LOT OR LOTS: A single tract of land which is designated by its owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed or built upon as a
single unit, under single control or ownership. It may be a single parcel separately described in a deed or plat which is recorded in the office of the
county recorder of deeds, or it may include parts of or a combination of such parcels when adjacent to one another and used as one lot. (Ord.
2001-08A, 4-2-2001; amd. Ord. 2004-28, 12-6-2004; Ord. 2005-19, 8-1-2005; Ord. 2005-27, 11-7-2005; Ord. 2008-24, 7-21-2008; Ord. 2008-42,
11-17-2008)
Chapter 3
GENERAL PROVISIONS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 288/387
10-3-1: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
A. All buildings erected hereafter, all uses of land or buildings established hereafter and all structural alterations or relocations of existing buildings
occurring hereafter shall be subject to all regulations of this title where applicable to the zoning districts in which such buildings, uses or land
shall be located.
B. However, where a building permit for a building or structure has been issued in accordance with law, prior to the effective date hereof, and
provided that the construction is begun within six (6) months of such effective date and diligently prosecuted to completion (completion to be
accomplished within 18 months of the adoption of this title), said building or structure may be completed in accordance with approved plans,
on the basis of which the building permit has been issued, and further, may, upon completion and inspection, be occupied under a certificate
of occupancy by the use for which it was originally designated, subject thereafter to the provisions of chapter 5, "Nonconforming Uses And
Structures", of this title.
C. Where the zoning administrator has issued a permitted use permit, a special use permit or a permit for variation, pursuant to the provisions of
this title, such permit shall become null and void unless work thereon is substantially underway within six (6) months of the date of the
issuance of such permit by the zoning administrator and completed within eighteen (18) months of the issuance of such permit.
D. A special use permit shall be deemed to authorize only the particular use for which it was issued. Such permits shall automatically expire or
cease to be of any force or effect if such use shall be discontinued for six (6) consecutive months or more, and a new special use permit must
be obtained from the village according to the guidelines contained within this title. (Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-2001)
10-3-2: NEW STRUCTURES:
All structures built hereafter shall comply with all of the regulations of this zoning ordinance. Any structure hereafter moved from one site to
another shall be considered to be a structure built hereafter. Any structure rebuilt or restored after damage or destruction by fire or other casualty
shall be considered to be a structure built hereafter. All enlargements of, or additions to, existing uses occurring hereafter shall comply with the
regulations of this title. (Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-2001)
10-3-3: NUMBER OF STRUCTURES ON A ZONING LOT:
Not more than one principal building shall be located on a single zoning lot, nor shall a principal building be located on the same zoning lot with
any other principal building, unless such principal building is located in a planned development that has been approved pursuant to the provisions
of this title. (Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-2001)
10-3-4: DIVISION OF ZONING LOTS:
No improved zoning lot shall hereafter be divided into two (2) or more zoning lots unless all improved zoning lots resulting from each such division
shall conform with all the applicable bulk regulations of the zoning district in which the property is located. (Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-2001)
10-3-5: USE AND BUILDING BULK REGULATIONS:
A. Use: No building, structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or part thereof, or other structure, shall be erected,
raised, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged or altered except in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district in which it
is located.
B. Building Bulk: All new buildings and structures shall conform to the building regulations established herein for the district in which each building
shall be located, except that parapet walls, chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, stacks and necessary mechanical
appurtenances shall be permitted to exceed the maximum height provisions when erected in accordance with all other ordinances of the
village of Broadview.
C. Yards: Whenever any ordinance or a covenant to which the village is a part stipulates a front yard or setback requirement along any street in
any district which is greater than the front yard requirement of the zoning district in which it is located, then the greater requirement shall apply.
TABLE 3-1
BULK REGULATIONS
District
R-1 
R-2 
R-3 
Minimum
total lot
area
5,000
square feet
9,000
square feet
12,000
square feet
Minimum
width at
building
line
50 feet 60 feet 100 feet
Minimum
front yard
interior lot
20 feet, or a uniform
setback maintained by
1/2 of residences on a
block
10 feet 10 feet
Minimum
interior
side yard
5 feet 5 feet 5 feet
Minimum
side yard
on corner
lot
10 feet 10 feet 10 feet
Minimum
rear yard
30 feet 10 percent of depth of corner lot and 15
percent of depth of interior lot, but not
less than 10 feet and not more than 25
feet
10 percent of depth of corner lot and 15
percent of depth of interior lot, but not
less than 10 feet and not more than 25
feet
Bulk
Maximum
impervious
coverage
50 percent 75 percent 80 percent
Maximum
height
35 feet 35 feet 45 feet
C-1
Roosevelt Road
Commercial
District
C-2
General
Commercial
District
I
Institutional
District
O/I
Office/
Industrial
District
M
Manufacturing
District
Required
Yard
Area
Setbacks
Minimum
front yard
None, or where
adjacent to
residential, front
yards shall be the
same as adjacent
residential district
10 foot landscaped front yard,
or where adjacent to
residential, front yards shall be
the same as adjacent
residential district
10 feet, or where
adjacent to residential,
front yard shall be the
same as adjacent
residential district
35 feet 40 feet
Minimum
side yard
None, or where
adjacent to
residential, side
yards shall be the
same as in adjacent
residential district
Where adjacent to residential,
side yards shall be the same
as in adjacent residential
district; a 10 foot side yard
shall be maintained on all
corner lots
10 feet 20 feet,
or 35
feet if
abutting
a street
20 feet, or 40
feet if abutting
a street
Minimum
rear yard
Where adjacent to a
residential district, a
15 foot rear yard
shall be provided
Where adjacent to the rear lot
line of a residential district, a
20 foot rear yard shall be
provided
10 percent of depth of
corner lot and 15 percent
of depth of interior lot, but
not less than 10 feet and
not more than 25 feet
10 feet 10 feet
Bulk
Maximum
impervious
coverage
90 percent 80 percent 80 percent 90
percent
90 percent
Maximum
height
45 feet 45 feet 45 feet 60 feet 60 feet
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 290/387
(Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-2001; amd. Ord. 2007-10, 4-16-2007)
10-3-6: PERMITTED OBSTRUCTIONS IN REQUIRED BUILDING SETBACK AREAS; YARD REQUIREMENTS:
A. In All Yards:
1. Open terraces not over four feet (4') above the average level of the adjoining ground, and not closer than two feet (2') to the adjacent
property line;
2. Awnings and canopies, but not projecting more than five feet (5'), and at least seven feet (7') above the average level of the adjoining
ground;
3. Steps, four feet (4') or less above grade, which are necessary for access to a permitted building or for access to a zoning lot from a street or
alley;
4. Chimneys projecting eighteen inches (18") or less into the yard;
5. Arbors or trellises (not exceeding 8 feet in height), flagpoles, fountains, sculptures, plant boxes, and other similar ornamental objects;
6. Open or lattice enclosed fire escapes, fireproof outside stairways, fire towers, and balconies projecting into a required front and rear yard by
not more than ten feet (10'), and into a required side yard by not more than five feet (5');
7. Driveways and parking spaces as restricted in chapter 6 of this title;
8. Basketball backboards and/or hoops;
9. Fences and walls not exceeding six feet (6') in height in side and rear yards.
B. In Front Yards:
1. One-story bay windows projecting three feet (3') or less into the yards;
2. Overhanging eaves and gutters projecting three feet (3') or less into the yard;
3. Freestanding yard lights in front yards, providing that in residential districts such lights do not exceed seven feet six inches (7'6") in height,
nor shall such light be permitted to increase the level of illumination at the side lot line more than one-half (1/2) foot-candle.
C. In Rear Yards:
1. Private garage, accessory shed, toolrooms and similar buildings for domestic storage;
2. Balconies, breezeways, and open porches;
3. One-story bay windows projecting three feet (3') or less into the yard;
4. Overhanging eaves and gutters projecting two feet (2') or less into the yard.
D. Side Yards:
1. Overhanging eaves and gutters projecting into the yard for a distance not exceeding forty percent (40%) of the required yard width, but in
no case exceeding two feet (2'). (Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-2001)
10-3-7: ACCESS TO PUBLIC STREETS:
Except as otherwise provided for herein, every building shall be constructed or erected upon a lot or parcel of land which abuts upon a public
street unless a permanent easement of access to a public street was of record prior to the adoption of this title. (Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-2001)
10-3-8: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
A. No accessory building, unless it is structurally a part of the principal building and unless it conforms with the requirements of accessory
buildings for special uses, shall be erected or altered at, nor moved to, a location within ten feet (10') of the nearest wall of the principal
building, nor within the required area for front or side yard on the lot as set forth for the district. In residence districts, an accessory building in
a rear yard shall be not less than three feet (3') from any property line except where alleys exist.
B. No accessory building shall encroach upon that side yard of a corner lot which is adjacent to the street, nor upon that side yard of a reversed
corner lot which is adjacent to the street, nor upon the rear yard of a through lot.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 291/387
C. No accessory building shall have more than one story nor exceed fourteen feet (14') in height from the grade to the top peak, unless otherwise
permitted as accessory to business and manufacturing uses or to authorized special uses. (Ord. 2004-14, 6-21-2004)
D. Temporary carports. (Ord. 2005-27, 11-7-2005)
10-3-9: CARGO CONTAINER REGULATIONS:
A. General Provisions: Cargo containers shall be restricted as follows:
1. The placement of cargo containers on residentially zoned property (R-1 through R-3) shall be prohibited.
2. The placement of cargo containers on commercial and institutional districts (C-1, C-2, and I) shall be restricted to designated loading berth
areas meeting the provisions of section 10-6-7 of this title. In no instance shall cargo containers be placed in front of the front wall of a
principal building.
3. The placement of cargo containers within the office/industrial and manufacturing districts (O/I and M) shall be restricted to:
a. A concrete or asphalt surfaced area within the buildable area of the lot; or
b. Designated loading berth areas meeting the provisions enumerated in section 10-6-7 of this title.
In no instance shall cargo containers be placed in front of the front wall of a principal building.
B. Sites Under Construction: For properties in which there is an active building permit issued by the village for a multiple-family or nonresidential
development, up to two (2) cargo containers may be placed on a property provided that they are placed within the buildable area of the lot.
Cargo containers used for construction purposes must be immediately removed upon completion of the construction project.
C. Cargo Container Amortization Schedule: Any cargo container lawfully existing on July 1, 2004, which does not conform to the provisions of this
title, shall be removed or made to conform within one year of the date of notification by the village that the cargo container no longer conforms
with this code. Any cargo container lawfully existing on July 1, 2004, which does not conform to the provisions of this section may request a
variance as outlined in section 10-7-3 of this title. (Ord. 2004-14, 6-21-2004)
10-3-10: SEVERABILITY:
In the event any word, phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, provision, or section of this title or any portion thereof shall be held to be
unconstitutional, unenforceable, or void, the same shall not affect the validity or enforceability of any remaining words, phrases, clauses,
sentences, paragraphs, provisions, or sections thereof. (Ord. 2004-14, 6-21-2004)
10-3-11: CONTRADICTORY REGULATIONS:
Where any contradictory regulations, restrictions or requirements imposed by any provision of this title upon the use of land, building, structures
or improvements are either more restrictive or less restrictive than restrictions or requirements imposed by any other provision of this title or any
other law of any governmental body having jurisdiction over the subject matter thereof, those restrictions or requirements which are more
restrictive shall govern. (Ord. 2004-14, 6-21-2004)
10-3-12: RELATIONSHIP TO COMPREHENSIVE PLAN:
The comprehensive plan shall be advisory only and in and of itself shall not be construed or interpreted as regulating or controlling the use of any
private property and it is not the intent of the village that owners of private property should rely on recommendations in the comprehensive plan
being translated into presently effective regulations. The decision as to whether and when particular elements of the comprehensive plan will be
implemented in regulatory ordinances is reserved for the village board. (Ord. 2004-14, 6-21-2004)
Chapter 4
ZONING DISTRICTS; MAP
10-4-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS:
The village of Broadview, Illinois, is hereby divided into the following districts:
A. R-1 Single-Family District: The R-1 district is established to preserve and protect existing low density, detached single-family residential
development and to encourage and promote compatible development where the permitted uses, lot areas, setbacks and other requirements
are designed to encourage quality residential development.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 292/387
B. R-2 Multi-Family District: The R-2 district provides a moderate density environment of single-family homes, two-family development, and multifamily
dwellings including townhomes, two-flats and small (3 to 4 unit) apartments. This district may provide a transition between single-family
and higher intensity uses.
C. R-3 Multi-Family District: The R-3 district provides opportunities for condominiums, apartments, and other multi-family housing.
D. I Institutional District: The I district accommodates existing and future public buildings and recreational uses, and other uses having purposes
and impacts similar to public buildings. By creation of this special district, it is the intent of this title to avoid the problems inherent in treating
such buildings as permitted or special uses in zoning districts characterized by uses and structures bearing no similarity to public and
institutional uses and buildings. (Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-2001)
E. C-1 Roosevelt Road Commercial District: The C-1 district provides a variety of commercial and service uses including retail shopping and
convenience stores, offices and personal business services, designed to provide for the needs of Broadview residents and to enhance the
economic vitality of the community. Mixed use development recommended in the village's comprehensive plan is appropriate in this district,
with special use approval to accommodate residential development on upper stories. Uses in this district produce a high volume of vehicular
and pedestrian traffic and should have access to major streets and transportation. (Ord. 2008-24, 7-21-2008)
F. C-2 General Commercial District: The C-2 district provides a variety of more intense commercial uses including retail shopping and
convenience stores, offices and personal business services, designed to provide for the needs of Broadview residents and to enhance the
economic vitality of the community. Uses in this district produce a very high volume of vehicular and pedestrian traffic and should have access
to major streets and transportation.
G. O/I Office/Industrial District: The O/I district provides opportunities for office and light industrial uses in an environment where setbacks and
other requirements are designed to encourage quality development with minimal impact on the adjacent nonindustrial uses.
H. M Manufacturing District: The M district provides opportunities for manufacturing, industrial, and restricted commercial uses in an environment
where setbacks and other requirements are designed to encourage quality development with minimal impact on the adjacent nonindustrial
uses. (Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-2001)
10-4-2: OFFICIAL ZONING MAP:
The boundaries of the zoning districts are established as shown on the map entitled "zoning map of Broadview, Illinois", which map, as amended,
is on file in the office of the village clerk, and shall have the same force and effect as if the zoning map, together with all notations, references and
other information shown thereon are a part of this title as fully set forth and described herein. (Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-2001)
10-4-3: INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
When uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply:
A. District boundary lines are either the centerlines of railroads, highways, streets, alleys or easements, or the boundary lines of lots, or such lines
extended, unless otherwise indicated.
B. All streets, alleys, public ways, waterways and railroad rights of way, if not otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be in the
same zone as the property immediately abutting on such alleys, streets, public ways and railroad rights of way or waterways. Where the
centerline of a street, alley, public way, waterway or railroad right of way serves as a district boundary, the zoning of such areas, unless
otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be the same as that of the abutting property up to such centerline. (Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-
2001)
10-4-4: USE DISTRICT TABLE:
No building or premises improved or unimproved shall be used, and no building shall be hereafter erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, or
structurally altered, except for a purpose permitted in the district in which the building or land is located as shown in table 4-1 of this section.
TABLE 4-1
BROADVIEW ZONING ORDINANCE USE LIST
Key:
P - Permitted
S - Special
C - Conditional
Use List (A (B-1 (B-2 (C-1 (C-2 I (CC M
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 293/387
Single-
Family
Residence)
R-1
Single-
Family
Residence
Multiple-
Family
Residence)
R-2
Multi-
Family
Residence
Multiple-
Family
Residence)
R-3
Multi-
Family
Residence
Commercial)
C-1
Roosevelt
Road
Commercial
Commercial)
C-2
General
Commercial
Institutional
Industrial)
O/I
Office
And
Industrial
Manufacturing
Residential
Condominiums P P
Dwelling unit on
second floor above
commercial
S
Group homes S C C
Multiple-family
dwellings housing a
maximum of 6
dwelling units
P P
Multiple-family
dwellings housing
more than 6
dwelling units
P
Nursing homes S C C
Rooming house/bed
and breakfast
S P P
Senior citizen
housing
P P S
Single-family
dwellings
P P P
Townhouses P P
Two-family
dwellings
S P P
Institutional
Ambulance service P P P P
Cemeteries P
Churches (religious
institutions)
S S S P
Clubs and lodges
(private, fraternal,
religious)
P P P
Colleges and
universities
P
Community center P P P
Convents,
monasteries,
seminaries
S S S P
Hospitals S S P
Libraries S S S S S P
Medical/dental
clinics
P P P
Meeting hall P P P
Parks and
playgrounds,
privately owned and
operated
S S S P
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 294/387
Parks and
playgrounds,
publicly owned and
operated
P P P P
Post office P P P
Public garage P P P
Schools
(commercial or
trade)
P P P P
Schools (public or
private)
S S S P
Utilities and public
services:
Electrical
substations
S S S P P P
Fire stations S P P P P
Police stations S P P P P
Public
transportation
facilities
S P P P P P
Public works S P P P
Water filtration
plants
S S S P P P
Commercial
Adult use P
Amusement
establishment1
P P
Animal hospital S S S
Antique shop P P
Art galleries and
museums
P P P
Auction room P S
Automobile laundry
S
Automobile rental P
Automobile repair P P
Automobile service
station
S P
Automobile supply
store
P P
Automotive vehicle
sales
P
Bakery P P
Banks and financial
institutions
P P S S
Barbershop C C
Beauty shop C C
Blueprinting and
photocopying
establishment
P P P P
Building material P P P
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 295/387
sales2
Camera,
photographic supply
and studio
P P
Candy store P P
Catalog sales office
P P
Clothing rental store
P P
Clothing sales P P
Contractors and
construction office
S P P
Convenience store P P
Currency exchange
P P
Day spa P P
Daycare C C C C C C S
Delicatessen P P
Dog kennel S S S S
Dollar or discount
stores
P P
Drive-in restaurant P
Drugstore and
pharmacies
P P
Dry cleaning
establishment
P P S
Electrical and
household
appliance store
P P
Exterminating shop
S P P
Feed store P P
Florist shop P P
Food carryout
service
P P
Food store P P
Fortune
tellers/psychics
P
General
merchandise store
P P
General office P P P P
Gift shop P P
Golf courses3 S S S
Greenhouse S P S S
Gun dealers C C
Hardware store P P
Health club P P
Hobby shop P P
Home furnishings
store
P P
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 296/387
Home occupations C C C
Hotel/motel S P P
Indoor or outdoor
flea market
S S
Indoor theater P
Insurance office P P
Jewelry store P P
Job printing shop4 P P P
Law offices P P
Liquor store P P
Machinery
equipment sales5
P P P
Meat market6 P P
Mortuary P P
Music/record stores
P P
Newsstand P P
Nurseries7 P P
Office equipment
and supply store
P P
Open sales lot S S
Orthopedic and
medical appliance
store
P P
Painting and
decorating supplies
P P
Pawnshop P P
Personal loan
service
P P
Pet shop P P
Radio and television
broadcasting station
P P P
Radio, television
and audio
equipment store
P P
Real estate office P P
Recording studio P P P P
Restaurant P P S S
Restaurant
including live
dancing and
entertainment
S P
Self-service
laundromat
P P
Shooting ranges C C C
Sporting goods
store
P P
Stationery and book
store
P P
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 297/387
Tailor/clothing repair
P P
Tattoo parlor S
Tavern P P
Tobacco store P P
Trailer or car rental P
Truck sales P
Undertaking
establishment and
funeral parlor
P P
Upholstery and
drapery materials
shop
P P
Variety store P P
Wall and floor
covering store
P P
Industrial
Ammonia
production
S P
Asphalt plant S S
Caskets and casket
supplies
P P
Chlorine production
S P
Concrete mixing
plants
P P
Confectionery P P
Crematory S P
Creosote
manufacture or
treatment
P P
Fireworks or
explosive
manufacture or
storage
S P
General
manufacturing and
assembly
P P
Ironworks P P
Petroleum
processing or
refining
S P
Pharmaceutical
manufacture
P P
Plastics
manufacture
P P
Printing, publishing
and bookbinding
P P
Recycling center S S
Saltworks P P
Smelters S P
Soap manufacture P P
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 298/387
Stockyards or
slaughter of animals
S P
Synthetic polymers P P
Tar distillation or
manufacture
S P
Warehouse or
wholesale
P P
Wood products
manufacture
P P
Other
Accessory
buildings/uses
P P P P P P P P
Parking lots P P P P P
Telecommunications
towers
P P
Notes:
1.Includes bowling alleys, pool halls, dance halls, gymnasiums, swimming pools, and skating rinks.
2.With accessory outside storage, provided outside storage does not exceed 16 feet in height.
3.Not including commercially operated driving ranges or miniature golf courses.
4.Using presses having beds of not more than 14 inches and 20 inches.
5.Not including service, repair or reconditioning; and storage of all machinery shall be within enclosed buildings.
6.Including sale of meat and meat products to restaurants, hotels, clubs and other wholesale establishments when conducted as part of the retail
business on the premises.
7.Provided that no offensive odors or dusts are created, and further, that no retail sales are conducted from a store erected or maintained on the
premises.
(Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-2001; amd. Ord. 2004-28, 12-6-2004; Ord. 2008-24, 7-21-2008; Ord. 2008-42, 11-17-2008; Ord. 12-34, 5-21-2012)
10-4-5: INTERPRETATION OF USES:
The planning and zoning board shall have the right to permit any other use not specifically listed in section 10-4-4, table 4-1 of this chapter,
without formal amendment, provided that the proposed use is similar to and compatible with those uses permitted in the district in question, and
which is consistent with the purposes of this title. The planning and zoning board shall receive input from the zoning administrator prior to making
a determination on unlisted uses. A denial may be appealed to the Broadview village board. (Ord. 2008-24, 7-21-2008)
10-4-6: SPECIAL AND CONDITIONAL ZONING DISTRICT USE STANDARDS:
The use standards of this section apply to respective use types whether they are allowed as permitted uses, conditional uses, special uses, or
accessory uses: (Ord. 2005-19, 8-1-2005)
A. Off Street Parking:
1. Automobile and truck parking facilities shall be provided for each use shown in section 10-6-5, table 6-1 of this title, as required or permitted
in chapter 6, "Off Street Parking And Loading", of this title.
B. Recreational Uses:
1. Shooting range shall be located not closer than one thousand feet (1,000') to any similar use, residence, daycare facility, school, park, liquor
store or bar.
C. Residential Uses:
1. Nursing homes are subject to the following:
a. Each home shall be duly licensed and, prior to admitting residents, the operator shall demonstrate that the dwelling will comply with
applicable licensing and code standards.
b. Applicant shall submit a statement of the exact nature of the home, the qualifications of the agency or agencies that will operate the
home, staffing pattern of the home, and the number and nature of the residents who will reside in the home.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 299/387
c. The home shall, to the extent feasible, conform to the type and outward appearance of the area in which it is located.
d. Prior to occupancy, a certificate of zoning compliance shall be applied for and received.
2. Group homes are subject to the following:
a. Each home shall be duly licensed and, prior to admitting residents, the operator shall demonstrate that the dwelling will comply with
applicable licensing and code standards.
b. Such homes shall be located not less than six hundred feet (600') from any other residential care home.
c. Applicant shall submit a statement of the exact nature of the home, the qualifications of the agency or agencies that will operate the
home, staffing pattern of the home, and the number and nature of the residents who will reside in the home.
d. The home shall, to the extent feasible, conform to the type and outward appearance of the area in which it is located.
e. Prior to occupancy, a certificate of zoning compliance shall be applied for and received.
3. Home occupations are subject to the following:
a. All receipt and delivery of merchandise, goods, or equipment shall be made by either carrier service or passenger automobile owned by
the resident and no such receipt, delivery or any other transacting of business within the residence, except emergency service, shall be
made outside of normal business hours.
b. No alteration of the principal building shall be made which changes the residential character of the dwelling.
c. Except for bed and breakfasts and home daycare facilities, no home occupation shall occupy more than twenty five percent (25%) of the
total heated floor area in the dwelling unit in which it is located.
d. All home occupations shall be conducted entirely within the principal residential building.
e. No outdoor storage shall be permitted.
f. Mechanical or electrical equipment which is not normally used for computer, office, domestic or hobby purposes is prohibited.
g. No home occupation shall be operated in such a manner as to cause offensive noise, vibration, smoke, heat, humidity or glare; or in any
way cause a nuisance or safety hazard to the occupants of nearby properties.
h. No home occupation may generate a significant increase in pedestrian or vehicular traffic for the residential district in which it is located.
i. Home occupations shall not include animal hospitals, barbershops, beauty parlors, clinics or hospitals, mortuaries, private clubs, repair
shops, restaurants, or kennels.
j. Garage sales, retail sale parties and other similar functions held at a residence shall not constitute a home occupation and shall be
permitted under this title as incidental to a residential use, provided that said activity is not conducted for more than three (3) calendar
days during any calendar year.
k. No exterior signage with respect to business use is allowed.
D. Business Uses:
1. Dry cleaning and pressing establishments within commercial districts shall employ facilities for the cleaning and pressing of not more than
thirty (30) pounds' capacity.
2. Daycare facilities shall not be located closer than one thousand feet (1,000') to another daycare facility, liquor store, bar, firearms dealer, or
shooting range.
3. Job printing shops within commercial districts shall not have presses of more than fourteen inches (14") and twenty inches (20").
4. Drive-up or drive-through facilities designed for transactions of business from customers' vehicles shall obtain a special use permit. In
considering the issuance of a special use permit, in addition to the general requirements for a special use, the Broadview planning
commission and the village board shall consider the following:
a. Traffic flow and congestion which may result from the drive-up facility, particularly facilities utilizing a public street or alley.
b. Interference with the operations of other businesses or uses in proximity of the drive-up facility.
c. Whether the drive-up facility is constructed entirely upon private property owned or controlled by the business and is designed to provide
for adequate stacking of vehicles.
d. Any other matter or information determined to be relevant to the reasonableness of the proposed use.
5. Firearms dealers shall be located not closer than one thousand feet (1,000') from any firearms dealer, daycare facility, school, park, liquor
store, or bar.
6. Liquor stores shall be located not closer than one thousand feet (1,000') from any firearms dealer, daycare facility, school, or park.
7. Shooting ranges shall not be located closer than one thousand feet (1,000') from any daycare facility, liquor store, bar, firearms dealer, or
other shooting range.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 300/387
8. Barbershops shall not be located closer than one thousand feet (1,000') from any beauty parlor or other barbershop.
9. Beauty parlors shall not be located closer than one thousand feet (1,000') from any barbershop or other beauty parlor.
10. Tattoo parlors and body piercing establishments are subject to the following:
a. All tattoo parlors and body piercing establishments shall be duly licensed.
b. Written parental consent shall be obtained before any person under the age of twenty one (21) is tattooed or body pierced.
c. No person, while on the premises of any tattoo or body piercing establishment shall possess, consume, sell, dispense, provide, give,
keep or maintain any alcoholic beverage. (Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-2001)
11. Adult businesses are subject to the following:
a. It shall be unlawful for any adult business to sell, distribute, or permit beer or alcoholic beverages on the premises.
b. In addition to the regulations set forth in chapter 9 of this title, all signs for adult businesses, other than directional signage, shall be flat
wall signs. Also, a one square foot sign shall be placed on the door of each entrance to the adult business stating the hours of operation
and adults only admittance. No merchandise or pictures of the products or entertainment on the premises shall be displayed in window
areas or any other exterior area of the building or site that can be seen by the public from the outside of the building.
c. Only one adult business shall be permitted per block face.
d. No operator, employee or agent of an adult business shall operate, be open for business, or permit any person not an employee of the
adult business other than an adult hotel or motel, to remain on the premises during the following hours: (Ord. 2008-42, 11-17-2008)
(1) In the case of retail adult businesses, between eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. Central Standard Time or
daylight saving time, whichever is in effect.
(2) In the case of nonretail adult businesses, between eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00) noon Central Standard Time
or daylight saving time, whichever is in effect. (Ord. 2008-42, 11-17-2008; amd. Ord. 12-34, 5-21-2012)
e. Adult businesses which are classified as special uses, in addition to satisfying the standards for special uses set forth in section 10-7-4 of
this title:
(1) Must be located a minimum of one thousand feet (1,000') from the property boundaries of any school, daycare center, cemetery, public
park, forest preserve, and public housing, and
(2) Must be located a minimum of seven hundred fifty feet (750') from the property boundaries of any place of religious worship, and
(3) Must be located a minimum of five hundred fifty feet (550') from the property boundaries of any residentially zoned property, and (Ord.
2008-42, 11-17-2008)
(4) Must not be located on any lot that has a property line within one thousand feet (1,000') of the property line of where any other adult
business is located, and
(5) Must be located a minimum distance from protected areas and shall conform to the requirements set forth in 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-5-1.5. (Ord. 12-34, 5-21-2012)
E. Outdoor Storage: Outdoor storage, display and sales in commercial, office/industrial, and manufacturing districts shall be allowed only in the
following situations:
1. Vehicles and trucks for sale at commercial establishments with a primary land use of automotive vehicle sales or truck sales.
2. Raw materials at industrial or manufacturing land uses, provided that the lot is not adjacent to a commercial or residential district. When the
lot is adjacent to a residential or commercial district, the materials shall be enclosed within an area that is effectively screened from view by:
a. A solid wall or solid fence that is a minimum of five feet (5') in height and a maximum of six feet (6') in height, or
b. Dense vegetative material that is at least five feet (5') in height.
3. When, as an accessory use of land, the outdoor storage is a part of temporary retail operations that are, by their nature, confined to a
specific season, such as the sale of bedding plants or snowblowers, provided that:
a. The area for outdoor storage, display and sales does not exceed five hundred (500) square feet; and
b. The height of materials stored does not exceed ten feet (10').
4. At retail establishments where the items, because of their size, bulk, weight, or volume, cannot be easily moved indoors at the close of
business, provided that:
a. The height of the materials stored outdoors does not exceed twelve feet (12'); and
b. The height of the materials stored outside is enclosed, except for reasonable openings for vehicles and walkways, within an area that is
effectively screened from view by: 1) a permanent wall or fence, or 2) dense vegetative material of a height that will provide effective
screening; and
c. The size of the enclosed storage area is limited to a maximum of twenty percent (20%) of the retail establishment's gross floor area.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 301/387
5. When the village board designates certain days and locations for special promotions or activities, e.g., grand openings.
6. As part of a special use permit for an open sales lot. Such a special use permit should specify restrictions on:
a. The items for outdoor storage; and
b. The manner in which the items are stored or displayed, e.g., screening, enclosed in a temporary tent; and
c. The period, duration, and frequency of the outdoor storage, e.g., annually between certain dates. (Ord. 2004-28, 12-6-2004)
F. New Or Used Automobile Sales:
1. Intended Purpose: The purpose of these regulations is to assure that a facility for the purpose of new or used automobile sales is designed
to be as compatible with adjacent uses as possible. The regulations are intended to address the blighting influence of the concentration of
these facilities and the transient nature of used car sales facilities.
2. Lot Size: Automobile sales facilities must have a minimum lot size of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
3. Permanent Structure: Automobile sales facilities must have a permanent structure on a foundation that meets all building code
requirements to house the office and support services. The structure must be a minimum size of one thousand (1,000) square feet. It also
shall be heated and contain toilet facilities for the employees. Office trailers, portable buildings, or mobile homes shall not be used for this
purpose.
4. Repair Facilities: Any accessory automobile repair service facility for the automobiles for sale and/or those purchased at the facility may be
provided. The accessory facility must comply with all applicable regulations found elsewhere in this title.
5. Parking And Permanent Surfaces: All surfaces used for the display of automobiles or other products must be paved in conformance with
chapter 6, "Off Street Parking And Loading", of this title. In addition to employee parking, one space per every ten (10) vehicles for sale shall
be provided for customer parking. All automobiles shall be contained within the subject lot. Parking or displaying vehicles within the public
right of way is prohibited.
6. Signage: All signs shall comply with chapter 9, "Signs", of this title. (Ord. 2006-10, 5-1-2006)
10-4-7: SCOPE OF REQUIREMENTS:
Except as may be provided elsewhere in this title, the provisions of this chapter shall establish the minimum and maximum requirements of area,
bulk, density, and setbacks for every zoning district established by this title. No building or structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged,
reconstructed, or structurally altered in violation of the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-2001)
Chapter 5
NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES
10-5-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
A. This title establishes separate districts, each of which is an appropriate area for the location of the uses, which are permitted in that district.
The purpose of this section is to provide for the regulation of nonconforming buildings, structures and uses, and to specify those
circumstances and conditions under which those nonconforming buildings, structures and uses shall be permitted to continue.
B. The provisions of this section are designed to curtail substantial investment in nonconformities and to bring about their eventual improvement
or elimination in order to preserve the integrity of this title and enhance the character of the village. Any nonconforming use, structure, or lot
which lawfully existed as of the effective date hereof and any use, structure, or lot which has become nonconforming as a result of the
adoption of this title or any subsequent reclassification of zoning districts or other amendment to this title, may be continued or maintained only
in accordance with the terms of this chapter.
C. This chapter is intended to regulate and limit the development and continued existence of uses, structures, and lots established prior to the
effective date hereof, which do not conform to the requirements herein.
D. For the purpose of this section, a building or structure lawfully constructed or established on the effective date hereof, shall be deemed to
include any building or structure for which a building permit has been lawfully issued prior to such date, and on which construction is begun
within the required period of time as set forth in this title. (Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-2001)
10-5-2: CONTINUANCE OF NONCONFORMING USE:
Any nonconforming building, structure or use which existed lawfully at the time of adoption of this title and which remains nonconforming upon the
adoption of this title, or of any subsequent amendments thereto, is subject to the regulations which follow. (Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-2001)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 302/387
10-5-3: EXPANSION OF NONCONFORMING USE:
The nonconforming use of a part of a building or structure may be expanded within the building or structure in which the use is presently located,
but no changes or structural alterations shall be made unless such changes or structural alterations, and the use thereof, conforms to all the
regulations of the district in which the building or structure is located. (Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-2001)
10-5-4: CHANGE OF NONCONFORMING USE:
A. A nonconforming use shall not be changed to another nonconforming use, except where an application for such a change has been submitted
to and approved by the zoning administrator.
B. Any part of a structure or land occupied by a nonconforming use, which is changed to or replaced by a use conforming to the provisions of this
title shall not thereafter be used or occupied by a nonconforming use. (Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-2001)
10-5-5: DISCONTINUANCE OR ABANDONMENT OF NONCONFORMING USE:
A. Whenever any part of a structure or land occupied by a nonconforming use is changed to or replaced by a use conforming to the provisions of
this title, such premises shall not thereafter be used or occupied by any nonconforming use, even though the structure may have been
originally designed and constructed for the prior nonconforming use.
B. Whenever a nonconforming use of a structure, or part thereof, has been discontinued for a period of one hundred eighty (180) consecutive
days, or whenever there is evident a clear intent on the part of the owner to abandon a nonconforming use, such use shall not after being
discontinued be reestablished, and the use of the premises thereafter shall conform with the use regulations of the zoning district in which it is
located. (Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-2001)
10-5-6: REPAIRS AND ALTERATIONS OF NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES:
A. Repairs may be made to a nonconforming structure, provided that no structural alterations shall be made in or to a structure, all or substantially
all of which is designed or intended for a use not permitted in the district in which it is located. However, structural alterations may be made if
they are required by law or are necessary to make the structure and use thereof conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located.
For the purpose of this section, ordinary repairs, as determined by the building commissioner, shall include the replacement of storage tanks
where the safety of operation of the installation requires such replacement.
B. No structural alterations shall be made in a building or other structure containing a nonconforming use, except in the following situations:
1. When the alteration will result in eliminating the nonconforming use.
2. A structure containing a residential nonconforming use may be altered or enlarged, provided that the enlargement or alteration itself
conforms to the requirements of the zoning district, and provided no structural alteration shall be made which would increase the number of
dwelling units. (Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-2001)
10-5-7: ADDITIONS AND EXPANSIONS OF NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES:
A. A building and/or structure which is nonconforming as to lot size requirements or building bulk regulations shall not be added to, expanded, or
enlarged unless such addition, expansion, or enlargement conforms to all the regulations of the district in which it is located.
B. No structure partially occupied by a nonconforming use shall be altered in such a way as to permit the enlargement or expansion of the space
occupied by such nonconforming use.
C. A structure which is nonconforming with respect to yards, lot coverage, or any other element of bulk regulated herein shall not be altered or
expanded in any manner which would increase the degree or extent of its nonconformity with respect to the bulk regulations of the district in
which it is located.
D. A nonconforming building or structure which is nonconforming only as to bulk shall be added to or enlarged in any manner unless such
additions and enlargements thereto are made to conform to all regulations of the district in which it is located. (Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-2001)
10-5-8: RESTORATION OF A DAMAGED NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE:
A. A structure which is nonconforming as to lot size requirements or building bulk regulations, and which is destroyed or damaged by fire or other
casualty or act of God to the extent that the cost of restoration shall exceed fifty percent (50%) of the value based on the Cook County
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 303/387
assessor's records for the entire structure shall not be restored unless such structure and use conforms to the provisions of the zoning district
in which it is located.
B. If the cost of restoration of such damaged structure does not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the value based on the Cook County assessor's
records for the entire structure no repairs or reconstruction shall be made unless such restoration is commenced within six (6) months from
the date of the fire or other casualty or act of God, and is diligently pursued until completion. The structure may be restored to its original
condition and the occupancy or use of such structure may be continued which existed at the time of such partial destruction. Failure to initiate
or conclude restoration within these limits shall constitute abandonment as defined in section 10-5-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-
2001)
10-5-9: RELOCATION OF A NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE:
No building or structure shall be moved in whole, or in part, to any other location on the same or any other lot unless every portion of such
building or structure which is moved, and the use thereof, is made to conform to all of the regulations of the district in which it is to be located.
(Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-2001)
10-5-10: ACQUISITION OF NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES:
A. The village may at any time, and from time to time, by ordinance duly enacted and in accordance with the authority vested in it by state law1:
1. Acquire by purchase, condemnation or otherwise, any buildings or structures which do not conform to the standards fixed by the village
pursuant to state law, and all land which is necessary or appropriate for the rehabilitation or redevelopment of any area blighted by
substandard buildings or structures;
2. Remove or demolish all such nonconforming buildings or structures so acquired;
3. Hold and use any remaining property for public purposes;
4. Sell, lease or exchange such property as is not required for public purposes, subject to the provisions of this title or of any amendment
hereto.
B. No such acquisition by condemnation shall be made until such time as the planning commission, at the request of the board of trustees or
upon its own initiative, shall have made a study of the area within which such nonconforming building or structure is located, and shall have
filed a written report on such study with the board of trustees. (Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-2001)
Chapter 6
OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING
10-6-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to alleviate or prevent the congestion of the public streets, and so promote the safety and welfare of the public by
establishing minimum requirements for the off street parking and loading and unloading of motor vehicles in accordance with the use to which
property is put. (Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-2001)
10-6-2: GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR PARKING AND LOADING:
A. Scope Of Regulations: The off street parking and loading provisions of this chapter shall apply as follows:
1. For all buildings and structures erected and all uses of land established after the effective date hereof, accessory parking and loading
facilities shall be provided as required by the regulations of this section. However, where a building permit has been issued prior to the
effective date hereof, and provided that construction is begun within one year of such effective date, and diligently prosecuted to completion,
only the less restrictive parking and loading standards as required prior to the effective date shall be provided.
2. When the intensity of use of any building, structure or premises shall be increased through addition of dwelling units, gross floor area,
seating capacity or other unit of measurement specified herein for required parking or loading facilities, parking and loading facilities as
required herein shall be provided for such increase in intensity of use.
However, no building or structure lawfully erected, or use lawfully established prior to the effective date hereof, shall be required to provide
such additional parking or loading facilities unless and until the increase in density or intensity of use exceeds fifteen percent (15%) in units
of measurement. In the event that this situation occurs, parking or loading facilities as required herein shall be provided for the total
increase.
3. Whenever the existing use of a building or structure is changed to a new use, parking or loading facilities shall be provided as required for
such new use.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 304/387
B. Existing Parking And Loading Facilities: Accessory off street parking or loading facilities which are located on the same lot as the building or
use served, and which were in existence on the effective date hereof or were provided voluntarily after such effective date, shall not hereafter
be reduced below, or if already less than, shall not further be reduced below the requirements of this title for a similar new building or use.
(Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-2001)
C. Roosevelt Road Corridor Parking Requirements: For the purpose of allowing the existing mix and density of uses within the Roosevelt Road
business district, additional off street parking is not required at locations where limited parking or no parking is currently provided. New uses
which are similar to those in operation at the time that this title is adopted are not required to add additional parking. However, where new
construction or a change in existing use warrants additional parking, one-half (1/2) of the standard parking requirements for commercial uses
detailed in this section, excluding restaurants, shall be provided. Due to the nature of restaurants and the additional parking that they require,
no reduction in required parking shall be granted without a variation, as described in this title. (Ord. 2006-10, 5-1-2006)
D. Permissive Parking And Loading Facilities: Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the voluntary establishment of off street parking
or loading facilities to serve any existing use of land or buildings provided that all regulations herein governing the location, design,
improvement and operation of such facilities are adhered to.
E. Damage Or Destruction: For any conforming or legally nonconforming building or use which is in existence on the effective date hereof, which
subsequent thereto is damaged or destroyed by fire, collapse, explosion or other cause, and which is reconstructed, reestablished or repaired,
off street parking or loading facilities equivalent to any maintained at the time of such damage or destruction shall be restored or continued in
operation. However, in no case shall it be necessary to provide parking or loading facilities in excess of those previously provided.
F. Control Of Off Site Parking Facilities: When required parking facilities are provided on land other than the zoning lot on which the building or
use served by such facilities is located, they shall be and remain in the same possession or ownership as the zoning lot occupied by the
building or use to which the parking facilities are accessory. No such off site parking facilities shall be authorized and no occupancy permit
shall be issued where the plans call for parking facilities to be located on a lot other than on the same zoning lot as the principal use until and
unless the planning and zoning board has reviewed the plans, heard the applicant and made findings that the zoning lot and the remote site
are in common ownership and that the off site parking facilities will be maintained at all times during the life of the proposed use or building.
G. Submission Of Plot Plan: Any application for a building permit, or for a certificate of occupancy where no building permit is required, shall
include therewith a site plan, drawn to scale and fully dimensioned, showing any parking or loading facilities to be provided in compliance with
this chapter. (Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-2001)
H. Landscape Requirements: Landscaping for off street parking areas shall be provided in accordance with subsection 10-8-4I, "Landscaping", of
this title. (Ord. 2006-15, 6-5-2006)
10-6-3: PARKING REGULATIONS:
A. Use Of Parking Facilities: Off street parking facilities accessory to residential uses located in any residential district shall be used solely for the
parking of passenger automobiles or company vehicles of comparable size, owned or used by occupants of the dwelling structures to which
such parking facilities are accessory or by guests of said occupants. Under no circumstances shall required parking facilities accessory to
residential structures be used for the parking of automobiles belonging to the employees, owners, tenants, visitors or customers of business or
manufacturing establishments.
B. Joint Parking Facilities: Off street parking facilities for properties with separate buildings or uses, or for buildings with mixed uses, may be
provided collectively on the zoning lot, provided that the total number of spaces so located together shall not be less than the sum of the
separate requirements for each use.
C. Shared Parking Facilities: Cumulative parking requirements for mixed use occupancies may be reduced where it can be determined that the
peak requirement of the several occupancies occurs at different times (either daily or seasonally). The shared parking report published by the
urban land institute may be used as a guideline in the estimation of parking demand for mixed use buildings and sites.
D. Computation: When determination of the number of off street parking spaces required by this chapter results in a requirement of a fractional
space, any fraction of one-half (1/2) or less may be disregarded while a fraction in excess of one-half (1/2) shall be counted as one parking
space.
E. Size: A required off street parking space shall be at least nine feet (9') in width and at least nineteen feet (19') in length, exclusive of access
drives or aisles, ramps, columns, or office or work areas. The nineteen foot (19') length may include up to two feet (2') of abutting space in a
vegetative buffer of landscaped area over which a parked vehicle may extend, provided that no parked vehicle may project over a sidewalk or
other pedestrian walkway such that the sidewalk is reduced to less than five feet (5') in width. Each required off street parking space shall
have a vertical clearance of at least seven feet (7').
F. Access:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 305/387
1. Each required off street parking space shall open directly upon an aisle or driveway of at least the width below, based upon the angle of the
parking stalls provided and whether the aisle serves one or two (2) rows of parking spaces:
Parking Angle Serving One Row Serving Two Rows
Parallel 12 feet 12 feet
30 degrees 12 feet 12 feet
45 degrees 13 feet 14 feet
60 degrees 18 feet 19 feet
90 degrees 20 feet 22 feet
2. All off-street parking facilities shall be designed with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner which will least
interfere with traffic movements. No driveway across public property nor curb cut shall exceed a width of thirty feet (30'). Driveways shall be
located at least one foot (1') from the property line.
3. Shared driveways shall not be permitted in residential districts.
4. Off-street parking spaces may be located in any yard except required front yards, but shall not be closer than one foot (1') to the lot line. All
such parking spaces are subject to the regulations of this chapter.
G. Design And Maintenance:
1. Open And Enclosed Parking Spaces: Accessory parking spaces located on the same lot as occupied by the use served may be open to the
sky or enclosed in a building. Accessory parking spaces located in a residential district elsewhere than on the same lot occupied by the use
served shall be open to the sky except when otherwise allowed as a special use.
2. Surfacing: All open off-street parking areas and driveways shall be improved with a compacted gravel base, not less than four inches (9")
thick, surfaced with asphalt, not less than three inches (3") thick, concrete or some comparable all-weather dustless material. Construction
of such surfacing shall be completed within one year of the issuance of a building permit.
3. Drainage: The surface drainage from every off-street parking area shall be in such a manner as not to overflow onto adjoining property. Offstreet
parking areas covering less than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet may have their surface drainage discharge directly
into public rights of way. Off-street parking areas covering less than two thousand (2,000) square feet may have their surface drainage
discharge directly into public alleys.
Off-street parking areas that exceed the above limitations shall have their surface drainage contained within their paved areas and removed
by means of drainage structures and storm sewers. Where storm sewers must connect to the existing village sewer system, the connection
shall be preceded by a catch basin structure having a half-trap device on its outlet pipe and a flow restrictor on its inlet pipe. The size of the
flow restrictor shall be based upon the metropolitan water reclamation district of greater Chicago (MWRDGC) storm sewer detention
requirements.
4. Lighting: Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking areas shall be directed away from residential properties in such a way as not to
create a nuisance. Lighting should have a total cutoff of light at an angle less than ninety degrees (90) and is located so that a light source
is completely shielded from the direct view of an observer five feet (5') above the ground at the point where the cutoff angle intersects the
ground.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 306/387
5. Signs: Incidental signs are permitted in parking areas in accordance with the regulations of chapter 9 of this title.
6. Repair And Service: No motor vehicle repair work of any kind shall be permitted in conjunction with accessory off-street parking facilities in
a residence district, except for minor repairs of the occupant's personal vehicle, provided that the vehicle is not rendered immobile for more
than two (2) days.
The sale of gasoline and motor oil in conjunction with accessory off-street parking facilities is not permitted in any residence district. (Ord.
2001-08A, 4-2-2001)
10-6-4: LOCATION OF ACCESSORY OFF-STREET PARKING FACILITIES:
The location of off-street parking spaces in relation to the use served shall be as prescribed hereinafter. All distances specified shall be walking
distances between such parking spaces and a main entrance to the use served.
A. For Uses In A Residence District: Parking spaces accessory to dwellings shall be located on the same zoning lot as the principal use. Spaces
accessory to uses other than dwellings may be located on a lot adjacent to, or directly across a street or alley from, the lot occupied by the
principal use, but in no case at a distance in excess of three hundred feet (300') from such use.
B. For Uses In Business And Manufacturing Districts: All required parking spaces shall be within one thousand feet (1,000') of the principal use.
However, no parking spaces accessory to a use in a business or manufacturing district shall be located in a residence district, except that
municipal parking lots may be allowed within two hundred feet (200') of and adjacent to any business or industrial district by special use permit
in accordance with chapter 5 of this title. (Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-2001)
10-6-5: SCHEDULE OF PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
A. Applicability: Accessory off-street parking spaces shall be provided for the following uses as required hereinafter. For uses not listed herein, the
parking requirements shall be determined by the zoning administrator. Parking spaces required on an employee basis shall be based on the
maximum number of employees on duty or residing, or both, on the premises at any one time. For the uses listed in table 6-1 of this section,
off-street loading berths shall be provided on the basis of gross floor area of buildings or portions thereof devoted to such uses in the amounts
shown:
TABLE 6-1
Use
Minimum Number Of
Parking Spaces Required
Minimum Required
Loading Spaces
Residential And Lodging Uses
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 307/387
Child daycare center 1 parking space per employee, plus 1/10 of 1 space per
person of licensed capacity
No loading space required
Dwelling units (singlefamily)
2 parking spaces per dwelling unit No loading spaces required
Dwelling units (multifamily)
Studio 11/4 parking spaces per dwelling unit No loading spaces required
1 bedroom 11/2 parking spaces per dwelling unit No loading spaces required
2 bedroom 2 parking spaces per dwelling unit No loading spaces required
Hotel/motel/bed and
breakfast
1 parking space per guest room plus 1 space per every 2
employees plus any spaces required for restaurant,
lounge, banquet areas, and meeting rooms
As required for restaurant or lounge
Nursing homes 1 parking space for every 5 beds, plus 1 space for every
self-care unit, and 1 space for every 2 employees on peak
shift
1 loading space required
Commercial Uses
Automobile service
stations
1 parking space per 2 employees No loading space is required
Bowling alleys 4 parking spaces per each lane, plus additional parking as
required for any affiliated restaurant or bar, or banquet
facility
Same as general retail
Clubs, lodges Parking spaces equal to 10 percent of the capacity in
persons
As required for any affiliated restaurant, lounge
Coin-operated
laundries
1 parking space per 4 machines No loading space is required
Funeral parlors,
undertaking
establishments
12 parking spaces, plus 1 space for each funeral vehicle 1 loading space is required
General retail 31/3 parking spaces per 1,000 sf of GFA No loading spaces required for the first 10,000 sf,
then 1 space per 30,000 sf up to 70,000 sf, plus 1
space per 80,000 sf thereafter
Personal service uses
21/2 parking spaces per 1,000 sf of GFA None for first 30,000 sf, then 1 per 100,000 sf
thereafter
Restaurants with
drive-through or
carryout facilities
1 parking space per 3 seats, plus 3 per cashier station. 8
stacking spaces per drive-through window
1 loading space per 40,000 sf of GFA
Restaurants without
drive-through facilities,
bars and taverns
11 parking spaces per 1,000 sf of GFA 1 loading space per 40,000 sf of GFA
Theaters 1 parking space per 4 seats 1 loading space per 100,000 sf of GFA
Office Uses
Financial institutions 4 parking spaces per 1,000 sf, plus 5 stacking spaces for
each drive-through teller position
None for the first 10,000 sf, then 1 per 50,000 sf
up to 110,000 sf plus 1 per 100,000 sf thereafter
General offices 4 parking spaces per 1,000 sf of GFA None for the first 30,000 sf, then 1 per 100,000
thereafter
Medical/dental offices
and clinics
3 parking spaces for each doctor or dentist, plus 1 parking
space per employee
Same as general office
Manufacturing And Wholesale Uses
Manufacturing 2/3 of 1 parking space per employee on peak shift, plus 1
space per 500 sf of floor area open to public
1 loading space per 25,000 sf up to 50,000 sf,
plus 1 for the next 50,000 sf then 1 per 100,000 sf
thereafter
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 308/387
Wholesale and
storage
2/3 of 1 parking space per employee on peak shift, plus 1
space per 500 sf of floor area open to public
1 for the first 50,000 sf of GFA plus 1 per 100,000
sf thereafter
Civic And Institutional Uses
Churches 1/4 of 1 parking space per person in permitted capacity,
plus adequate space for all vehicles associated with the
church
1 loading space per 100,000 sf of GFA
Community centers 4 parking spaces per 1,000 sf of GFA No loading space is required
Public services or
public utilities
1 parking space per 2 employees No loading space is required
Schools (nursery,
elementary, high)
1 parking space per classroom, plus 1/5 of 1 space per
student over driving age
1 loading space per 100,000 sf of GFA
(Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-2001)
10-6-6: AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Number Of Spaces: In any self-park facility, a certain number of spaces must be set aside for wheelchair access as summarized in the
following table:
Total Spaces Minimum Accessible Spaces
1 to 25 1
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 9
501 to 1,000 2 percent of total
1,001 and over 20 plus 1 per 100 over 1,000 spaces
B. Exceptions:
1. Outpatient units at medical care facilities: ten percent (10%) of total spaces for that facility.
2. Medical care facilities specifically for treatment of the mobility impaired: twenty percent (20%) of the total spaces for that facility.
C. Accessible Parking Space Dimensions:
1. Standard Accessible Spaces: Accessible spaces shall consist of an eight foot (8') wide parking stall adjacent to an eight foot (8') wide
access aisle.
2. Vertical Clearance: Along at least one aisle to and from each accessible space, a minimum clearance of eight feet two inches (8'2") (98
inches) is required.
D. Location Of Accessible Spaces:
1. Accessible parking spaces serving a particular building shall be located on the shortest accessible route of travel to an accessible entrance.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 309/387
2. Accessible parking spaces may be provided on one level of a multi-level parking structure.
E. Accessible Route:
1. At least one accessible route with a continuous minimum clearance of thirty six inches (36") must be provided from accessible parking
spaces to the nearest accessible pedestrian entrance.
2. If an accessible route has less than sixty inches (60") clear width then passing spaces at least sixty inches by sixty inches (60" x 60") must
be located at reasonable intervals not to exceed every two hundred feet (200').
3. The floor slope along an accessible route shall not exceed a ratio of one to twelve (1:12) with a maximum rise of thirty inches (30") for any
run.
4. A level landing shall be provided at the bottom of each ramp and top of each ramp run. The width of the landing shall be at least as wide as
the ramp run and at least sixty inches (60") long. At changes in direction a sixty inch by sixty inch (60" x 60") landing shall be provided.
5. The cross slope of ramps shall not exceed a ratio of one to fifty (1:50).
6. The floor slope at loading zones shall not exceed a ratio of one to fifty (1:50).
7. It is preferable to provide the accessible route at the front of the stalls. Also, the accessible route shall avoid crossing lanes of vehicular
travel. When crossing vehicular travel lanes is necessary, the route of travel shall be designated and marked by a crosswalk.
F. Relation To State Or Federal Standards: Where any conflicts with state or federal legislation may exist, the state and federal standards shall
control. (Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-2001)
10-6-7: OFF-STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
A. Location: All required loading berths shall be located on the same zoning lot as the principal use. No loading berth for vehicles over two (2)
tons' capacity shall be closer than fifty feet (50') to any property in a residence district unless completely enclosed by building walls, or a
uniformly painted solid fence or wall, or any combination thereof, not less than six feet (6') in height. No permitted or required loading berth
shall be located in any required front or side yard. No permitted or required loading berth shall be located within twenty five feet (25') of the
nearest point of intersection of any two (2) streets.
B. Size: A required loading berth shall be at least ten feet (10') in width by at least sixty feet (60') in length, exclusive of aisles and maneuvering
space, and shall have a vertical clearance of at least fourteen feet (14').
C. Access: Each required off-street loading berth shall be designed with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner
which will least interfere with traffic movements.
D. Surfacing: All open off-street loading berths shall be improved with a compacted macadam base, not less than seven inches (7") thick,
surfaced with not less than two inches (2") of asphalt, concrete or some comparable all-weather dustless material.
E. Repair And Service: No motor vehicle repair work or service of any kind shall be permitted in conjunction with loading facilities provided in any
residence or business districts.
1. Space allocated to any off-street loading berth shall not, while so allocated, be used to satisfy the space requirements for any off-street
parking facilities or portions thereof.
2. For uses other than prescribed for in this section, loading berths adequate in number and size to serve such uses, as determined by the
zoning administrator, shall be provided.
3. Uses for which off-street loading facilities are required herein but which are located in buildings of less floor area than the minimum
prescribed for such required facilities shall provide adequate receiving facilities off any adjacent alley, service drive, or open space on the
same lot which is accessible by motor vehicle. (Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-2001)
Chapter 7
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
10-7-1: ENFORCEMENT:
The zoning administrator, or other officials that have been or shall be duly appointed by the village board of trustees, shall enforce this title, and in
addition thereto, and in furtherance of their authority shall:
A. Issue all certificates of occupancy and make and maintain records thereof.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 310/387
B. Conduct inspections of buildings, structures and uses of land to determine compliance with the terms of this title.
C. Maintain permanent and current records of this title, including, but not limited to, all maps, amendments, special uses, variations, appeals and
applications therefor.
D. Receive, file and forward to the zoning administrator a copy of all applications for special uses or petitions for amendments to this title.
E. Receive, file and forward to the planning and zoning board1 copies of all applications for appeals, variations and other matters on which the
planning and zoning board is required to review under this title.
F. Provide such clerical and technical assistance as may be required by the plan commission/planning and zoning board in the exercise of its
duties.
G. Prepare, and coordinate with a local newspaper to publish, notice of public hearings scheduled for the plan commission/planning and zoning
board. (Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-2001)
10-7-2: CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY:
A. Certificates Required:
1. No land shall be occupied or used and no building or structure hereafter erected or altered shall be occupied or used in whole or in part for
any purpose whatsoever until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the building commissioner and, except for dwellings,
posted on the premises stating that the intended use of land and building complies with all the building and zoning ordinances of the village
and with the provisions of these regulations.
2. A new certificate of occupancy is required if the occupancy, ownership or use of any building, structure or land is changed, or if alterations
are made to any building, structure or land or part thereof. A new certificate voids any certificate of prior date. The requirement of a new
certificate of occupancy for all transfers of ownership of real estate in the village shall be reflected on all real estate title insurance reports
conducted precedent to the transfer of ownership to give public notice of said mandatory certification.
B. Application And Issuance Of Certificate:
1. Change Of Occupancy, Ownership Or Use: Written application shall be made for a certificate of occupancy by the owner or duly authorized
agent for the owner of any building, structure or land, prior to any change of occupancy, ownership or use. Written application shall also be
made for a certificate of occupancy by the new occupant of a commercial or industrial building or structure prior to occupancy. Said
certificate shall be issued within ten (10) days after written application therefor; provided, the building or structure shall be entitled thereto, or
the building commissioner shall state in writing the reasons for his refusal to issue said certificate.
If a business license is required, the certificate of occupancy shall be issued in conjunction with the business license.
2. New Buildings And Alterations: Written application shall be made for a certificate of occupancy coincidental to the application for a building
permit. A certificate of occupancy shall be issued within ten (10) days after the erection or alteration of such building has been completed
provided, the building or alteration shall be entitled thereto, or the building commissioner shall state in writing the reasons for his refusal to
issue said certificate.
3. Inspections: Before any certificate of occupancy shall be issued, the building commissioner shall order a thorough inspection by all
applicable inspectors and inspection branches of the building department, and no certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless the
building or structure shall comply with all provisions of this title and amendments thereto and the building commissioner shall have signed
approval from all applicable inspectors and inspection branches.
4. Temporary Certificate Of Occupancy: A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued by the building commissioner provided that:
a. External Conditions: The applicant for such a temporary certificate demonstrates that the construction which remains to be completed
relates solely to the external conditions of the development, such as landscaping, and is not directly related to the safety of the premises;
and
b. Completion Impractical At Time Of Request: The applicant demonstrates that such completion is impractical at the time the temporary
certificate is sought due to weather or other conditions acceptable to the building commissioner; and/or is not directly related to the safety
of the premises; and
c. Letter Of Credit: The applicant secures the completion of the construction with a letter of credit, in a form acceptable to the village
president and village attorney, and in an amount sufficient to complete the construction as determined by the building commissioner.
d. Records: A record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the office of the building commissioner and copies shall be furnished on
request to any person having proprietary or tenancy interest in the building affected.
5. Payment Of Village Debts Required: No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until all outstanding debts or obligations due the village
from the property in question have been paid in full.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 311/387
C. Change Of Occupancy:
1. Notice Posted: Upon determination that any building or structure or part thereof has been vacated, the building commissioner shall post or
cause to be posted in a conspicuous place near each entrance to the building or structure, a notice substantially in words and figures as
follows:
VILLAGE OF BROADVIEW, ILLINOIS
BUILDING DEPARTMENT
NOTICE
This building is not to be occupied or used for any purpose until a certificate of occupancy, or other authorization, shall have been issued
by the Building Commissioner.
Occupancy, use or change of this building for any purpose without authorization by the Building Commissioner will be a violation of
Section 7-3 of the Zoning Ordinance of the Village of Broadview and subject to the penalties provided by Title 1, Chapter 13 of the
Broadview Village Code.
Date:
Location:
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, cover, or obliterate this notice without approval from:
Broadview Building Commissioner
2350 South 25th Avenue
Broadview, Illinois 60153
Phone: (708) 345-8174 or 681-3600
Building Commissioner
2. Unlawful To Remove: It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, cover or obliterate any notice or notices lawfully posted by the building
commissioner or any other authorized official, as herein specified.
3. Change Of Occupancy: Whenever any building or structure, or part thereof shall have been posted with a notice as herein specified, it shall
be unlawful for any person or persons to occupy, use or change such building for any purpose without authorization from the building
commissioner.
4. Penalty: Any person violating or refusing to obey any order issued under this section or destroying, mutilating or concealing any notice
posted by or under the authority of the building commissioner shall be punished as provided in title 1, chapter 13 of this code.
D. Continuation Of Existing Occupancy Or Use: Nothing in this section shall prevent the continuance of the present occupancy or use of any
existing building or land for which a certificate of occupancy has been issued except upon change of ownership or as may be necessary for
the safety of life or property. (Ord. 2008-22, 7-21-2008)
10-7-3: VARIANCES:
The "variation" process is intended to provide limited relief from the requirements of this title in those cases where strict application of those
requirements will create a practical difficulty or particular hardship prohibiting the use of land in a manner otherwise allowed under this title. It is
not intended that variations be granted merely to remove inconveniences or financial burdens that the requirements of this title may impose on
property owners in general. Rather, it is intended to provide relief where the requirements of this title render the land difficult to use because of
some unique physical attribute of the property itself or some other factor unique to the property for which the variation is requested. In no event,
however, shall the village grant a variation which would allow the establishment of a use which is not otherwise allowed in a zoning district or
which would change the zoning district classification of any or all of the affected property. (Ord. 2004-14, 6-21-2004)
A. Application For Variation, Notice Of Hearing: An application for a variation may be made by the owner of the subject property relating to the
variation or legal representative thereof. Said application shall be filed with the zoning administrator who shall process and forward such
application to the planning and zoning board for consideration in accordance with applicable statutes of the state.
No variations shall be recommended by the planning and zoning board except after a public hearing before said board, of which there shall be
a notice of time and place of the hearing published at least once, not more than thirty (30) nor less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing, in
one or more newspapers with a general circulation within the village. This notice shall contain the particular location for which the variation is
requested as well as a brief statement of what the proposed variation consists.
In addition, not less than fifteen (15) days, nor more than thirty (30) days before the public hearing, the applicant shall serve written notice,
either in person or by registered mail, return receipt requested, on the owners of all property, as recorded in the office of the Cook County
recorder of deeds and as appears from the authentic tax records within two hundred fifty feet (250') in each direction of the location for which
the variation is requested; provided, the number of feet occupied by all public roads, streets, alleys and other public ways shall be excluded in
computing the two hundred fifty foot (250') requirement. The applicant shall furnish, at the public hearing, a written statement certifying that he
has complied with the requirements of this subsection. Attached to the written statement shall be a list of property owners notified in
accordance with the above.
The planning and zoning board shall review the facts of the case and testimony presented at the hearing and upon completion of the review,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 312/387
shall thereafter submit a report of its findings and recommendations to the village board of trustees within thirty (30) days of the completed
public hearing. (Ord. 2007-10, 4-16-2007)
B. Decisions By Planning And Zoning Board: All decisions of the planning and zoning board on variations arrived at after the hearing shall require
a majority vote of all members and such decisions shall be final. However, an appeal may be taken to the village board by any person or by
any office, department, board, bureau or commission aggrieved by the planning and zoning board's decision on a variation request. Such an
appeal shall be filed with the village clerk who shall forward such appeal to the village board for final action.
C. Standards For Granting Variances:
1. The planning and zoning board shall not vary the provisions of this title as authorized in this chapter unless it shall have made findings
based upon the evidence presented to it in the following specific cases:
a. The property in question cannot yield a reasonable return if permitted to be used only under the conditions allowed by the regulations
governing the district in which it is located.
b. The plight of the owner is due to unique circumstances.
c. The variation, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the locality.
2. For the purpose of supplementing the above standards, the planning and zoning board, in making this determination whenever there are
practical difficulties or particular hardships, shall also take into consideration the extent to which the following facts, favorable to the
applicant, have been established by the evidence:
a. The particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical conditions of the specific property involved would bring a particular hardship
upon the owner as distinguished from a mere inconvenience if the strict letter of the regulation were to be carried out.
b. The conditions upon which the petition for variation is based would not be applicable generally to other property within the same zoning
classification.
c. The purpose of the variation is not based exclusively upon a desire to make more money out of the property.
d. The alleged difficulty or hardship has not been created by any person presently having an interest in the property.
e. The granting of the variation will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the
neighborhood in which the property is located.
f. The proposed variation will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property, or substantially increase the danger of fire,
or otherwise endanger the public safety, or substantially diminish or impair property values within the neighborhood.
3. The planning and zoning board may require such conditions and restrictions upon the premises benefited by a variation as may be
necessary to comply with the standards set forth in this subsection C to reduce or minimize the injurious effect of such variation upon other
property in the neighborhood, and to implement the general purpose and intent of this title.
D. Authorized Variances: Variations from the regulations of this title may be decided by the planning and zoning board only in accordance with the
standards set forth in this subsection and only in the following instances:
1. To permit a yard less than the yard required by the applicable regulations.
2. To permit the use of a lot not of record on the effective date hereof for a use otherwise prohibited solely because of the insufficient area of
the lot, but in no event shall the area of the lot be less than ninety percent (90%) of the required lot area.
3. To permit the same off street parking spaces to qualify as required spaces for two (2) or more uses; provided, that the maximum use of
such facility by each user does not take place during the same hours or on the same days of the week.
4. To increase by not more than twenty five percent (25%) the maximum distance that required parking spaces are permitted to be located
from the use served.
5. To allow any permitted, nonresidential use in a residence district to exceed the floor area ratio imposed by the applicable regulation.
6. To allow other variances from these regulations when the planning and zoning board determines it is in the best interests of the village and
the factors of this section are met.
E. Revocation: In any case where a variation has been granted, and where no work pertinent thereto has been initiated within one year from the
date of approval of the requested variation, then without further action by the village, said variation shall become null and void. (Ord. 2004-14,
6-21-2004)
10-7-3-1: CONDITIONAL USES:
A. Authority: Conditional uses shall be authorized or denied by the zoning administrator in accordance with the regulations and conditions set
forth in this section for conditional uses.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 313/387
B. Standards For Granting Conditional Uses: No conditional use shall be authorized by the zoning administrator unless it meets the standards set
forth in section 10-4-6 of this title.
C. Remedies For Denial Of Conditional Uses: Upon denial of a conditional use permit by the zoning administrator, an application for a special use
may be made in accordance with section 10-7-4 of this chapter.
D. Time Limit Of Conditional Use Permits: A conditional use will expire if the applicant fails to obtain a building permit or certificate of occupancy
within six (6) months from the date of the granting of the conditional use, unless otherwise specified by the zoning administrator.
E. Transferability And Revocation: All conditional use permits shall be approved for a specific location, and may be transferred to a successor
property owner. However, a conditional use permit may not be transferred to any other location.
The zoning administrator shall have the authority to revoke said permit if the zoning administrator determines that:
1. All activities permitted pursuant to an approved conditional use permit have ceased for a period of one year or more; or
2. There is any change in the use for which the conditional use permit was granted; or
3. A second conditional use permit is granted for the same property. (Ord. 2005-19, 8-1-2005)
10-7-4: SPECIAL USES:
A. Purpose: The development and execution of this title are based upon the division of the village into districts, within any one of which the use of
land and buildings and the bulk and location of buildings or structures as related to the land, are essentially uniform. It is recognized, however,
that there are special uses which, because of their unique character, cannot be properly classified in any particular district or districts without
consideration, in each case, of the impact of those uses upon the neighboring lands and upon public need for the particular use or the
particular location. Such special uses fall into two (2) categories: 1) uses operated by a public agency or publicly regulated utilities, or uses
traditionally affected with a public interest; 2) uses entirely private in character, but of such a nature that the operation may give rise to unique
problems with respect to their impact upon neighboring property or public facilities.
B. Authority: Special uses shall be authorized or denied by the village board of trustees in accordance with the statutes of the state applicable to
amendments of this title, and the regulations and conditions set forth in this title for special uses. (Ord. 2004-14, 6-21-2004)
C. Application For Special Use: An application for a special use may be made by the owner of the subject property relating to the special use or
legal representative thereof. Said application, in such form and accompanied by ten (10) sets of proposed preliminary development plans and
such other information as shall be established from time to time by the planning and zoning board, shall be filed with the zoning administrator
and thereafter processed in the manner prescribed herein for processing applications for amendments.
No special use shall be recommended by the planning and zoning board except after a public hearing before said board, of which there shall
be a notice of time and place of the hearing published at least once, not more than thirty (30) nor less than fifteen (15) days before the
hearing, in one or more newspapers with a general circulation within the village. This notice shall contain the particular location for which the
special use is requested as well as a brief statement of what the proposed special use consists.
Not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the public hearing, the applicant shall post a readable sign(s) on the property(ies) which
is/are the subject of the application in a location visible from the public roadway. Sign(s) must be removed no later than ten (10) days after a
recommendation is made by the planning and zoning board. The sign(s) may be placed in a window if the principal building is located within
fifteen feet (15') of the front property line.
The sign(s) shall be constructed of weatherproof material and contain the action requested, date, time and place where the meeting shall be
held, a statement that further information can be obtained from the petitioner and the building department, and the phone number of the village
of Broadview and the petitioner. The words "NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING" must appear at the top of the sign(s) in letters no smaller than
1.5 inches. The date and time of the meeting shall also be 1.5 inches. All cost associated with hearing sign(s) is borne by the applicant.
In addition, not less than fifteen (15) days, nor more than thirty (30) days before the public hearing, the applicant shall serve written notice,
either in person or by registered mail, return receipt requested, on the owners of all property, as recorded in the office of the Cook County
recorder of deeds and as appears from the authentic tax records, within two hundred fifty feet (250') in each direction of the location for which
the special use is requested; provided, the number of feet occupied by all public roads, streets, alleys and other public ways shall be excluded
in computing the two hundred fifty foot (250') requirement. The applicant shall furnish, at the public hearing, a written statement certifying that
he has complied with the requirements of this subsection. Attached to the written statement shall be a list of property owners notified in
accordance with the above.
The planning and zoning board shall review the facts of the case and testimony presented at the hearing and upon completion of the review,
shall thereafter submit a report of its findings and recommendations to the village board of trustees within thirty (30) days of the completed
public hearing. (Ord. 2007-10, 4-16-2007)
D. Standards For Granting Special Uses: No special use shall be authorized by the village board of trustees unless the special use:
1. Is deemed necessary for the public convenience at that location.
2. Is so designed, located and proposed to be operated that the public health, safety and welfare will be protected.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 314/387
3. Would not cause substantial injury to the value of other property in the neighborhood in which it is located.
E. Special Conditions: The planning and zoning board may recommend, and the village board of trustees may require, such conditions and
restrictions upon the construction, location and operation of a special use as may be deemed necessary to promote the general objectives of
this title and to minimize the injury to the value of property in the neighborhood. (Ord. 2004-14, 6-21-2004)
F. Planned Developments: Planned developments are of such substantially different character from other special uses that specific and additional
standards and exceptions are hereby set out to govern the recommendations of the planning commission/planning and zoning board and the
action of the village board of trustees.
In the case of business, manufacturing or residential planned developments, the planning commission/planning and zoning board may
recommend, and the village board of trustees may authorize, that there be in part of the area of such development and for the duration of such
development, specified uses not determined or permitted by the use regulations of the district in which the development is located, provided
that the planning and zoning board shall find:
1. The uses permitted by such exception are necessary and desirable and are appropriate with respect to the primary purpose of the
development.
2. The uses permitted by such exception are not of such nature or so located as to exercise a detrimental influence on the surrounding
neighborhood.
3. Not more than twenty percent (20%) of the ground area or of the floor area of such development would be devoted to the uses permitted by
the exceptions.
G. Decisions: The village board of trustees, upon report of the planning and zoning board/planning commission and without further hearing, may
authorize or deny an application for a special use in accordance with the statutes of the state applicable to approval of amendments, or may
refer it back to the planning and zoning board/planning commission for further consideration. (Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-2001)
10-7-5: APPEALS:
A. Authority: The planning and zoning board shall hear and decide appeals from an administrative order, requirement, decision or determination
made by the building commissioner or other authorized officials of the village, relating to regulations of this title.
B. Applicability Of Appeals: An appeal may be taken to the planning and zoning board by any person or by any office, department, board, bureau
or commission aggrieved by an administrative order, requirement, decision or determination under this title by the building commissioner or
other authorized official.
C. Initiation Of Appeal: An appeal shall be filed with the village clerk who shall forward such appeal to the planning and zoning board for
processing in accordance with applicable statutes of the state.
D. Decisions: All decisions, after hearing before the planning and zoning board on appeals from an administrative order, requirement, decision or
determination of the building commissioner or other authorized official of the village, relating to this title, shall, in all instances, be final
administrative determination and shall be subject to judicial review only in accordance with applicable statutes of the state. (Ord. 2001-08A, 4-
2-2001)
10-7-6: AMENDMENTS:
A. Authority: The regulations imposed and the districts created under the authority of this title may be amended from time to time in accordance
with applicable statutes of the state. An amendment shall be granted or denied by the village board of trustees only after a public hearing
before the planning and zoning board and a report of its findings and recommendations has been submitted to the village board of trustees.
B. Initiation Of Amendment: Amendments may be proposed by the village board of trustees, by the planning and zoning board, or by the owner of
the subject property relating to the amendment or legal representative thereof. (Ord. 2006-07, 4-3-2006)
C. Procedure: An application for an amendment shall be filed with the zoning administrator and thereafter introduced to the village board of
trustees. The zoning administrator shall schedule a public hearing and forward copies of the application to the planning and zoning board. No
amendment shall be recommended by the planning and zoning board except after a public hearing before said board, of which there shall be
a notice of time and place of the hearing published at least once, not more than thirty (30) nor less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing, in
one or more newspapers with a general circulation within the village. This notice shall contain the particular location for which the amendment
is requested as well as a brief statement of what the proposed amendment consists.
Not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the public hearing, the applicant shall post a readable sign(s) on the property(ies) which
is/are the subject of the application in a location visible from the public roadway. Sign(s) must be removed no later than ten (10) days after a
recommendation is made by the planning and zoning board. The sign(s) may be placed in a window if the principal building is located within
fifteen feet (15') of the front property line.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 315/387
The sign(s) shall be constructed of weatherproof material and contain the action requested, date, time and place where the meeting shall be
held, a statement that further information can be obtained from the petitioner and the building department, and the phone number of the village
of Broadview and the petitioner. The words "NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING" must appear at the top of the sign(s) in letters no smaller than
1.5 inches. The date and time of the meeting shall also be 1.5 inches. All cost associated with hearing sign(s) is borne by the applicant.
If the applicant is not the owner of the property which is the subject of the application, the applicant must provide personal notice of the public
hearing to the property owner via certified mail sent to the property address which is the subject of the application, and also to the taxpayer of
record if the tax roll records reflect a different address.
In addition, not less than fifteen (15) days, nor more than thirty (30) days before the public hearing, the applicant shall serve written notice,
either in person or by registered mail, return receipt requested, on the owners of all property, as recorded in the office of the Cook County
recorder of deeds and as appears from the authentic tax records, within two hundred fifty feet (250') in each direction of the location for which
the amendment is requested; provided, the number of feet occupied by all public roads, streets, alleys and other public ways shall be excluded
in computing the two hundred fifty foot (250') requirement. The applicant shall furnish, at the public hearing, a written statement certifying that
he has complied with the requirements of this subsection. Attached to the written statement shall be a list of property owners notified in
accordance with the above.
If the village board of trustees or the planning and zoning board is the applicant, or if the application only requests an amendment to the
textual provisions of the zoning ordinance and does not request rezoning of property, the requirements directing the applicant to post a sign(s)
for notice of the public hearing and to mail notice to property owners within two hundred fifty feet (250') shall not apply.
The planning and zoning board shall review the facts of the case and testimony presented at the hearing and upon completion of the review,
shall thereafter submit a report of its findings and recommendations to the village board of trustees.
The village board of trustees, upon a report of the planning and zoning board and without further public hearing, may grant or deny any
proposed amendment in accordance with applicable statutes of the state, or may refer it back to the planning and zoning board for further
consideration. (Ord. 2007-10, 4-16-2007)
10-7-7: FEES:
A. The village board shall establish a schedule of fees, charges and expenses for occupancy certificates, appeals, applications for variations,
zoning amendments, planned developments, special uses, site plan review, signs and other administrative matters pertaining to this zoning
ordinance.
B. The approved schedule of fees shall be filed and posted in the office of the building department, and may be altered or amended by the village
board from time to time.
C. All consulting fees incurred by the village for variations, amendments, special use permits and site plan review pursuant to the terms of this
title, shall be paid by the petitioner or applicant in accordance with section 3-1A-4 of this code.
D. No action shall be taken on any appeal, or application for variation, amendment, special use, planned development, or site plan review until all
applicable fees, charges and expenses have been paid in full. (Ord. 2004-29, 12-6-2004)
10-7-8: PENALTY:
(Rep. by Ord. 2004-29, 12-6-2004)
10-7-9: DEVELOPMENT REVIEW COMMITTEE:
To provide for the fair and expeditious review of subdivision, variance, and site plan applications, a development review committee is established.
The development review committee shall consist of the following members or their representatives:
A. The village president;
B. The village engineer or consultant;
C. The village planner or consultant;
D. The building commissioner;
E. The director of public works;
F. The chief of police or his/her representative;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 316/387
G. The fire department chief or his/her representative;
H. The chairman of the plan commission; and
I. The zoning administrator.
The development review committee shall meet as needed. At least one week prior to the meeting, the building commissioner shall submit
copies of all pending applications to members of the development review committee. The purpose of this committee is to review applications
for completeness and compliance with village codes and regulations. The village planner or consultant will be responsible for documenting
suggestions made at committee meetings and forwarding comments to the plan commission and the applicant. Applicants of projects requiring
review should attend and participate in discussion of their project with the development review committee. (Ord. 2006-10, 5-1-2006)
10-7-10: REVIEW OF ZONING ORDINANCE:
The zoning ordinance shall be reviewed on a yearly basis and shall be initiated and conducted by the zoning administrator. The purpose of this
review will be to update the zoning ordinance to meet any new needs of the village, to update any outdated definitions and terminology, and to
maintain consistency with other village ordinances and federal and state laws. (Ord. 2004-14, 6-21-2004)
10-7-11: PROCEDURE DIAGRAMS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 317/387
(Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-2001)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 318/387
(Ord. 2006-07, 4-3-2006)
Chapter 8
SITE PLAN REVIEW
10-8-1: SITE PLAN REVIEW; WHERE REQUIRED:
Site plan approval shall be required for property within the R-2 and R-3 multi-family, C-1 and C-2 commercial, or O/I office/industrial and M
manufacturing zoning districts. If a building permit is sought for any new construction, enlargement, relocation, reconstruction, or for any open
parking area, accessory or otherwise, whether by right, variance, or commercial use, or if exterior changes to a building or structure are to be
made which involve changes of decor, hanging of signs not permitted as of right, masonry work or other modifications to the general exterior
appearance and design of the building, an application shall be made to the village for review of the site plan. No building permit shall be issued
where compliance with this title is required, unless the applicant has received prior site plan approval under this title, and no certificate of
occupancy shall be issued unless there has been compliance with all the terms and provisions of site plan approval.
In the case of any building whose use is indefinite at the time the initial application is filed, the applicant may apply for preliminary site plan
approval for the purpose of starting construction. The initial application shall contain all those items required under chapter 4 of this title which are
available at that time; and, as soon as the use of the building becomes definite, the applicant shall complete the application and apply for final site
plan approval. (Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-2001)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 319/387
10-8-2: OBJECTIVES:
The objectives of site plan review are to determine whether use, building, structure addition or change to any building, structure or use will
conform to the state statutes, the zoning ordinance, the village's comprehensive plan and Roosevelt Road redevelopment plan, and other
applicable ordinances and requirements of the village and state. Site plan review shall work towards the development of an aesthetically
acceptable and well ordered community serving the interest of public health, safety, and general welfare. (Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-2001)
10-8-3: FACTORS CONSIDERED:
In the course of such review, the village shall consider, but not be limited to, such factors as the following:
A. The preservation of any scenic natural features.
B. The adequacy of access, for fire and police protection.
C. The adequacy of provisions for drainage of surface waters and for waste disposal.
D. The location and the layout of accessory off street parking and off street loading spaces, the width and grading of all entrances and exits to
such places, the location of such exits and entrances, the traffic flow, together with: 1) the distance from street intersection, 2) the likelihood of
left hand turns and other turning movements, and 3) the likelihood of drawing vehicular traffic to and through local residential streets.
E. The arrangements for safe and convenient pedestrian circulation, on the site and on its approaches.
F. The impact of the proposed layout upon the surrounding area, and particularly upon any nearby residences including, but not limited to: 1) the
location and height of buildings and the extent of their shadows, 2) the location, intensity, and directions of any outdoor lighting and the
proposed times for its use, 3) the location of any overhead power lines, 4) the likelihood of any other nuisances, and 5) whether appropriate
and adequate screening is provided; particularly the screening of mechanical equipment.
G. The size, location and type of any signs.
H. Proposed plans for any outdoor display or storage.
I. The proposed landscaping, and its appropriateness in the area involved. Preservation of substantial trees is to be encouraged to the maximum
extent possible.
J. The arrangement of buildings, structures and open spaces on the site; and the kind and use of building materials.
K. In its review, the village shall encourage creative design of the site, to provide a convenient and attractive layout. (Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-2001)
10-8-4: FILING:
The applicant shall file with the village building department one original application for plan approval on a form to be provided by the building
department together with the required fee and ten (10) copies of a site plan which shall include the following items and information:
A. A survey of the property prepared by an Illinois licensed surveyor showing the boundaries of the property, building or setback lines and the
lines of all existing streets, roads, easements, rights of way and areas dedicated to public use within two hundred feet (200') of the property.
The survey shall also contain a title, north point, scale, name and address of record owner, and the name, address and professional license
number and seal of the surveyor who prepared the survey, and the date of the survey. Said date shall be no more than sixty (60) days prior to
the date of application for site plan review. The survey shall be drawn to scale and the scale shall not be larger than one inch equals fifty feet
(1" = 50').
B. At the site and within two hundred feet (200') thereof, the location and use of all existing or proposed usage for lands, or all existing or
proposed buildings, and of all other existing or proposed structures such as walls, fences, culverts, bridges, roadways, etc., with spot
elevations of such structures. Buildings to be removed shall be indicated by broken lines. Such features shall be indicated on a separate
drawing when requested by the village planner or village engineer.
C. All zoning and special district boundaries and off street parking within two hundred feet (200') of the property. Such features shall be shown on
a separate map or as a key map on the detail map itself.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 320/387
D. Location of all existing and proposed storm drainage structures and utility lines, including telephone, power, water, sewer, gas, etc., whether
publicly or privately owned, with pipe sizes, grades and direction of flow.
E. The distances, as measured along the centerlines of existing streets abutting the property, to the nearest intersection with any other public
street.
F. All means of vehicular and pedestrian ingress and egress to and from the site onto public streets, showing the size and locations of driveway
and curb cuts.
G. The location and design of any off street parking areas, showing size and location of spaces, aisles and barriers.
H. Location, direction of illumination and intensity of all proposed outdoor lighting. (Ord. 2006-10, 5-1-2006)
I. Landscaping:
1. The purpose of these landscaping requirements is to provide adequate screening and buffering of structures, parking areas and land uses,
which will:
a. Promote the compatibility of land uses;
b. Conserve or enhance property values;
c. Break up large expanses of pavement and decrease surface water runoff and erosion;
d. Reduce heat buildup and the effects of wind;
e. Provide safe pedestrianways and traffic separation;
f. Restrict blowing trash and litter; and
g. Improve the visual quality of the site, as well as overall community appearance.
2. The following landscape requirements shall apply:
a. A landscape plan, prepared by a registered landscape architect, shall be submitted for review and shall include the identification of
species, size, and spacing and location of plant materials and all other landscape treatments. Such landscape plan shall be of a suitable
scale, or as a part of the final site plan, to illustrate proposed landscaping, as well as existing vegetation to remain.
b. Trees and shrubs shall be keyed into a plant list.
c. The preservation of existing trees, shrubs or other plantings is encouraged and should be done whenever such preservation is practical.
Existing vegetation may be used to meet the landscaping requirements described herein.
d. Plantings shall consist of varieties that are appropriate to the climate and that will not be allowed to grow to obstruct or interfere with
aerial power lines, streetlights or signage. The village shall maintain a list of appropriate plantings.
e. Any commercial, institutional or industrial use greater than one acre in size, in any zoning district, shall provide a minimum of ten percent
(10%) of the total lot area as landscaping.
f. Upon installation, plantings shall meet the following minimum size requirements:
(1) Shade trees: Two and one-half inch (2.5") caliper as measured twelve inches (12") above grade;
(2) Evergreen trees: Six feet (6') tall, minimum; and
(3) Ornamental trees: Six feet (6') tall, minimum, if multi-stem. Two and one-half inch (2.5") caliper as measured twelve inches (12") above
grade if single stem.
g. All off street parking areas greater than four (4) parking spaces (excluding parking garages, parking decks and parking structures) shall
provide a perimeter landscaping strip of a minimum of three feet (3'). Such landscaping shall be located on all sides of the parking area,
and any required drives or pedestrian accessways shall be exempted. If adjacent to residential lots, a wall or fence of not less than five
feet (5') in height, or a densely planted, compact hedge not less than five feet (5') in height, shall be provided.
h. All off street parking areas of twenty (20) or more spaces (excluding parking garages, parking decks and parking structures) shall provide
one interior landscaping island of a minimum of one hundred (100) square feet for every twenty (20) parking spaces. All such landscaping
islands shall contain at least one shade tree.
i. Where the requirements imposed by any provision of the zoning ordinance involving landscaping, screening, buffer strips, yards, or other
open space requirements are either more or less restrictive than the requirements of this subsection, the regulations which impose a
higher standard shall apply.
j. Due to the dense urban character and limited developable land available within the village, the board of trustees may modify or waive any
provision of these landscaping standards based on specific site limitations and the recommendations of the development review
committee. (Ord. 2006-15, 6-5-2006)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 321/387
J. A detailed written description, sketch, rendering or picture of any buildings or structures to be constructed.
K. A copy of any covenants and deed restrictions that are intended to cover all or any part of the tract.
L. Name and address, of the architect, land planner or surveyor preparing the site plan, and the date of the site plan. (Ord. 2006-10, 5-1-2006)
10-8-5: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
The following additional items and information may be required by the village planner or consultant or the village engineer, whenever he
determines that they would be necessary or helpful to the village in reviewing the site plan:
A. Existing contours at intervals of one foot (1') of elevation where slopes are three percent (3%) or less, and intervals of two feet (2') where
slopes are more than three percent (3%), based upon United States coast and geodetic survey data. Where any changes in contours are
proposed, existing grades shall be indicated by dashed lines and final grades shall be indicated by solid lines.
B. Location of existing rock outcrops, high points, watercourses, depressions, ponds, marshes, wooded areas with trees having a diameter of
eight inches (8") or more, as measured one foot (1') above ground level, and other significant features, including previous flood elevations of
watercourses, ponds and marsh areas as determined by survey.
C. All proposed easements and public and community areas. All proposed streets with profiles indicating grading, and cross sections showing
width of sidewalk, and locations and size of utility lines, according to the standards and specifications of the village.
D. Such other items and information pertaining to the site as the village planner or consultant or the village engineer may reasonably determine to
be necessary or helpful to the village in reviewing the application. (Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-2001)
10-8-6: DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURE:
After the filing of the complete application and site plan referred to above, copies shall be delivered to each of the members of the development
review committee. The development review committee shall review the application, site plan, and any other evidence submitted by the applicant
or interested party. The development review committee may request additional information, testimony, or submissions of the applicant relevant to
the application and site plan. The development review committee shall act to ensure compliance with all ordinances of the village. The
development review committee may recommend approval or disapproval of the proposed plan, or may recommend approval subject to
appropriate conditions and safeguards. The development review committee shall forward its recommendation to the president and the board of
trustees for full review. (Ord. 2002-03, 3-18-2002)
10-8-7: SITE APPROVAL:
The president and board of trustees shall acknowledge receipt of the recommendation from the development review committee at a regular
business meeting or committee meeting, and schedule a time to review the recommendation. Such review may take place as part of the board's
regular business meeting or committee meeting. Notice of the meeting to review the recommendation will be published pursuant to the provisions
of the open meetings act, if it is not part of a regularly scheduled board meeting. No new information or evidence may be presented. If the
applicant wishes to present such new evidence or information he must request that the application be returned to the development review
committee, which shall examine any new evidence presented and shall forward a new recommendation to the president and board of trustees.
The president and board of trustees shall issue a decision affirming, denying, or modifying the recommendation of the development review
committee based upon the factors and objectives set forth herein. The decision and findings contained therein shall be final. (Ord. 2002-03, 3-18-
2002)
10-8-8: FAILURE TO REVISE SITE PLAN:
In the event the village board requires any correction or revision of the site plan, no building permit shall be issued until the applicant has
submitted a site plan corrected or revised in accordance with the requirements of the village board. (Ord. 2002-03, 3-18-2002)
10-8-9: COMPLIANCE, TIME LIMIT:
Any action of the applicant to construct, operate or maintain any building, structure, or use in a manner other than provided for in the approved
site plan, shall constitute a violation of this title and shall be the basis for the issuance of a stop order.
The failure of the applicant to complete construction within one year of site plan approval, or any longer period specified by the village board at
the time of its approval, shall nullify the permit. However, extensions of time for completion by the applicant may be granted by the village board
upon the request of applicant, together with evidence of continuing progress toward completion. (Ord. 2006-10, 5-1-2006)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 322/387
10-8-10: EXTENT OF AUTHORITY:
Nothing in this title shall be interpreted to give the village board or development review committee power to authorize in any district any use of a
building or structure not permitted by law in that district, to issue any exception, variance, or special permit, to approve any conditional use, to
exclude from any district any use permitted by the regulation of the district merely on the grounds that such use is inappropriate in a specific
location. Any development approved under the provisions of this title shall conform to all ordinances or regulations of the district in which the
proposed development is located, specifically the permitted height and coverage, and the required lot area per dwelling unit, usable open space,
lot width and lot depth, yards and off street parking and loading spaces. (Ord. 2002-03, 3-18-2002)
Chapter 9
SIGNS
10-9-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is established to create the standards for a comprehensive and balanced system of sign regulations for the following purposes:
A. To encourage, as a means of communication in the village of Broadview, the employment of signs which are:
1. Compatible with their surroundings.
2. Appropriate to the type of activity to which they pertain.
3. Expressive of the identity of individual proprietors.
4. Legible in the circumstances in which they are seen.
5. Respectful of the reasonable rights of other sign owners.
B. To preserve, protect and promote the public health, safety and welfare.
C. To improve pedestrian and traffic safety.
D. To maintain and enhance community appearance and the village's ability to attract sources of economic development by promoting the
reasonable, orderly and effective display of signs.
E. To minimize the possible adverse effect of signs on nearby public and private property.
F. To preserve the value of private property by assuring the compatibility of signs with surrounding land uses.
G. To ensure that signs are designed as integral architectural elements of the building and site to which they principally relate. (Ord. 2001-08A, 4-
2-2001)
10-9-2: SCOPE:
No sign in the village of Broadview shall be constructed, erected, converted, altered, rebuilt, enlarged, remodeled, relocated or expanded until a
permit for such sign has been obtained in accordance with the standards and procedures set out in this chapter. However, no permit shall be
required for routine maintenance as defined herein. (Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-2001)
10-9-3: DEFINITIONS:
The definitions noted below apply uniquely to this chapter and supersede any conflicting definitions found in the zoning ordinance. Many of these
definitions are graphically depicted in the diagrams included in this section.
ANIMATED SIGN: Any sign that uses movement or change of lighting to depict action or create a special effect or scene.
AWNING: A structure made of cloth, metal or other material affixed to a building in such a manner that the structure may be permanently affixed
or affixed in such a manner that it may be raised or retracted to a position against the building.
AWNING SIGN: Any sign that is painted, printed or otherwise placed on the outer surface of an awning in such a manner that the awning forms
the background surface of the sign.
BANNER SIGN: Any temporary sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is attached to a pole or building and secured on at least two (2)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 323/387
sides. National flags, state or municipal flags, shall not be considered banners.
CANOPY AND MARQUEE SIGNS: A sign that is mounted or painted on, or attached to, a canopy or marquee.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN: A sign or portion thereof with characters, letters, or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged. A sign on which
the message changes more than eight (8) times per day shall be considered an animated sign and not a changeable copy sign for purposes of
this chapter. A sign on which the only copy that changes is an electronic or mechanical indication of time or temperature shall be considered a
"time and temperature" portion of a sign and not a changeable copy sign for purposes of this chapter.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN, ELECTRONIC: A type of sign or portion thereof that is capable of displaying words, symbols or alphanumeric
characters which are defined by a small number of matrix elements using different combinations of light emitting diodes (LEDs), fiber optics, light
bulbs or other illumination devices that can be electronically or automatically programmed and may be changed by remote or automatic means.
The following terms for such electronic changeable copy signs shall be defined as follows:
A. Dissolve: A mode of message transition on an electronic changeable copy sign accomplished by varying the light intensity or pattern,
where one message gradually appears to dissipate and lose legibility simultaneous to the gradual appearance and legibility of a subsequent
message.
B. Fade: A mode of message transition on an electronic changeable copy sign accomplished by varying the light intensity, where one
message gradually reduces intensity to the point of not being legible and a subsequent message gradually increases intensity to the point of
legibility.
C. Nits: A luminance unit equal to one candle per square meter measured perpendicular to the rays from the source.
D. Scroll: A mode of message transition on an electronic changeable copy sign where the message is changed by the apparent vertical
movement of the letters or graphic elements of the message.
E. Static: Graphics on an electronic changeable copy sign having no motion or movement of any type.
F. Travel: A mode of message transition on an electronic changeable copy sign where the message is changed by the apparent horizontal
movement of the letters or graphic elements of the message.
G. Transition: A visual effect used on an electronic changeable copy sign to change from one message to a subsequent message.
COMMERCIAL MESSAGE: Any sign wording, logo, or other representation that, directly or indirectly, names, advertises, or calls attention to a
business, product, service, or other commercial activity.
COMPREHENSIVE SIGN PLAN: A sign plan approved by the plan commission indicating the size and location of all signs to be located in a
unified business center.
CONSTRUCTION SIGN: A sign announcing the impending construction of a project, limited to displaying the name of the project, the developer,
the financial institution providing the finance, the designer(s), the general contractor, a phone number where more information may be obtained,
and a date announcing the planned completion of the project.
ERECT: To build, construct, attach, hang, rehang, place, affix, or relocate and includes the painting or lettering of a sign.
EXTERNAL ILLUMINATION: Illumination of a sign which is produced by an artificial source of light which is not contained within the sign itself.
FACADE: Any side, surface or wall below the roof of a building which is parallel or within forty five degrees (45) of parallel with a parcel's
frontage on a public thoroughfare, which faces toward and relates to that public thoroughfare. If a building has a complex shape, then all walls or
surfaces facing in the same direction, or nearly the same direction, are part of a single facade.
FLAG: Any fabric or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns, or symbols, used as a symbol of a government, political subdivision, or other
entity.
FLASHING SIGN: A directly or indirectly illuminated sign where the source of illumination is not maintained constant or stationary in the intensity
or color at all times when such sign is in use.
FOR SALE/FOR LEASE/FOR RENT SIGNS: A sign which directs attention to a housing, office, or retail development with space for sale, lease or
rent.
FREESTANDING SIGN: Any sign not attached to a building; primarily ground signs, pole signs, pylon signs, and portable signs.
GARAGE/YARD SALE SIGN: Any sign used in residential zoning districts to advertise the sale of used, unwanted household goods.
GASOLINE STATION: A premises where motor fuels are sold for direct use by motor vehicles.
GRADE: Established or finished elevation measured at the center line of the adjacent street.
GROUND SIGN: Any detached sign which has its bottom portion erected upon or mounted on a base that is permanently set on the ground that
is at least as wide as the bottom side of the sign. Ground signs are also commonly known as monument signs.
HISTORIC SIGN: A sign at least thirty (30) years old and which, by reason of unique design, size configuration, or its product's/company's long
association with the village, is of extraordinary local significance, makes a contribution to the cultural, historic, or aesthetic quality of the village's
streetscape.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 324/387
IDENTIFICATION SIGN: A sign where the text gives the name and address of a building, business, development, or establishment. Such a sign
may also be wholly or partly devoted to a readily recognized symbol.
ILLUMINATED SIGN: Any sign which is lit by an artificial (usually electric) light source.
INFLATABLE SIGN: Any sign or inflatable device of more than two (2) cubic feet in capacity designed to be filled with air or a gas lighter than air,
displayed to attract the attention of the public. This definition shall include balloons and balloon signs.
INSTRUCTIONAL SIGN: A sign, generally informational, that has a purpose secondary to the use of the lot on which it is located, such as "no
parking", "entrance", "loading only", and other similar directives.
INTERNAL ILLUMINATION: The illumination of a sign which is produced by an artificial source of light concealed or contained within the sign
itself, and which becomes visible in darkness through the translucent portion of the sign face.
MARQUEE: Any hood or roof-like structure of permanent construction supported entirely by the building, and projecting from the building's wall.
MOVIE OR LIVE ENTERTAINMENT THEATER: A fully enclosed building with fixed or movable seats arranged in an auditorium fashion, where
motion pictures or live entertainment acts are presented.
NONCONFORMING SIGN: Any sign that does not conform to the requirements of this title.
OFF-SITE SIGN: Any general outdoor advertising sign, which is designed to advertise or direct attention to a business or activity conducted or a
product, commodity, service, real property, entertainment, or facilities offered or sold elsewhere than on the same lot or within the same building
upon which the sign is located or to which it is affixed, or which directs persons to a location different from where the sign is installed. The term
"billboard" shall be included in this definition.
OFFICER: The building inspector of the village of Broadview.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, organization, or partnership, singular or plural, of any kind.
POLE SIGN: A sign mounted on one or more freestanding pole(s) or pylons.
POLITICAL SIGN: Any sign displayed in conjunction with an official election or referendum, used on behalf of candidates for elected public office
or to advocate a position on referenda.
PORTABLE SIGNS: Any sign attached to or mounted upon a frame intended to be moved from place to place.
PROJECTING SIGN: A sign wholly or partly dependent upon a building for support, and which projects more than twelve inches (12") in a
perpendicular fashion from such building.
RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE SIGN: A sign used to advertise the sale, lease or rent of an individual home, apartment or property located in a
residential zoning district.
RESIDENTIAL SIGN: Any sign located in a district zoned for residential uses that contains no commercial message except advertising for goods
or services legally offered on the premises where the sign is located.
ROOF SIGN: A sign mounted on the roof of a building.
SIGN: A name, identification, description, display, message, or illustration which is affixed to, or represented directly or indirectly upon a building,
structure, or piece of land, and which directs attention to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization, or business.
SIGN CONTRACTOR: A person or entity who performs work for compensation in connection with the erection, construction, enlargement,
alteration, repair, moving, improvement, maintenance, conversion or manufacture of any sign.
SIGN STRUCTURE: The sign and all parts associated with its mounting.
SIGN SUPPORTS: All structural features by which a sign is held up, including, for example, poles, braces, guys, and anchors.
SIGN SURFACE AREA: The total exposed surface within a continuous perimeter composed of a single rectangle enclosing the extreme limits of
characters, lettering, illustrations, ornamentations, or other figures, together with any material, or color used as an integral part of the display or to
differentiate the sign from the background on which it is placed.
SUSPENDED SIGN: A sign that is suspended from the underside of a horizontal plane surface and is supported by such surface.
TEMPORARY SIGN: Any sign designed, constructed, or erected to display a message for a limited duration of time. Such signs include, but are
not limited to: banner, beacon or searchlight, garage/yard sale, grand opening, political, portable, real estate, and special event signs, as well as
any other sign which by its definition and application in this chapter is designated as a temporary sign.
UNIFIED BUSINESS CENTER: Premises containing three (3) or more individual offices or businesses sharing a common building.
VILLAGE: The village of Broadview, Cook County, Illinois.
VILLAGE BOARD: The mayor and trustees of the village of Broadview.
WALL SIGN: Any sign attached parallel to and supported by a wall or building, and within six inches (6") of such wall, or painted on the wall
surface of any building.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 325/387
WINDOW AREA: Any transparent area on a facade through which the interior of a premises may be viewed from outside.
WINDOW SIGN: Any sign which is affixed or placed so that its message or image is read as a part of the total composition of a window area.
ZONING LOT OR LOTS: A single tract of land which is designated by its owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed or built upon as a
single unit, under single control or ownership. It may be a single parcel separately described in a deed or plat which is recorded in the office of the
county recorder of deeds, or it may include parts of or a combination of such parcels when adjacent to one another and used as one lot.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 326/387
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 327/387
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 328/387
(Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-2001; amd. Ord. 13-02, 1-22-2013)
10-9-4: EXEMPTIONS:
The following signs shall be exempt from all but the maintenance and public safety requirements of this chapter:
A. Government Signs: Any public notice, warning, directional, and other instructional or regulatory signs required by a valid and applicable
federal, state, or local law, regulation, or ordinance.
B. Interior Signs: Any sign inside a building, not attached to a window or door, which cannot be read from vehicles passing on adjoining streets.
C. Nonsign Decorations: Temporary displays, including holiday lights, decorations, painted window areas, works of art, flags (not exceeding 50
square feet), memorial signs, religious or historic symbols, and other displays with no commercial message.
D. Traffic Control Signs: On private property, such as stop, yield, and similar signs which meet Illinois department of transportation standards, and
which contain no commercial message.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 329/387
E. Memorial Signs: Memorial signs or tablets listing names or buildings and date of erection, when cut into any masonry surface or inlaid so as to
be part of the building or when constructed of bronze or other incombustible material.
F. Directional And Warning Signs: Signs, not exceeding five (5) square feet in area, which provide instruction, direction or warning and are located
entirely on the property to which they pertain to identify restrooms, public telephones, walkways, parking lot entrances and exits, and features
of a similar nature or with respect to warnings, "no trespassing", "no dumping", and similar warning signs. Parking lot entrance and exit signs
shall not exceed five feet (5') in height.
G. Business Nameplates: Nonelectrical nameplates denoting the business name of an occupation legally conducted on the premises, provided
that the sign area does not exceed two (2) square feet in area, provided that no more than one sign per principal use may be erected.
H. Vending Machine Signs: Permanent, nonflashing signs on vending machines, gasoline pumps, ice containers, automated teller machines, or
other similar machines. Such signs shall relate only to that which is dispensed by the machine. Such signs may be illuminated only on the
front. Logos, names or other promotional information shall be considered the permitted sign. (Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-2001)
10-9-5: ADMINISTRATION; PERMIT:
A. Administrative Officer: The building inspector of the village of Broadview is designated to administer this chapter.
B. Permit Requirements:
1. Permit Required: Unless otherwise exempted in this chapter, no sign shall be erected, structurally or graphically altered, or relocated
without having first obtained a valid permit for such sign, issued by the village. No permit shall be required for routine maintenance of a sign.
2. Permit Application: Application for permits to erect, construct, or alter a sign shall be submitted on a form and in the manner prescribed by
the building inspector. Each application shall be signed by the owner of the sign and the owner of the property upon which it is to be located.
Applications for permits shall be accompanied by such information as may be required to assure compliance with all applicable regulations.
Information shall be submitted in eight and one-half inch by eleven inch (81/2" x 11") format for easy duplication. Submission requirements
shall include:
a. Name, address and telephone number of the applicant;
b. A drawing or drawings indicating the location of the building, structure or lot to which or upon which the sign or advertising structure is to
be attached or erected;
c. A drawing or photograph showing the position of the sign or advertising structure in relation to structures;
d. Two (2) prints of the drawings and specifications, and color renderings for the proposed sign or advertising structure, including the
methods of construction, illumination, materials and attachment to the buildings or in the ground. Such drawings must include all text and
graphics proposed on the sign, drawn to scale with dimensions; legal nonconforming signs can satisfy this requirement by submitting a
photograph of the sign;
e. If required by the building inspector, a copy of a statement by a registered professional engineer indicating that said sign meets structural
and wind pressure requirements, and will not pose a public health or safety threat;
f. Name of person, firm, corporation or association responsible for erecting the sign or advertising structure;
g. Written consent of the owner or agent of the zoning lot on which the sign or advertising structure is to be erected;
h. A completed application for any electrical permit required to be issued for said sign or advertising structure;
i. A master sign plan documenting all existing signs on the zoning lot, including their type and area, location, and the occupant of the site to
which each sign pertains;
j. Any additional information as the building inspector shall require to show full compliance with this and all other applicable chapters of this
code; and
k. A landscape plan, including proposed location, quantity, size, and species of required landscape improvements. (Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-
2001)
C. Application Review Procedures:
1. The following procedure must be followed for approval of a sign permit:
a. Building Commissioner Approval: Applications for all new permanent signs not previously located on the zoning lot, changes to existing
signs, and temporary signs requiring a permit shall be reviewed and approved or denied by the building commissioner.
b. Planning Commission: Appeals from decisions of the building commissioner, and all variances to this chapter shall be considered by the
planning commission. All recommendations of the planning commission shall be referred to the village board for consideration. (Ord.
2005-20, 8-1-2005)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 330/387
D. Inspection Procedures:
1. Preinstallation Inspection: The person responsible for the installation of a sign shall schedule with the building inspector a preinstallation
inspection prior to installing any sign requiring a permit. Such inspection shall include a footing inspection, if applicable, and confirmation of
the other details of mounting and placement.
2. Final Inspection: The person responsible for the installation of a sign shall notify the building inspector upon completion of the work to
schedule a final inspection.
3. Six Month Deadline: If the work authorized under a permit has not been completed within six (6) months after the date of issuance, the
permit shall be null and void.
E. Variations: It is the intent of this section to permit variations from the requirements of this chapter only so as to recognize unusual hardships
and make reasonable accommodations for them.
1. Petition For Variation: A petition for a variation from any provision(s) of this chapter may be made by any person having a proprietary
interest in the sign for which such variation is requested.
a. Petition Contents: A petition for a variation shall be filed in writing with the building inspector and shall be accompanied by such
documents and information as are necessary to clearly exhibit the practical difficulty for which the variation is necessary, including:
(1) The names, addresses, and telephone number of the petitioner, the owner of the property on which the sign is to be erected or affixed,
the owner of the sign, and the person responsible for erecting or affixing the sign.
(2) A description of the requested variation, including reference to the section of this chapter from which relief is requested.
(3) Justification of the requested variation.
(4) The location of the premises on which the sign is to be erected or affixed.
(5) A site plan of the premises involved, showing accurate placement thereon of the proposed sign.
(6) A print of the drawings and specifications describing the sign to be erected or affixed and method of construction and attachment to
the building or in the ground. Such drawings and specifications shall include details of dimensions, materials, color, and weight.
(7) The written consent of the owner of the premises on which the sign is to be erected or affixed.
(8) A fee, as determined by ordinance adopted by the village board from time to time, to be paid at the time of filing of the petition for
variation.
2. Hearing: The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the petition for variation within thirty (30) days of receipt of a completed
written application.
a. Hearing Notice: Notice shall be given of the time, place and purpose of the public hearing.
b. Required Attendance: The petitioner or its authorized representatives shall attend the meetings of the board at which the variation is to be
heard.
c. Decision: Within fifteen (15) working days of the close of the required public hearing on the variation, unless otherwise agreed to by the
petitioner, the planning commission shall prepare and submit written findings, and by a majority vote, issue a recommendation to grant,
deny, wholly or in part, or modify said variation. Such recommendation will then be referred to the village board for final consideration.
3. Standards: Variations shall only be approved to overcome an exceptional condition which poses practical difficulty or particular hardship in
such a way as to prevent the display of a sign as intended by this chapter or to preserve an historic sign with unique visual character. No
variation shall be granted unless the board finds that the petition meets each of the following standards:
a. Unique Hardship: The proposed variation will not merely serve as a convenience to the applicant, but will alleviate some demonstrable
and unusual hardship which would result if the strict letter of the regulations were carried out and which is not generally applicable to
other property within the village.
b. Reasonable Return: The property in question cannot yield a reasonable return if permitted to be used only under the conditions allowed
by the regulations in this chapter.
c. Hardship Not Self-Created: The alleged hardship has not been created by the petitioner nor any person presently having a proprietary
interest in the premises.
d. Consistent With Public Welfare: The proposed variation will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other
property or improvements in the neighborhood. The proposed variation will not by itself or with other signs contribute to the creation of
visual distraction which may lead to personal injury or a substantial reduction in the value of property.
e. Graphic Effectiveness Demonstrated: The petitioner has demonstrated that all reasonable efforts (utilizing color, contrast, lettering
legibility, illumination, and graphic composition) have been made to increase the reading effectiveness of the proposed sign within the
normal requirements of this chapter.
f. Consistent With Sign Ordinance Intent: The proposed variation is in harmony with the intent, purpose, and objectives of this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 331/387
4. Conditions: Such conditions and restrictions may be imposed on the premises to be benefited by a variation as may be necessary to comply
with the standards set forth herein, to reduce or minimize any injurious effect of such variation on other property in the neighborhood, and to
implement the general intent, purpose, and objectives of this chapter.
5. Revocation: In any case where a variation has been granted, and where no work pertinent thereto has been initiated within six (6) months
from the date of approval of the requested variation, then without further action said variation shall become null and void. (Ord. 2001-08A, 4-
2-2001)
10-9-6: GENERAL STANDARDS:
A. Applicable Regulations: In addition to the provisions of this chapter, all signs must conform to the regulations and standards of all other
applicable chapters of this code.
B. Commercial Message Location: A sign which displays a commercial message is permitted only on the premises where the business,
profession, accommodation, commodity, service, entertainment, or other commercial activity represented on the sign is located.
C. Obstruction To Doors, Windows, Or Fire Escapes: No sign or advertising structure shall be erected, relocated or maintained so as to prevent or
inhibit free ingress to, or egress from, any door, window or fire escape, or inhibit the use of fire protection systems. No sign or advertising
structure shall be attached to a standpipe or fire escape. No sign shall interfere with any opening required for ventilation.
D. Glass Limitation: Any glass forming a part of any sign shall be safety glass or its equivalent as approved by the building inspector, and of such
thickness as required to withstand wind loads.
E. Movable Sign Parts: No sign or its parts shall be permitted to be movable or rotating, nor shall any sign have illuminated effects which convey
the illusion of movement.
F. Items Secured: All manually movable items on a sign, such as covers to service openings, shall be secured by latches.
G. Location:
1. No freestanding sign shall be located within a triangular area established at the intersection of two (2) streets or a street and a driveway in
which nothing is erected, planted, placed, or allowed to grow so as to limit or obstruct the sight distance of motorists. Such a triangle shall
have legs of twenty five feet (25') along the rights of way when two (2) streets intersect, and ten feet (10') along the right of way and
driveway when a street and driveway intersect.
2. No sign shall be allowed to encroach upon the public right of way or public property, except as permitted under section 10-9-14 of this
chapter.
3. No sign facing the side or rear lot line of an abutting residentially zoned lot shall be located within fifty feet (50') of that residential lot line.
H. Illuminated Signs: All illuminated signs shall be subject to the following requirements:
1. Signs shall be shaded wherever necessary to avoid casting bright light upon property located in any residential district or upon any public
street or park. Any illuminated sign located on a lot adjacent to or across the street from any residential district, which sign is visible from
such residential district, shall not be illuminated between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
2. Internally illuminated signs shall permit light to shine fully through only the lettering and graphic elements of the sign. The background for
such lettering and graphics shall be opaque or translucent and shall transmit light at a level substantially less than that transmitted through
the lettering and graphics.
I. Traffic Safety: In order to ensure reasonable traffic safety, it shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any fluttering, undulating, swinging, rotating,
blinking, or flashing sign or attention gathering device. No sign or advertising structure shall be erected, installed or maintained in such a
manner as to obstruct free and clear vision, or as to distract the attention of the driver of any vehicle by reason of position, shape, color or
lighting thereof.
No sign or advertising structure shall be erected or maintained in such a manner as to be likely to interfere with, obstruct the view of, or
imitate, resemble, or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device. Accordingly, no sign or advertising structure shall make use
of the words "stop", "go", "slow", "look", "caution", "warning", "danger", or any similar word, phrase, symbol, or character, or employ any red,
yellow, orange, green or other colored lamp or light, in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic.
J. Sign Area Bonus: The replacement of nonconforming signs shall be encouraged through a bonus of ten percent (10%) applied to the allowable
area for individual signs if permits for the replacement of all legal nonconforming signs on a premises are requested and approved prior to
January 1, 2001.
K. Landscape Requirements: The following requirements must be included on plans that are submitted as a part of a sign permit application:
1. For every one square foot of gross sign area, there shall be provided one square foot of landscape area adjacent to the sign.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 332/387
2. The required landscape area shall complement the sign and consist of plantings such as deciduous or evergreen shrubs, flowering plants,
and ground cover. Sodded or seeded areas shall not qualify as part of the landscaped area.
3. All landscape areas shall be mulched to conserve moisture and minimize weed growth.
4. It shall be the duty of the property owner to maintain all such landscaped areas in a neat and proper manner. (Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-2001)
10-9-7: COMPUTATIONS:
The following principles shall control the computation of sign area and sign height:
A. Computation Of Area Of Individual Signs: The area of a sign face shall be the total exposed surface within a continuous perimeter composed
of a single rectangle enclosing the extreme limits of characters, lettering, illustrations, ornamentations, or other figures, together with any
material, or color used as an integral part of the background of the display, or to differentiate the sign from the background on which it is
placed, but not including any supporting framework, bracing, or decorative fence or wall when such fence or wall otherwise meets zoning
ordinance regulations and is clearly incidental to the display itself.
B. Computation Of Area Of Multifaced Signs: The sign area for a sign with more than one face shall be computed by adding together the area of
all sign faces visible from any one point. When two (2) identical sign faces are placed back-to-back, so that both faces cannot be viewed from
any point at the same time, and when such sign faces are part of the same sign structure and are not more than forty two inches (42") apart,
the sign area shall be computed by the measurement of one of the faces.
C. Computation Of Height: The height of a sign shall be the measurement from the top of the highest element of the sign to: 1) the average level
of the finished ground surface, exclusive of any filling or mounding, around any sign located more than twenty five feet (25') from a street right
of way; 2) the established street elevation when the sign is located within twenty five feet (25') from one street right of way; or 3) the average
of all street elevations when the sign is located within twenty five feet (25') from more than one street right of way. (Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-2001)
10-9-8: SIGNS ALLOWED IN RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS:
The following signs shall be permitted in residential zoning districts, and shall be subject to all applicable standards:
A. Exempt signs as specified in section 10-9-4 of this chapter.
B. The following temporary signs as specified and regulated in section 10-9-12 of this chapter:
1. Window signs.
2. Residential real estate signs.
3. Political signs.
4. Garage/yard sale signs.
5. Construction signs.
C. One identification sign, not to exceed fifty (50) square feet in total surface area for the following uses: religious institution, private or public
school, and facilities constructed and maintained by any taxing district. Such a sign may be illuminated, shall not exceed ten feet (10') in
height, and shall be set back a minimum of ten feet (10') from any lot line. Two (2) such identification signs may be erected at entrances to the
facility if the permitted square footage is divided equally into two (2) symmetrical signs, provided that all other provisions of this chapter are
met. (Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-2001)
10-9-9: SIGNS ALLOWED IN NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS:
The following signs shall be permitted in nonresidential zoning districts, and shall be subject to all applicable standards:
A. Freestanding signs shall be permitted, subject to the following provisions:
1. Number: There shall be a limit of one freestanding sign per lot, shopping center, shopping center outlot, or unified business center; i.e.,
either one pole sign or one ground sign, which shall be erected for the purpose of identifying the establishment. (Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-2001)
2. Height: No pole sign shall exceed twenty five feet (25') in height from grade, and no ground sign shall exceed ten feet (10') in height from
grade. (Ord. 2005-10, 4-4-2005)
3. Surface Area: No pole or ground sign shall exceed a maximum surface area of one hundred (100) square feet.
4. Setback: No freestanding sign shall be located closer than one foot (1') to any property line.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 333/387
5. Ground Clearance: All pole signs shall maintain a ground clearance of seven feet (7') from the grade to the bottom side of the sign.
6. Scale And Proportion: A pole or ground sign shall be compatible with the building or buildings it identifies, and the sign may not be of such a
size that it visually overpowers the building on the site.
7. Overhang: No pole sign may overhang any part of a structure, parking or loading space, driveway, or maneuvering aisle.
8. Illumination: Pole signs may only be internally illuminated. Ground signs may be internally or externally illuminated.
9. Tenant Identification Panels: Provision for identifying tenants within a shopping center or unified business center as part of the permitted
square footage of the sign identifying the shopping center or unified business center as a whole shall be permitted, provided that there shall
be a limit of two (2) panels or divisions of said sign for such purposes. (Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-2001)
10. Menu Board Signs: In addition to the one permitted freestanding sign, single faced menu board signs may be permitted for restaurants
provided such signs do not exceed twenty four (24) square feet in surface area or eight feet (8') in height. Menu board signs shall only be
permitted in business zoning districts, and shall only be internally illuminated. (Ord. 2006-15, 6-5-2006)
B. Wall signs shall be permitted, subject to the following provisions:
1. Location: A wall sign shall be erected upon the wall of the building facade having its principal frontage upon a public street. A wall sign may
be on the building facade other than the principal frontage if it faces a nonresidential district and the total square footage does not exceed
the total permitted on the principal frontage. In no case shall a wall sign be permitted that faces the side of any adjoining lot located in a
residential zoning district.
2. Number: A maximum of one wall sign per establishment shall be permitted, erected for the purpose of identifying the establishment, subject
to the following provisions:
a. No wall signs shall be permitted for individual tenants in a multi-story or multi-tenant office building, unless specifically authorized as part
of an approved PUD at the time of approval of said PUD.
b. A corporate logo shall be permitted, but shall count as the permitted wall sign if it is not incorporated into the wall sign.
3. Height: The maximum height of a wall sign shall be thirty feet (30') from grade, or two (2) stories, whichever is less, but in no case shall any
portion of such sign be extended above the roofline.
4. Surface Area: In the C-2, I, O/I and M zoning districts, the surface area of a wall sign shall not exceed two (2) square feet per one linear foot
of store frontage, or one hundred fifty (150) square feet, whichever is less. In the C-1 zoning district the surface area of a wall sign shall not
exceed one and one-half (11/2) square feet per one linear foot of store frontage, or one hundred (100) square feet, whichever is less.
5. Projection: No wall sign shall project from the building wall more than twelve inches (12").
6. Shape: The outlined shape and silhouette of a wall sign shall be simple and compatible with the building facade it is mounted on. Shapes
that disrupt the architectural order and composition of a building facade are not acceptable.
7. Scale And Proportion: Wall signs shall be harmonious in scale and proportion with the building facade they are mounted to and with the
architectural elements of the building, such as windows, cornices, sign friezes, and bays. A wall sign shall not visually overpower those
elements nor detract from the composition of the building facade.
8. Overhang: The edges of wall signs shall not overhang the top of bays or equivalent architectural features of building facades.
9. Illumination: Wall signs may be internally or wash-lighting illuminated. Wash lighting shall be accomplished by individual fixtures recessed in
horizontal housing above the sign or by gooseneck lights shielded by metal shades. Wash-lighting fixtures must be positioned at least three
feet (3') apart and provide even lighting.
10. Corner Units: Establishments occupying a corner unit in a building shall be entitled to have two (2) wall signs, one per wall, each adhering
to all of the other standards in this subsection, provided that:
a. The primary wall sign shall be deemed to be that which is located on the side of the unit that has the legal address or the principal
entrance for the general public.
b. The surface area of the secondary wall sign shall not exceed that of the primary wall sign.
c. The location of the secondary wall sign is not adjacent to any residential dwelling unit or vacant property located in a residential zoning
district.
d. Both sides of the corner unit face a public street. Signs facing a service drive, loading dock entrance, or the like shall be prohibited.
11. Mansard Roofs: Signs to be erected upon mansard roofs shall be treated as wall signs, and shall be single-faced. In no case shall the roof
or a portion of the roof itself be illuminated.
C. Canopy, under-canopy, and marquee signs shall be permitted subject to the following provisions:
1. Number: There shall be a limit of one canopy or one marquee sign per lot or per establishment, erected for the purpose of identifying the
establishment, except as otherwise provided for in this subsection, and provided that no wall signs are directed to the same street frontage.
2. Location: Canopy/marquee signs may be mounted on the face (vertical edges only) of the canopy/marquee proper.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 334/387
3. Signable Area: The signable area for canopy/marquee signs shall not extend beyond the canopy/marquee face on which the sign is located.
No sign or portion of a sign shall exceed the borderline of any outer edge of said canopy/marquee. No sign shall be placed on or over the
roof of said canopy/marquee.
4. Surface Area: The surface area of a canopy/marquee sign shall not exceed ten (10) square feet, or thirty percent (30%) of the signable wall
area of a canopy/marquee attached to the building front, whichever is greater. A multiple-bay canopy/marquee, such as drive-up lanes at a
financial institution, may have a sign for each bay, provided that the sum total of all such signs does not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the
surface area of the face of the canopy/marquee that faces a public street or private drive.
5. Projection: No canopy/marquee sign shall project more than eight inches (8") from the canopy/marquee proper.
6. Ground Clearance: A clearance of eight feet (8') shall be maintained from the lowest point on the canopy/marquee to the grade or walkway
under said canopy/marquee.
7. Shape: The outlined shape and silhouette of a canopy/marquee sign shall be simple and compatible with the building it is mounted on.
Shapes that disrupt the architectural order and composition of a building facade are not acceptable.
8. Scale And Proportion: Canopy/marquee signs shall be harmonious in scale and proportion with the building they are mounted to and with
the architectural elements of the building, such as windows, cornices, sign friezes, and bays. A canopy/marquee sign shall not visually
overpower those elements nor detract from the composition of the building facade.
9. Material: Canopy/marquee signs shall be constructed of a noncombustible type material.
10. Illumination: Canopy/marquee signs may only be internally illuminated.
11. Under-Canopy Signs: In addition to the signs permitted in this subsection, one under-canopy sign shall be permitted to be erected above a
general public entrance into the establishment in order to identify said establishment, provided that:
a. A minimum clearance of eight feet (8') from the walkway is maintained.
b. Such signs shall be placed perpendicular to the building, with the top edge of the sign fastened to the bottom edge of the canopy.
c. Such signs shall not exceed three (3) square feet in surface area.
d. Such signs may only be internally illuminated.
e. A limit of one sign per establishment shall be permitted.
D. Awning signs shall be permitted subject to the following provisions:
1. Location: Individual letters, words, or symbols may be directly affixed or applied to any surface of an awning, generally by painting, printing,
or weaving. Signs shall not be constructed of or applied to other material which are then fastened to the awning.
2. Surface Area: Provided that no wall signs or canopy/marquee signs are directed to the same street frontage, the surface area of an awning
sign shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the exterior surface area of an awning. If wall, canopy, or marquee signs are directed to the
same street frontage, the sign letters shall not exceed eight inches (8").
3. Ground Clearance: A clearance of eight feet (8') shall be maintained from the lowest point on the awning to the grade or walkway under
said awning.
4. Illumination: Awning signs shall not be illuminated.
E. Neon signs shall be permitted subject to the following provisions:
1. Number: There shall be a limit of one neon sign per lot or per establishment.
2. Surface Area: The surface area of a neon sign shall not exceed eight (8) square feet. The use of neon tubing or lighting to outline a window
or other portal shall be considered a neon sign and its surface area shall be measured from the outside edges of the sign.
3. Illumination: The use of neon tubing as the internal illumination of a sign shall not be considered a neon sign. (Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-2001)
10-9-10: PERMITTED EXTRA SIGNS:
A. Criteria: Certain business operations are hereby found to be unique with respect to their sign requirements and therefore justified to be
permitted to have extra signs, in addition to those specified in section 10-9-9 of this chapter, as specified below. These include:
1. Gasoline Stations: Gasoline stations are unique because their primary functions are performed out-of-doors in a manner prescribed by state
statutes.
2. Movie And Live Entertainment Theaters: These theaters are unique because of the rapid turnover of the name of their entertainment
product.
3. Unified Business Centers: Unified business centers are unique because of the concentrated development and their centralized ownership
characteristics.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 335/387
B. Gasoline Stations: In addition to the signs permitted by other sections of this chapter, the following signs are permitted uniquely to gasoline
stations:
1. Two (2) signs per pump island which designate the function of the island as "self-service" or "full service". Such signs shall not have more
than two (2) faces and shall not exceed three (3) square feet per face.
2. One sign displaying the price of fuel sold, with a maximum surface area of six (6) square feet per fuel type. Such signs shall not have more
than two (2) faces.
3. One nonilluminated sign identifying the service performed in each service bay may be placed over the opening to each bay. Such signs
shall have one face and shall not exceed three (3) square feet each.
4. One nonilluminated nameplate identifying the owner or operator is permitted adjacent to the doorway of the station. Such nameplate shall
have one face and shall not exceed two (2) square feet in area.
5. Temporary signs advertising batteries, tires, oil or other products which are directly related to motor vehicles, if the signs are located directly
adjacent to a display of the product(s) described. Such signs may have two (2) faces, however, their total area shall not exceed fifteen (15)
square feet.
6. One sign over each pump stand not to exceed twenty four inches (24") in height with length governed by the length of the pump itself.
7. One wall sign on a detached car wash building, provided that it conforms to all other provisions for wall signs as stated in this section.
8. Any signs required by state or federal government.
C. Movie And Live Entertainment Theaters: In addition to the signs permitted by other sections of this chapter, the following sign is permitted
uniquely to theaters:
1. Each theater may have one sign of up to fifty (50) square feet which will accommodate changeable lettering copy.
2. A theater's changeable copy sign may have two (2) faces if it is freestanding, but both faces must be parallel and located no more than two
feet (2') apart.
3. A theater's changeable copy sign may be located on a marquee, provided it does not project above or beyond the structural limits of such
marquee.
4. Otherwise, a theater's changeable copy sign shall conform to the regulations for the sign type to which it most nearly resembles.
D. Unified Business Centers: In addition to the signs permitted by other sections of this chapter, the following additional signs are permitted
uniquely to unified business centers:
1. A unified business center may have one identification sign for the center in addition to the signs permitted for each separate business. The
permitted area of such identification sign shall be based upon a ratio of five (5) square feet per one acre of the site, up to a maximum of one
hundred fifty (150) square feet. Tenant identification panels are permitted as part of the permitted square footage of the center identification
sign. Every unified business center is permitted an identification sign of eight (8) square feet. Otherwise, unified business center
identification signs shall conform to the regulations of the sign type to which they most closely resemble.
2. Unified business centers may have common directory signs to guide pedestrians to individual businesses on the site. Such signs shall be
limited to one square foot per business listed on the sign. Centers must have a minimum of ten (10) businesses to qualify to have one
directory sign and may have one additional sign for each ten (10) businesses. (Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-2001)
10-9-11: UNIFIED BUSINESS CENTER SIGN PLAN:
No permit shall be issued for a sign to be located in a unified business center until a comprehensive sign plan has been approved for the center
and the sign complies with the provisions thereof.
A. Unified Business Center Sign Plan Approval: Approval of a unified business center sign plan shall be at the discretion of the village board, after
review and recommendation of the plan commission, and in accordance with the criteria noted herein.
B. Application Contents: In addition to the requirements listed for permit applications in section 10-9-5 of this chapter, the application for a unified
business center sign plan shall include a format for all signs to be used in the center, including their maximum size, color, location, illumination
details, lettering type, and mounting details.
C. Criteria: The criteria used by the village in its review of the proposed unified business center sign plan shall include:
1. Scale And Proportion: Every sign shall have good scale and proportion in its design and in its visual relationship to the other signs, buildings
and surroundings.
2. Integral Elements: The signs in the plan shall be designed as integral architectural elements of the building and site to which they principally
relate and shall not appear as incongruous "add-ons" or intrusions.
3. Harmony: The colors, materials and lighting of every sign shall be harmonious with the building and site to which it principally relates.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 336/387
4. Effective Composition: The number of graphic elements and letters shall be held to the minimum needed to convey each sign's message
and shall be composed in proportion to the area of the sign's face.
5. Compatibility: Each sign shall be compatible with signs within the proposed unified business center.
6. Unified Image: The effect of the signs proposed in the plan shall be the establishment of a unified image for the center. (Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-
2001)
10-9-12: TEMPORARY SIGNS:
A. General Provisions: The following general provisions shall apply to all temporary signs:
1. Permit Required: An application is required for all temporary signs, except for construction signs, window signs, residential real estate signs,
and political signs. Upon application, the building inspector may issue permits for temporary signs or displays related to grand openings,
special promotions, going out of business, emergency information, and similar purposes.
2. Duration: Unless a specific duration for a particular temporary sign type is noted in this section, temporary signs must be removed within
fifteen (15) days from the date of activation. Temporary sign permits may be renewed twice within a calendar year.
3. Location: All temporary signs shall be erected only on the property of the permitted, unless the permitted is a nonprofit organization, and
shall be set back a minimum of five feet (5') from any public right of way.
4. Illumination: No temporary sign shall be illuminated.
5. Construction: All temporary signs shall be anchored and supported in a manner which reasonably prevents the possibility of the signs
becoming hazards to the public health and safety as determined by the building inspector.
6. Number: Unless a specific number of signs is listed for a particular temporary sign type, only one temporary sign shall be permitted per
zoning lot or business.
B. Temporary Sign Types: Temporary signs shall be limited in use to the following types of signs:
1. Freestanding signs shall be permitted subject to the following provisions:
a. Height: Freestanding signs shall not exceed eight feet (8') in height from grade.
b. Material: Freestanding signs shall be constructed of wood, metal, or other durable material and reasonably supported in or on the ground
by adequate bracing.
c. Surface Area: Freestanding signs shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet in surface area per face, and may be single-faced or
double-faced.
2. Banner signs shall be permitted subject to the following provisions:
a. Height: Banner signs shall not exceed the height of the first floor of the building, or twelve feet (12') from grade, whichever is greater.
b. Location: Banner signs without a permanent frame shall be affixed only to building walls. Banner signs with a permanent frame may also
be affixed to poles.
c. Number: One banner sign shall be permitted per zoning lot or business. If banner signs are mounted with a permanent frame, additional
banner signs are permitted at a ratio of one sign per seventy five feet (75') of lot frontage.
d. Surface Area: Banner signs shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet in surface area.
3. For sale/for lease/for rent signs shall be permitted subject to the following provisions:
a. Duration: A permit for a new development identification sign may be effective for no more than a period of three (3) years, or until ninety
percent (90%) of the units originally for sale or lease have been sold or leased for the first time, whichever comes first.
b. Height And Location: Such signs shall be located on the property advertised for sale, lease or rent and set back a minimum of ten feet
(10') from any property line, with a maximum height of fifteen feet (15').
c. Removal: The permit applicant shall be required to remove the for sale/for lease/for rent sign upon expiration of the permit as noted
above. To guarantee removal, an acceptable bond or letter of credit of one hundred fifteen percent (115%) of the cost of dismantling the
sign shall be provided to the Village at the time of permitting.
d. Size: The maximum surface area of such a sign shall be one hundred (100) square feet.
4. Residential real estate signs shall be permitted subject to the following provisions:
a. Location: The sign is located upon the property that is offered for sale, lease, or rent, or has been sold.
b. Message: The sign content shall be limited to the words "For Sale", "For Lease", "For Rent", "Open House", or "Sold" or substantially
similar terminology; the name, address, and phone number of the individual realtor or agent; and the name and logo of the realtor's
franchise or brokering office.
c. Number: Only one sign shall be permitted for each building, dwelling unit, or lot.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 337/387
d. Removal: The sign shall be removed within seven (7) days after the real estate closing, or lease or rental transaction is completed, except
that "Open House" signs shall be erected and removed on the day of the event.
e. Size And Height: The sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet in surface area. The sign shall not exceed four feet (4') in height from
grade.
5. Window signs shall be permitted subject to the following provisions. No permit is required for window signs.
a. Location: Window signs shall be affixed only to the interior surface of the glass and shall not be located on any windows above the first
floor of the building.
b. Surface Area: Such signs shall not exceed thirty five percent (35%) of the window surface area for each windowpane. Signs shall not be
affixed in such a manner that a safety hazard to customers or staff of the establishment is created by the obstruction of vision. The Chief
of Police or his designee(s) shall be empowered to require the removal or relocation of any such sign deemed to be a safety hazard.
6. Beacon or searchlights may be permitted in connection with grand openings or special events provided:
a. Direction Of Illumination: Lights must be oriented skyward not breaking an angle of forty five degrees (45) from the ground.
b. Duration: The sign(s) may be displayed for no more than fifteen (15) days. Upon expiration of said fifteen (15) days, the use of said sign
shall be discontinued and no inflatable sign advertising the same business or establishment shall be reinstalled or reerected for a period
of six (6) months.
c. Number: Only one unit shall be permitted per zoning lot. (Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-2001)
7. Political signs shall be allowed without permit, provided that: (Ord. 2016-37, 9-6-2016)
a. Duration: (Rep. by Ord. 2016-37, 9-6-2016)
b. Location: The sign shall be placed on private property and set back from any public right-of-way.
c. Number: There shall be no limit on the number of political signs permitted; provided, however, that the quantity of signs displayed does
not create a safety hazard to traffic by distracting motorists or interfering with safe pedestrian flow, in which case the Chief of Police
and/or the Building Commissioner shall be authorized to require that the number of signs be reasonably reduced.
d. Size And Height: In residential districts, the sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet in surface area. The sign shall not exceed four feet
(4') in height from grade. In nonresidential districts, a freestanding sign shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet in surface area. Signs
that are not freestanding shall not exceed nine (9) square feet in surface area. The sign shall not exceed six feet (6') in height from grade.
(Ord. 2016-37, 9-6-2016)
8. Garage/yard sale signs. See title 4, chapter 12 of this Code. (Ord. 2001-20, 9-10-2001)
9. Construction signs shall be permitted, provided that:
a. Duration: Signs shall not be installed prior to issuance of a building permit and shall be removed within seven (7) days of issuance of an
occupancy permit.
b. Location: The sign shall be placed on private property on the premises of the construction and set back a minimum of ten feet (10') from
any public right-of-way.
c. Number: One sign shall be permitted per zoning lot.
d. Size And Height: In nonresidential and multi-family zoning districts, the sign shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet in surface area.
The sign shall not exceed ten feet (10') in height from grade. The same standard shall apply to religious institutions, private or public
schools, golf courses and facilities constructed and maintained by any taxing district located in a single-family zoning district. For
residential uses in a single-family zoning district, the sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet in surface area and shall not exceed four
feet (4') in height from grade. (Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-2001)
10-9-13: LEGAL NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
A. Signs Existing On Effective Date: For any sign existing in the Village on April 2, 2001, an application for a sign permit must be submitted to the
Building Commissioner before December 31, 2001. Applications for permits for existing signs submitted before December 31, 2001, shall be
exempt from the application fees adopted under authority of this title. (Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-2001)
B. Nonconforming Existing Signs, Permits And Terms:
1. C-1 Zoning District: A sign in the C-1 District that would be permitted under this title only with a sign permit, but which was in existence on
April 2, 2001, and which was constructed in accordance with Village regulations in effect on the date of its construction, but which by reason
of its size, height, location, design or construction is not in conformance with requirements of this title, shall be issued a nonconforming sign
permit if an application in accordance with this section is timely filed.
Such permit shall allow the sign(s) subject to such permit, which are made nonconforming by this chapter, to remain in place and to be
maintained for a period ending no later than June 17, 2006, provided that no action is taken which increases the degree or extent of
nonconformity. (Ord. 2005-10, 4-4-2005)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 338/387
2. C-2, O/I, M, And I Zoning Districts: A sign in the C-2, O/I, M and I Districts that would be permitted under this title only with a sign permit, but
which was in existence on April 2, 2001, and which was constructed in accordance with village regulations in effect on the date of its
construction, but which by reason of its size, height, location, design or construction is not in conformance with requirements of this chapter,
shall be issued a nonconforming sign permit if an application in accordance with this section is timely filed.
Such permit shall allow the sign(s) subject to such permit, which are made nonconforming by this title, to remain in place and to be
maintained for a period ending no later than April 2, 2007, provided that no action is taken which increases the degree or extent of
nonconformity.
C. Loss Of Legal Nonconforming Status: A sign loses its legal nonconforming status if one or more of the following occurs:
1. Sign Altered: The sign is altered in any way, except for normal maintenance or repair;
2. Sign Relocated: The sign is relocated either on the premises or to another location;
3. Sign Unsafe: The sign fails to conform to the sections of this chapter regarding maintenance and operation, and public safety standards;
4. Sign Damaged: Damage occurs to a sign which requires repairs exceeding fifty percent (50%) of the replacement value of the sign;
5. Excessive Maintenance Costs: When any proposed change, repair, or maintenance would constitute an expense of more than twenty five
percent (25%) of the replacement value of the sign;
6. New Occupancy Permit: A change in use occurs which requires a new occupancy permit for the premises to which a legal nonconforming
sign relates.
On the date of occurrence of any of the above, the sign shall be immediately brought in compliance with this section with a new permit
secured, or shall be removed within thirty (30) days of that date.
D. Continuing Obligation: Nothing in this section shall relieve the owner or user of a legal nonconforming sign, or owner of the property on which
the legal nonconforming sign is located, from the provisions of this chapter regarding safety, maintenance, and repair of signs, provided
however, that any repainting, cleaning and other normal maintenance or repair of the sign or sign structure shall not modify the sign structure,
sign face or message in such a way which makes the sign more nonconforming.
E. Historic Signs: Other than safety requirements, the provisions of this sign code may be waived by the village board for historic signs upon
application for relief by the sign owner or by a village initiated action in accordance with the following procedure:
1. Upon filing of said application, the village board may declare a sign or group of signs to be "historic" by making findings according to the
guidelines below. Notwithstanding safety and maintenance regulations (section 10-9-17 of this chapter), a sign so designated by the village
board shall be deemed to conform with this code.
2. Signs may be so designated upon the finding that they exhibit unique characteristics that enhance the streetscape or the historic identity of
the village or neighborhood. Such a sign contributes to the historical or cultural character of the streetscape and the community at large.
3. Nothing in this subsection E shall prohibit the owner of a designated historic sign from removing such sign. (Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-2001)
10-9-14: SIGNS IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY:
No signs shall be allowed in the public right of way, except for the following:
A. Permanent Signs: Permanent signs including:
1. Public signs erected by or on behalf of a governmental body to post legal notices, identify public property, convey public information, and
direct or regulate pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
2. Informational signs of a public utility regarding its poles, lines, pipes, or facilities.
B. Emergency Signs: Emergency warning signs erected by a governmental agency, a public utility company, or a contractor doing authorized or
permitted work within the public right of way. (Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-2001)
10-9-15: OFFICIAL, CORPORATE AND ANCILLARY FLAGS:
The display of official, corporate and ancillary flags shall be permitted subject to the following requirements. These regulations are designed to
control the use of permanent flagpoles or staff upon which the flag is located and the relationship of the flag to the flagpole or staff. Flags and
flagpoles do not require a specific sign permit. Flags shall be permitted in all zoning districts subject to the following requirements:
A. Flags shall be displayed only on permanent flagpoles or staffs designed and constructed specifically and exclusively for flag display. No official,
corporate or ancillary flag shall be displayed on or attached in any manner to light poles, sign poles, trees, vehicles, or similar structures or
objects. The temporary display of flags where such requirements are impractical, such as a parade, holidays, or special events, shall be
deemed to be acceptable.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 339/387
B. There shall be a maximum of one flagpole per one hundred feet (100') of frontage within nonresidential zoning districts.
C. Flagpoles shall be set back a minimum of ten feet (10') from the property line.
D. The display of more than two (2) flags per flagpole shall be prohibited.
E. The height of a flagpole shall be in proportion to the scale of the building to which the pole relates, and in no case shall it be higher than the
following height limitations:
Building Height
Pole Height
Measured From Grade
Single-family uses 25 feet
All other uses:
0 - 25 feet 30 feet
25.1 feet or higher 35 feet
F. The vertical length of a permitted single flag on a flagpole or staff shall not exceed one-fourth (1/4) of the length of the pole or staff upon which
the flag is hung. Under no circumstances shall any flag exceed fifty (50) square feet in surface area. The official flag of the United States Of
America is exempt from this size restriction.
G. Flags shall be displayed in such a manner that no portion of the flag shall project over any property line or contact any other structure when
fully extended.
H. Flags shall not be mounted on or over roofs or rooflines in any fashion. Wall mounted official and corporate flags shall be displayed from
flagpoles or staffs not to exceed ten feet (10') in length. No portion of such flagpoles or staffs shall extend above the roofline or over a property
line.
I. Official flags shall be maintained in an orderly fashion, and in clean and good condition. The official flag of the United States Of America shall
be displayed in accordance with the flag code, title 36, USC, chapter 10, as amended by P.L. 344, 94th congress, approved July 7, 1976, or as
amended in the future. All other official flags should be displayed in accordance with the same standards of respect and protocol.
J. Corporate and ancillary flags shall be maintained in an orderly fashion, and in clean and good condition. Tattered or torn flags shall be removed
or replaced promptly. (Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-2001)
10-9-16: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
All signs not expressly permitted under this chapter or exempt from regulation under section 10-9-4 of this chapter, are prohibited in the village of
Broadview. Such signs include, but are not limited to:
A. Signs containing statements, words or pictures of an obscene or pornographic nature.
B. Any sign or advertising device painted or displayed on any vehicle or trailer parked on the public right of way, public property, or private
property so as to be prominently visible from a public right of way and parked for the flagrant purpose of providing advertisement of products
or directing people to a business or activity.
C. Signs nailed, tacked or otherwise affixed to trees or other vegetation in such a way as to puncture bark.
D. Handbills, posters, notices, or similar attention gathering devices posted or affixed on traffic control boxes, signs, lamp poles, utility poles, or
traffic control support.
E. Projecting signs.
F. Animated signs.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 340/387
G. Any sign attached to a chimney, on a fence or fence type wall, retaining wall, bench, fence post, refuse enclosure, utility box, storage shed,
bus shelter, satellite dish, antenna, or other accessory structure.
H. Any exterior string of lights or exposed light bulbs, except those that are temporarily displayed in conjunction with traditionally accepted civic,
patriotic, or religious holidays for a duration not to exceed sixty (60) days.
I. Any additional or subsequent sign painted on, attached, or otherwise affixed to poles or permitted signs.
J. Portable signs.
K. Off site signs except as to the areas described in section 10-9-16-1 of this chapter wherein they shall be considered a special use.
L. Inflatable signs.
M. Roof signs.
N. Electronic changeable copy signs except as a special use per section 10-9-16-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 13-02, 1-22-2013)
10-9-16-1: OFF SITE SIGNAGE (BILLBOARDS):
Outdoor advertising (billboards) shall be a special use in nonresidential and multi-family zoning districts, and shall be subject to all applicable
standards set forth herein:
A. Outdoor advertising (billboards) as follows:
1. Location Requirements: Outdoor advertising (billboards) shall be a special use only:
a. In O/I - office/industrial, C-2 - general commercial and multi-family residential zoning districts; and
b. Outdoor advertising (billboards) shall only be located along the Eisenhower Expressway (I-290) within the village; and
c. Outdoor advertising (billboards) shall only be located within two hundred fifty feet (250'), measured perpendicularly from the edge of the
right of way from the roadway from which the outdoor advertising (billboard) sign is intended to be viewed. Such distance is measured
from the center point of the support post. If the outdoor advertising (billboard) sign has more than one support, then separation distance is
measured from the center of the linear dimension of the outdoor advertising (billboard) sign.
2. Distance Requirements:
a. The minimum distance between any outdoor advertising (billboard) sign and another outdoor advertising (billboard) sign shall be at least
five hundred feet (500'). The separation distance is measured from the center points of the support posts. If the outdoor advertising
(billboard) sign has more than one support, then separation distance is measured from the center of the linear dimension of the outdoor
advertising (billboard) sign. Outdoor advertising (billboard) signs located outside the village limits shall be included in determining the
minimum separation distance.
3. Size And Facing Of Signs:
a. Each outdoor advertising (billboard) sign shall have only one sign face per facing (2 advertising faces per structure).
b. "V" type signs with a face that protrudes from the opposite face shall be permitted only where the linear distance between the outer edges
of the two (2) faces of the "V" sign is a maximum of sixteen feet (16'). Each "V" type sign face shall be visible in only one direction of
travel on the same side of the street.
c. The maximum display area of outdoor advertising (billboard) signs shall not exceed the gross surface area of one thousand two hundred
(1,200) square feet per sign face.
d. Side by side, two-tiered, stacked or decked signs shall be prohibited. Signs employing movement including, but not limited to, changeable
copy signs, pennants, flags, banners, streamers, propellers, disks and searchlights shall be prohibited. Flashing, blinking or similar
lighting shall be prohibited.
4. Height And Area Requirements:
a. The maximum height of an outdoor advertising (billboard) sign shall be one hundred ten feet (110');
b. Height shall be measured from the base of the pole structure to the top of the outdoor advertising (billboard) sign structure.
5. Submission Requirements: Applicants must comply with the requirements of section 10-7-4, "Special Uses", of this title in seeking a special
use for outdoor advertising (billboards).
6. Variances: A variance relating to outdoor advertising (billboard) signs may not be granted to permit any of the following:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 341/387
a. To allow more than one sign face per facing, or more than two (2) sign faces in total.
b. To allow the gross surface area to exceed the dimensions specified herein.
7. Maintenance And Nonconformity:
a. All signs and sign structures shall be kept in repair and in proper state of preservation.
b. Any lawfully erected billboard in existence on the effective date of these regulations may continue to be maintained in-kind and repaired
in-kind in place as long as the size or number thereof is not increased in terms of faces, length, height, or area. If such sign is damaged,
exceeding seventy five percent (75%) of its replacement value, it shall not be rebuilt; provided, however, that nothing herein shall prevent
maintenance, repainting or posting of legally established nonconforming signs. (Ord. 11-56, 11-21-2011)
10-9-16-2: ELECTRONIC CHANGEABLE COPY SIGNS:
A. Restrictions: Except as otherwise allowed in this chapter, electronic changeable copy signs shall be permitted only as a special use, per
section 10-7-4 of this title, and be an integral and subordinate portion of a freestanding sign. The electronic changeable copy sign shall be
included in the calculation of the maximum allowable sign surface area for the freestanding sign to which it is attached.
B. Special Use: Electronic changeable copy signs shall be a special use per section 10-7-4 of this title.
C. Requirements: Electronic changeable copy signs, other than off site signage, are limited to one per lot of record. Any permitted electronic
changeable copy signs shall be subject to all of the following requirements and shall comply with all state and federal laws:
1. Electronic changeable copy signs shall display static messages only with no animation, no effects simulating animation, and no video. The
messages shall not dissolve, fade, scroll, travel, flash, spin, revolve, shake or include any other type of movement or motion.
2. The interval (the amount of time in between the event) of change of any such static messages shall be no less than ten (10) seconds, i.e.,
each message displayed shall be displayed for a minimum period of ten (10) seconds.
3. Each transition from one message to a subsequent message shall be accomplished immediately with no fade, dissolve, scroll or travel and
shall be consistent with all state and federal laws.
4. Each such sign shall contain automatic dimmers that continuously monitor the brightness of the display using ambient and direct light
photocells and that maintain a maximum luminance during daylight hours not exceeding the lower of either the maximum luminance
permitted by applicable ordinance, regulation or special use permit during such hours, or seven thousand five hundred (7500) lumens per
square meter (whichever is lower) and that maintain a maximum luminance from dusk to sunrise not exceeding the lower of either the
maximum luminance permitted by ordinance, regulation or special use permit during such hours, or five hundred (500) lumens per square
meter (whichever is lower). Such sign shall also be equipped with a backup system with an almanac of sunrise and sunset times throughout
the year in the unlikely event of a photocell failure.
5. The sign shall be programmed or set in a manner such that the display will turn dark and emit no light in case of a malfunction.
6. Electronic messages shall not advertise products or services not available on the lot on which the electronic sign is located, other than
community or public service messages.
7. All approved electronic changeable copy signs shall be made available for emergency notifications as deemed necessary by the chief of
police.
D. Limited To Conforming Freestanding Sign: An electronic changeable copy sign may be located only as part of a monument or ground sign
which is in compliance with all applicable requirements of this chapter and other applicable requirements of law. No electronic changeable
copy sign may be located as part of a nonconforming sign.
E. Off Site Signage:
1. Electronic changeable copy signs shall display static messages only with no animation, no effects simulating animation, and no video. The
messages shall not dissolve, fade, scroll, travel, flash, spin, revolve, shake or include any other type of movement or motion.
2. Each transition from one message to a subsequent message shall be accomplished immediately with no fade, dissolve, scroll or travel and
shall be consistent with all state and federal laws.
3. The interval (the amount of time in between the event) of change of any such static messages shall be no less than ten (10) seconds, i.e.,
each message displayed shall be displayed for a minimum period of ten (10) seconds.
4. Each such sign shall contain automatic dimmers that continuously monitor the brightness of the display using ambient and direct light
photocells and that maintain a maximum luminance during daylight hours not exceeding the lower of either the maximum luminance
permitted by applicable ordinance, regulation or special use permit during such hours, or seven thousand five hundred (7500) lumens per
square meter (whichever is lower) and that maintain a maximum luminance from dusk to sunrise not exceeding the lower of either the
maximum luminance permitted by applicable ordinance, regulation or special use permit during such hours, or five hundred (500) lumens
per square meter (whichever is lower).
5. Such sign shall also be equipped with a backup system with an almanac of sunrise and sunset times throughout the year in the event of a
photocell failure.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 342/387
6. All approved electronic changeable copy signs shall be made available for emergency notifications as deemed necessary by the chief of
police. (Ord. 13-02, 1-22-2013)
10-9-17: MAINTENANCE AND OPERATION:
A. Maintenance And Repair: Every sign, including, but not limited to, those signs for which permits are required, shall be maintained in a safe,
presentable, and good structural condition at all times, including replacement of defective parts, painting, cleaning and other acts required to
maintain the sign, advertising structure, marquee, canopy or awning in its originally permitted and installed condition in accordance with the
following criteria and with the applicable chapters of this code:
1. Paint Or Treat: To prevent rust, peeling, flaking, fading or rotting, the owner of any sign or advertising structure shall, as required, paint all
parts and supports thereof unless the same are galvanized, stainless or otherwise treated.
2. Repairs: Broken panels, missing letters, defective illumination, torn fabric, flaking or peeling paint and other damage to a sign, advertising
structure, marquee, awning, canopy or support structure shall be repaired.
3. Clean And Sanitary: All signs or advertising structures and the area surrounding same shall be maintained by the owner thereof in a clean,
sanitary and inoffensive condition, and free and clear of all debris, rubbish and obnoxious substances, and any related grassed area or
landscaping shall be kept trimmed and in a healthy condition.
B. Obsolete Or Abandoned Signs: For any sign or advertising structure now or hereafter existing, which advertises a business, commodity,
service, entertainment, activity, or event which has been discontinued, or is located on property which has been vacant and unoccupied, the
building inspector shall give written notice requiring removal of the sign to permittee thereof, or if the permittee cannot be located, to the
owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of the building, structure or premises upon which it is found. If, after notification, the proper
person fails to remove the sign or structure within sixty (60) days after such notice the building inspector is hereby authorized to have such
sign or advertising structure removed.
C. Unsafe And Unlawful Signs: For any sign or advertising structure that is unsafe or insecure, or is a menace to the public, or has been
constructed or erected, or is being maintained in violation of the provisions of this chapter, the building inspector shall give written notice to the
permittee thereof, or if the permittee cannot be located, to the owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of the building, structure or
premises upon which it is found. If, after notification, the proper person fails to remove or alter the structure so as to comply with the standards
of this section within thirty (30) days after such notice, the building inspector is hereby authorized to have such sign or advertising structure
removed. The building inspector may summarily, and without notice, have removed any sign or advertising structure which is an immediate
safety hazard to persons or property.
D. Lien To Recover Costs: In the event of failure by any party to reimburse the village within sixty (60) days for costs incurred for repair or removal
ordered by the building inspector, the village board shall certify the charges for repair or removal to the village's legal counsel, who will be then
authorized to file a notice of lien in the office of the Cook County recorder of deeds to foreclose this lien, and to sue the owner of the real
estate, or sign permittee, or their agents, in a civil action to recover the money due for the foregoing services, plus all expenses and
reasonable attorney fees to be fixed by the court. Included in the expenses recoverable by the village are the costs of filing the notice of lien,
foreclosing said lien, and all litigation costs, together with all office and legal expense incurred in connection with the collection of the amount
due. (Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-2001)
10-9-18: VIOLATIONS:
A. Any of the following shall be a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the enforcement remedies and penalties provided by this section,
by the zoning ordinance, and by state law:
1. To install, create, erect, or maintain any sign in a way that is inconsistent with any plan or permit governing such sign or the zoning lot on
which the sign is located;
2. To install, create, erect, or maintain any sign requiring a permit without first securing such a permit;
3. To fail to remove any sign that is installed, created, erected, or maintained in violation of this chapter, or for which the sign permit has
lapsed.
B. Each sign installed, created, erected, or maintained in violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate violation when applying the
penalty portions of this chapter. (Ord. 2001-08A, 4-2-2001)
10-9-19: ENFORCEMENT AND REMEDIES:
A. The building commissioner is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
B. The building commissioner may inspect, at such times as he deems necessary, each sign or sign structure regulated by this chapter for the
purpose of ascertaining whether the sign is in compliance with this chapter or any other relevant code, law or ordinance.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 343/387
C. The building commissioner shall give notice to the owner or to any person occupying the property that the sign on his/her premises is in
violation of this chapter.
D. Remedies of the village for violation of this chapter shall include the following:
1. Issuing a stop work order for any and all work on any signs in the same zoning lot;
2. Seeking an injunction or other order of restraint or abatement that requires the removal of the sign(s) or the correction of the nonconformity;
3. Imposing any penalties that can be imposed directly by the village under the zoning ordinance;
4. Seeking in court the imposition of any penalties that can be imposed by such court under the zoning ordinance; and
5. Issuance of a citation for not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day such violation
continues shall be considered a separate violation;
6. Causing any sign or other advertising structure, which is an immediate peril to persons or property, to be removed summarily without notice;
and
7. All other remedies as provided for or allowed by state law for the violation of this chapter and the zoning ordinance.
E. Any sign advertising a defunct business, or an unavailable product or service, shall be taken down and removed by the owner, agent or person
having control of the premises upon which the sign is located within ninety (90) days of the business vacating the premises.
F. Failure to comply with any notice by the building commissioner concerning violations of this chapter within the time specified shall cause the
building commissioner to authorize removal. Expenses related to removal shall be the responsibility of the owner of the premises upon which
such sign is located.
1. The building commissioner shall notify the owner or occupant of the premises of the total costs incurred for such repair or removal of the
sign. If the owner or occupant fails to pay the costs and expenses of such repair or removal within thirty (30) days of the notice, then such
costs and expenses shall become a lien against the property.
G. All such remedies provided herein shall be cumulative. To the extent that state law may limit the availability of a particular remedy set forth
herein for a certain violation or a part thereof, such remedy shall remain available for other violations or other parts of the same violation. (Ord.
13-02, 1-22-2013)
Title 11
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL SUBDIVISION PROVISIONS
11-1-1: AUTHORITY TO MAKE RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The Planning Commission1 shall make such rules and regulations pertaining to subdivisions for the requirements for approval of subdivisions in
conformity with the provisions of State law2. Such regulations shall be kept on file in the office of the Village Clerk. (1987 Code)
11-1-2: CONFORMANCE WITH OFFICIAL PLAN:
No map or plat of any subdivision presented for record affecting land within the corporate limits and in contiguous territory outside of the Village
and distant not more than one and one-half (11/2) miles from such limits, and not included in any city, village or incorporated town, after the
adoption of the Official Plan as provided in Section 2-5-4 of this Code, shall be entitled to record or shall be valid unless the subdivision thereon
shown shall provide for streets, alleys and public grounds in conformity with any requirements applicable thereto, on such Official Plan. (1987
Code)
11-1-3: FEES:
Upon the filing of a preliminary plat and final plat at the office of the Planning Commission, a fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each plat shall be
paid to the Collector for processing charges. All fees shall be placed in the General Fund. (1987 Code)
Title 12
FLOOD CONTROL
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 344/387
Chapter 1
FLOOD CONTROL REGULATIONS
12-1-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to the village by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-2, 5/11-
30-8, and 5/11-31-2 (1994). The purpose of this chapter is to maintain the village's eligibility in the national flood insurance program; to minimize
potential losses due to periodic flooding including loss of life, loss of property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and
governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely
affect the public health, safety and general welfare; and to preserve and enhance the quality of surface waters, conserve economic and natural
values and provide for the wise utilization of water and related land resources. This chapter is adopted in order to accomplish the following
specific purposes:
A. To meet the requirements of 615 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/18g rivers, lakes and streams act;
B. To assure that new development does not increase the flood or drainage hazards to others, or create unstable conditions susceptible to
erosion;
C. To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood damage;
D. To protect human life and health from the hazards of flooding;
E. To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control projects, repairs to flood damaged public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and
relief operations; and
F. To make federally subsidized flood insurance available for property in the village by fulfilling the requirements of the national flood insurance
program;
G. To comply with the rules and regulations of the national flood insurance program codified as 44 CFR 59-79, as amended;
H. To protect, conserve, and promote the orderly development of land and water resources;
I. To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses and floodplains in order to moderate flood and storm water impacts,
improve water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat, provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits
and enhance community and economic development. (Ord. 2005-11, 5-16-2005)
12-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions are adopted:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is
incidental to the use of the principal structure.
ACT: "An act in relation to the regulation of the rivers, lakes and streams of the state of Illinois", 615 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5 et seq.
APPLICANT: Any person, firm, corporation or agency which submits an application.
APPROPRIATE USE: Only uses of the designated floodway that are permissible and will be considered for permit issuance. The only uses that
will be allowed are as specified in subsection 12-1-7D of this chapter.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also known as the
100-year frequency flood event. Application of the base flood elevation at any location is as defined in section 12-1-5 of this chapter.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The elevation in relation to mean sea level of the crest of the base flood.
BUILDING: A structure that is principally aboveground and is enclosed by walls and a roof. The term includes a gas or liquid storage tank, a
manufactured home, mobile home or a prefabricated building. This term also includes recreational vehicles and travel trailers to be installed on a
site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days, unless fully licensed and ready for highway use.
CHANNEL: Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial depression, ponded area, flowage, slough, ditch, conduit, culvert, gully,
ravine, wash, or natural or manmade drainageway, which has a definite bed and banks or shoreline, in or into which surface or ground water
flows, either perennially or intermittently.
CHANNEL MODIFICATION: Alteration of a channel by changing the physical dimensions or materials of its bed or banks. Channel modification
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 345/387
includes damming, riprapping (or other armoring), widening, deepening, straightening, relocating, lining and significant removal of native
vegetation from the bottom or banks. Channel modification does not include the clearing of dead or dying vegetation, debris, or trash from the
channel. Channelization is a severe form of channel modification involving a significant change in the channel cross section and typically involving
relocation of the existing channel (e.g., straightening).
COMPENSATORY STORAGE: An artificially excavated, hydraulically equivalent volume of storage within the SFHA used to balance the loss of
natural flood storage capacity when artificial fill or structures are placed within the floodplain. The uncompensated loss of natural floodplain
storage can increase off site floodwater elevations and flows.
CONDITIONAL APPROVAL OF A DESIGNATED FLOODWAY MAP CHANGE: Preconstruction approval by IDNR/OWR and FEMA of a proposed
change to the floodway map. This preconstruction approval, pursuant to this part, gives assurances to the property owner that once an
appropriate use is constructed according to permitted plans, the floodway map can be changed, as previously agreed, upon review and
acceptance of as built plans.
CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR): A letter which indicates that FEMA will revise base flood elevations, flood insurance rate
zones, flood boundaries or floodway as shown on an effective flood hazard boundary map or flood insurance rate map, once the as built plans are
submitted and approved.
CONTROL STRUCTURE: A structure designed to control the rate of flow that passes through the structure, given a specific upstream and
downstream water surface elevation.
CRITICAL FACILITY: Any public or private facility which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard
to life and health. Examples are public buildings, emergency operations and communication centers, etc.
DAM: All obstructions, wall embankments or barriers, together with their abutments and appurtenant works, if any, constructed for the purpose of
storing or diverting water or creating a pool. Underground water storage tanks are not included.
DESIGNATED FLOODWAY: The channel, including on stream lakes, and that portion of the floodplain adjacent to a stream or watercourse as
designated by IDNR/OWR, which is needed to store and convey the existing 100-year frequency flood discharge with no more than a 0.1 foot
increase in stage due to the loss of flood conveyance or storage, and no more than a ten percent (10%) increase in velocities.
A. The floodways are designated for Addison Creek and Salt Creek on the flood insurance rate map prepared by FEMA on map number
17031C panel 0476G dated June 2, 2005. The floodways for Des Plaines River are on the flood insurance rate map prepared by FEMA on
map number 17031C panel 0477F dated November 2, 2000. When two (2) floodway maps exist for a waterway, the more restrictive
floodway limit shall prevail.
B. The floodways for those parts of unincorporated Cook County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village that may be
annexed into the village are designated for Salt Creek on the flood insurance rate map prepared by FEMA on map number 17031C panel(s)
0478F, 0457F and 0459F dated November 6, 2000.
C. To locate the designated floodway boundary on any site, the designated floodway boundary should be scaled off the designated floodway
map and located on a site plan, using reference marks common to both maps. Where interpretation is needed to determine the exact
location of the designated floodway boundary, IDNR/OWR should be contacted for the interpretation.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to real estate, including:
A. Construction, reconstruction, repair, or placement of a building or any addition to a building.
B. Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a
site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days. If the travel trailer or recreational vehicle is on site for less than one hundred eighty (180)
days, it must be fully licensed and ready for highway use.
C. Drilling, mining, installing utilities, construction of roads, bridges, or similar projects.
D. Demolition of a structure or redevelopment of a site.
E. Clearing of land as an adjunct of construction.
F. Construction or erection of levees, walls, fences, dams, or culverts; channel modification; filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving, or
other nonagricultural alterations of the ground surface; storage of materials; deposit of solid or liquid waste.
G. Any other activity of man that might change the direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface water, including extensive vegetation
removal.
Development does not include routine maintenance of existing buildings and facilities such as reroofing or resurfacing of roads when there is
no increase in elevation, or gardening, plowing, and similar agricultural practices that do not involve filling, grading, or construction of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 346/387
levees.
ELEVATION CERTIFICATES: A form published by FEMA that is used to certify the elevation to which a building has been elevated.
EROSION: The general process whereby soils are moved by flowing water or wave action.
EXEMPT ORGANIZATIONS: Organizations which are exempt from this chapter per Illinois Compiled Statutes (ILCS) including state, federal or
local units of government.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities
for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) has been completed before April 1, 1990.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets,
and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FEMA: Federal emergency management agency and its regulations at 44 CFR 59-79 revised as of October 1, 2001. This incorporation does not
include any later editions or amendments.
FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from overflow of inland or tidal waves, or
the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD FREQUENCY: A period of years, based on a statistical analysis, during which a flood of a stated magnitude may be expected to be
equaled or exceeded.
FLOOD FRINGE: That portion of the floodplain outside of the designated floodway.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP: An official map of a community where the boundaries of the flood having special hazard areas have been
designated as zone A.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAPS (FIRM): A map prepared by FEMA that depicts the special flood hazard area (SFHA) within a community. This
map includes insurance rate zones and floodplains and may or may not depict floodways.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: An examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and if appropriate, corresponding water surface
elevations.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): The elevation of the base flood or 100-year frequency flood plus one foot (1') of freeboard at any
given location in the SFHA.
FLOODPLAIN: That land typically adjacent to a body of water with ground surface elevations at or below the base flood or the 100-year frequency
flood elevation. Floodplains may also include detached special flood hazard areas, ponding areas, etc. The floodplain is also known as the
special flood hazard area (SFHA).
A. The floodplains are those lands within the jurisdiction of the village that are subject to inundation by the base flood or 100-year frequency
flood. The SFHAs of the village for Addison Creek and Salt Creek are on the flood insurance rate map prepared by FEMA on map number
17031C panel 0476G dated June 2, 2005. The floodplains for Des Plaines River are on the flood insurance rate map prepared by FEMA on
map number 17031C panel 0477F dated November 2, 2000.
B. The SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated Cook County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village or that may be
annexed into the village are designated for Salt Creek on the flood insurance rate map prepared by FEMA on map number 17031C panel(s)
0478F, 0457F and 0459F dated November 6, 2000.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE: A form published by FEMA that is used to certify that a building has been designed and constructed to be
structurally dry floodproofed to the flood protection elevation.
FREEBOARD: An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, future
watershed development, unknown localized conditions, wave actions and unpredictable effects such as those caused by ice or debris jams.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
A. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the national register;
B. Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historic district or a district preliminarily determined
by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 347/387
C. Individually listed on the state inventory of historic places by the Illinois historic preservation agency;
D. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that has been certified by the Illinois historic preservation agency.
HYDROLOGIC AND HYDRAULIC CALCULATIONS: Engineering analysis which determines expected flood flows and flood elevations based on
land characteristics and rainfall events.
IDNR/OWR: Illinois department of natural resources, office of water resources.
LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA): Official determination by FEMA that a specific structure is not in a 100-year flood zone; amends the
effective flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) or FIRM.
LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR): Letter that revises base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood
boundaries or floodways as shown on an effective FHBM or FIRM.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that
such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designated for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term manufactured homes also includes park trailers, travel
trailers and other similar vehicles placed on site for more than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days. The term "manufactured home" does
not include a "recreational vehicle".
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots
for rent or sale.
MITIGATION: Includes those measures necessary to minimize the negative effects which floodplain development activities might have on the
public health, safety and welfare. Examples of mitigation include compensatory storage, soil erosion and sedimentation control, and channel
restoration. Mitigation may also include those activities taken to reduce a structure's susceptibility to flooding.
NGVD NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM OF 1929: Reference surface set by the national geodetic survey deduced from a continental
adjustment of all existing adjustments in 1929.
NATURAL: When used in reference to channels means those channels formed by the existing surface topography of the earth prior to changes
made by man. A natural stream tends to follow a meandering path; its floodplain is not constrained by levees; the area near the bank has not
been cleared, mowed or cultivated; the stream flows over soil and geologic materials typical of the area with no substantial alteration of the
course or cross section of the stream caused by filling or excavating. A modified channel may regain some natural characteristics over time as the
channel meanders and vegetation is reestablished. Similarly, a modified channel may be restored to more natural conditions by man through
regrading and revegetation.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: Structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management
regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: Manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) has been completed on or after April 1, 1990.
ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK (OHWM): The point on the bank or shore up to which the presence and action of surface water is so
continuous so as to leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic
vegetation or other easily recognized characteristics.
PUBLIC BODIES OF WATERS: All open public streams and lakes capable of being navigated by watercraft, in whole or in part, for commercial
uses and purposes, and all lakes, rivers, and streams which in their natural condition were capable of being improved and made navigable, or
that are connected with or discharge their waters into navigable lakes or rivers within, or upon the borders of the state of Illinois, together with all
bayous, sloughs, backwaters, and submerged lands that are open to the main channel or body of water directly accessible thereto.
PUBLIC FLOOD CONTROL PROJECT: A flood control project which will be operated and maintained by a public agency to reduce flood
damages to existing buildings and structures which includes a hydrologic and hydraulic study of the existing and proposed conditions of the
watershed. Nothing in this definition shall preclude the design, engineering, construction or financing, in whole or in part, of a flood control project
by persons or parties who are not public agencies.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE OR TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicle which is:
A. Built on a single chassis;
B. Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
C. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 348/387
D. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
REGISTERED LAND SURVEYOR: A land surveyor registered in the state of Illinois, under the Illinois land surveyors act1.
REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER: An engineer registered in the state of Illinois, under the Illinois professional engineering practice
act2.
REPAIR, REMODELING OR MAINTENANCE: Development activities which do not result in any increases in the outside dimensions of a building
or any changes to the dimensions of a structure.
REPETITIVE LOSS: Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two (2) separate occasions during a ten (10) year period for which the
cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds twenty five percent (25%) of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
RETENTION/DETENTION FACILITY: A retention facility stores storm water runoff without a gravity release. A detention facility provides for
storage of storm water runoff and controlled release of this runoff during and after a flood or storm.
RIVERINE SFHA: Any SFHA subject to flooding from a river, creek, intermittent stream, ditch, on stream lake system or any other identified
channel. This term does not include areas subject to flooding from lakes, ponding areas, areas of sheet flow, or other areas not subject to
overbank flooding.
RUNOFF: The water derived from melting snow or rain falling on the land surface, flowing over the surface of the ground or collected in channels
or conduits.
SEDIMENTATION: The processes that deposit soil, debris, and other materials either on other ground surfaces or in bodies of water or
watercourses.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): Any base flood area subject to flooding from a river, creek, intermittent stream, ditch, or any other
identified channel or ponding and shown on a flood hazard boundary map or flood insurance rate map as zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99, AH, VO,
V30, VE, V, M, E, or D.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the
permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or
footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or placement of a manufactured home
on a foundation.
STRUCTURE: The results of a manmade change to the land constructed on or below the ground, including the construction, reconstruction or
placement of a building or any addition to a building; installing a manufactured home on a site; preparing a site for a manufactured home or
installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days unless they are fully licensed and ready for highway use.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damage
condition would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred, regardless of the actual
repair work performed. Volunteer labor and materials must be included in this determination. Damage of less than fifty percent (50%) of the fair
market value will be applied to the repetitive loss calculations.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: A. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement.
B. For the purposes of this definition "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
C. The term does not, however, include either:
1. Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are
solely necessary to assure safe living conditions or
2. Any alteration of a "historic structure" listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the Illinois Register of Historic Places, provided
that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure.
TRANSITION SECTION: Reaches of the stream or floodway where water flows from a narrow cross section to a wide cross section or vice versa.
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance is presumed to be in violation
until such time as that documentation is provided. (Ord. 2005-11, 5-16-2005)
12-1-3: HOW TO USE THIS CHAPTER:
A. The building commissioner shall be responsible for fulfilling all of the duties listed in section 12-1-4 of this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 349/387
B. To fulfill those duties, the building commissioner first should use the criteria listed in section 12-1-5, "Base Flood Elevation", of this chapter to
determine whether the development site is located within a floodplain.
Once it has been determined that a site is located within a floodplain, the building commissioner must determine whether the development site
is within a flood fringe, a designated floodway, or within an SFHA or floodplain for which no floodway has been identified.
1. If the site is within a flood fringe, the building commissioner shall require that the minimum requirements of section 12-1-6 of this chapter be
met.
2. If the site is within a floodway, the building commissioner shall require that the minimum requirements of section 12-1-7 of this chapter be
met.
3. If the site is located within an SFHA or floodplain for which no detailed study has been completed and approved, the building commissioner
shall require that the minimum requirements of section 12-1-8 of this chapter be met.
C. In addition, the general requirements of section 12-1-9 of this chapter shall be met for all developments meeting the requirements of section
12-1-6, 12-1-7, or 12-1-8 of this chapter.
D. The building commissioner shall assure that all subdivision proposals shall meet the requirements of section 12-1-10 of this chapter.
E. If a variance is to be granted for a proposal, the building commissioner shall review the requirements of section 12-1-11 of this chapter to make
sure they are met. In addition, the building commissioner shall complete all notification requirements.
F. In order to assure that property owners obtain permits as required in this chapter, the building commissioner may take any and all actions as
outlined in section 12-1-13 of this chapter. (Ord. 2005-11, 5-16-2005)
12-1-4: DUTIES OF THE ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL(S):
The building commissioner shall be responsible for the general administration and enforcement of this chapter which shall include the following:
A. Determining The Floodplain Designation: Check all new development sites to determine whether they are in a special flood hazard area
(SFHA). If they are in an SFHA, determine whether they are in a floodway, flood fringe or in a floodplain for which a detailed study has not
been conducted and which drains more than one square mile. Check whether the development is potentially within an extended SFHA (with a
drainage area less than 1 square mile), indicating that the development would have adverse impacts regarding storage, conveyance, or
inundation which would be the basis for the applicant being required to delineate the floodplain and floodway and be subject to the remaining
sections of this chapter.
B. Professional Engineer Review: If the development site is within a floodway or in a floodplain for which a detailed study has not been conducted
and which drains more than one square mile, the permit shall be referred to a registered professional engineer under the employ or contract of
the village for review to ensure that the development meets section 12-1-7 or 12-1-8 of this chapter. In the case of an appropriate use, the PE
shall state in writing that the development meets the requirements of section 12-1-7 of this chapter.
C. Dam Safety Requirements: Ensure that an IDNR/OWR permit has been issued or a letter indicating no permit is required, if the proposed
development activity includes construction of a "dam" as defined in section 12-1-2 of this chapter. Regulated dams may include weirs,
restrictive culverts or impoundment structures.
D. Other Permit Requirements: Ensure that any and all required federal, state and local permits are received prior to the issuance of a floodplain
development permit.
E. Plan Review And Permit Issuance: Ensure that all development activities within the SFHAs of the jurisdiction of the village meet the
requirements of this chapter, and issue a floodplain development permit in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and other regulations
of this community when the development meets the conditions of this chapter.
F. Inspection Review: Inspect all development projects before, during and after construction to assure proper elevation of the structure and to
ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
G. Damage Determinations: Make damage determinations of all damaged buildings in the SFHA after a flood to determine substantially damaged
structures which must comply with subsection 12-1-9C1c of this chapter.
H. Elevation And Floodproofing Certificates: Maintain permit files including: 1) an elevation certificate certifying the elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) of a residential or nonresidential building, and/or; 2) the elevation to which a nonresidential building has been
floodproofed, using a floodproofing certificate, for all buildings subject to section 12-1-9 of this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 350/387
I. Records For Public Inspection: Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request base flood data, SFHA and designated floodway maps,
copies of federal or state permit documents, variance documentation, conditional letter of map revision, letter of map revision, letter of map
amendment and "as built" elevation and floodproofing and/or elevation certificates for all buildings constructed subject to this chapter.
J. State Permits: Ensure that construction authorization has been granted by IDNR/OWR, for all development projects subject to sections 12-1-7
and 12-1-8 of this chapter, unless enforcement responsibility has been delegated to the village. However, the following review approvals are
not delegated to the village and shall require review or permits from IDNR/OWR:
1. Organizations which are exempt from this chapter, as per Illinois Compiled Statutes;
2. IDNR/OWR projects, dams or impoundment structures as defined in section 12-1-2 of this chapter and all other state, federal or local unit of
government projects, including projects of the village and county, except for those projects meeting the requirements of subsection 12-1-7J
of this chapter;
3. An engineer's determination that an existing bridge or culvert crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis indicating the
proposed flood profile, per subsection 12-1-7F5 of this chapter;
4. An engineer's analysis of the flood profile due to subsection 12-1-7F4 of this chapter;
5. Alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent compensatory storage as indicated in subsections 12-1-7F1, F2, and F8 of this
chapter;
6. Permit issuance of structures within, under, or over publicly navigable rivers, lakes and streams;
7. Any changes in the base flood elevation or floodway locations; and
8. Base flood elevation determinations where none now exist.
K. Cooperation With Other Agencies: Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to improve base flood or 100-year
frequency flood and floodway data and to improve the administration of this chapter; submit data to IDNR/OWR and FEMA for proposed
revisions of a regulatory map within six (6) months whenever a modification of the floodplain may change the base flood elevation or result in
a change to the floodplain map. Submit reports as required for the national flood insurance program. Notify FEMA of any proposed
amendments to this chapter.
L. Promulgate Regulations: Promulgate rules and regulations as necessary to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter, subject
however to the review and approval of IDNR/OWR and FEMA for any chapter changes. (Ord. 2005-11, 5-16-2005)
12-1-5: BASE FLOOD ELEVATION:
This chapter's protection standard is based on the flood insurance study for the village. If a base flood elevation or 100-year frequency flood
elevation is not available for a particular site, then the protection standard shall be according to the best existing data available in the Illinois state
water survey's floodplain information repository that has been approved by IDNR/OWR and FEMA. When a party disagrees with the best
available data, he/she shall finance the detailed engineering study needed to replace existing data with better data and submit it to IDNR/OWR
and FEMA for approval prior to any development of the site.
A. The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the SFHAs of Addison Creek and Salt Creek shall be as delineated on the 100-year
flood profiles in the flood insurance study of the village prepared by FEMA (or the department of housing and urban development) and dated
June 2, 2005, and such amendments to such study and maps as may be prepared from time to time.
B. The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated Cook County that are within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village or that may be annexed into the village shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the flood
insurance study of Cook County prepared by FEMA (or department of housing and urban development) and dated June 2, 2005, and such
amendments or revisions to such study and maps as may be prepared from time to time.
C. The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each SFHA delineated as an AH zone or AO zone shall be that elevation (or depth)
delineated on the flood insurance rate map of the village.
D. The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each of the remaining SFHAs delineated as an A zone on the flood insurance rate
map of the village shall be according to the best existing data available in the Illinois state water survey floodplain information repository.
1. When no base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation exists, the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for a riverine SFHA
shall be determined from a backwater model, such as HEC-II, WSP-2, or a dynamic model such as HIP.
2. The flood flows used in the hydraulic models shall be obtained from a hydrologic model, such as HEC-I, TR-20, or HIP, or by techniques
presented in various publications prepared by the United States geological survey for estimating peak flood discharges.
3. Along any watercourses draining more than one square mile, the above analyses shall be submitted to IDNR/OWR for approval. Once
approved it must be submitted to the Illinois state water survey floodplain information repository for filing.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 351/387
4. For a nonriverine SFHA, the base flood elevation shall be the historic flood of record plus three feet (3'), unless calculated by a detailed
engineering study and approved by IDNR/OWR for drainage areas greater than one square mile.
5. For an unmapped extended SFHA (with a drainage area less than 1 square mile) which has been identified by the building commissioner
pursuant to subsection 12-1-4A of this chapter, the base flood elevation shall be determined by the applicant utilizing a method as approved
in this subsection D, with concurrence of the building commissioner. (Ord. 2005-11, 5-16-2005)
12-1-6: OCCUPATION AND USE OF FLOOD FRINGE AREAS:
Development in and/or filling of the flood fringe will be permitted if protection is provided against the base flood or 100-year frequency flood by
proper elevation, and compensatory storage, and other applicable provisions of this chapter. No use will be permitted which adversely affects the
capacity of drainage facilities or systems. Developments located within the flood fringe shall meet the requirements of this section, along with the
requirements of section 12-1-9 of this chapter.
A. Development Permit: No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not exempted by law shall commence any development in the SFHA
without first obtaining a development permit from the building commissioner.
B. Application For Permit: Application for a development permit shall be made on a form provided by the building commissioner. The application
shall be accompanied by drawings of the site, drawn to scale, showing property line dimensions and legal description for the property and
sealed by a licensed engineer, architect or land surveyor; existing grade elevations in MSL, 1929 adjustment datum or NGVD and all changes
in grade resulting from excavation or filling; the location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings. For all proposed buildings,
the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) and lowest adjacent grade shall be shown on the submitted plans and the development
will be subject to the requirements of section 12-1-9 of this chapter.
C. Comparison Of Elevation: Upon receipt of a development permit application, the building commissioner shall compare the elevation of the site
to the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. Any development located on land that can be shown to be higher than the base flood
elevation of the current flood insurance rate map and which has not been filled after the date of the site's first flood insurance rate map without
a permit as required by this chapter is not in the SFHA and, therefore, not subject to the requirements of this chapter. Conversely, any
development located on land shown to be below the base flood elevation and hydraulically connected, but shown on the current flood
insurance rate map is subject to the provisions of this chapter. The building commissioner shall maintain documentation of the existing ground
elevation at the development site and certification that this ground elevation existed prior to the date of the site's first flood insurance rate map
identification.
D. Soil Erosion And Sediment Control Plan: A soil erosion and sediment control plan for disturbed areas shall be submitted. This plan shall
include a description of the sequence of grading activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be implemented to
mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the identification of a
responsible party to ensure postconstruction maintenance.
E. Issuance Of Permit: The building commissioner shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant copies of all other federal, state, and local
permits, approvals or permit-not-required letters that may be required for this type of activity. The building commissioner shall not issue a
permit unless all other federal, state, and local permits have been obtained.
F. Preventing Increased Damages: No development in the flood fringe shall create a threat to public health and safety.
G. Elevation Of Site: If fill is being used to elevate the site above the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation, the applicant shall submit
sufficient data and obtain a letter of map revision (LOMR) from FEMA for the purpose of removing the site from the floodplain.
H. Compensatory Storage: Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for use, the volume of space which will be occupied by the
authorized fill or structure below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be compensated for and balanced by a
hydraulically equivalent volume of excavation taken from below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. The excavation volume
shall be at least equal to 1.0 times the volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure. In the case of streams and watercourses, such
excavation shall be made opposite or adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied. All floodplain storage lost below the existing 10-year flood
elevation shall be replaced below the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All floodplain storage lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation
shall be replaced above the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the
watercourse.
I. Construction Of The Lowest Floor Below The Base Flood Elevation (BFE): A person who has obtained a letter of map revision based on fill that
removes a site in the flood fringe from the floodplain due to the use of fill to elevate the site above the BFE, may apply for a permit from the
village to construct the lowest floor of a residential building below the BFE in the flood fringe. The building commissioner shall not issue such a
permit unless the applicant has complied with all the criteria set forth in the following subsection. Compensatory storage shall be provided per
subsection H of this section.
1. The elevation of the lowest opening in the basement wall (i.e., window wells, accessways) shall be at or above the flood protection elevation
(FPE).
2. The lowest adjacent grade to the foundation shall be at or above the FPE, for a minimum distance of ten feet (10') beyond the outside face
of the structure. However, if site conditions are such that this requirement cannot be met, the building commissioner may waive the ten foot
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 352/387
(10') minimum setback if an Illinois registered professional engineer certifies that an alternative method to protect the building from damage
due to hydrostatic pressures has been met. The certifications shall be in the form of a detailed soils and structural design analysis, which
shall be submitted to the building commissioner for review. The building commissioner may require such additional documentation as
necessary to prove that the proposed shorter setback distance will keep the structure reasonably safe. In no case shall the setback distance
be less than four feet (4').
3. The grade around the perimeter of the structure, measured at a distance of twenty feet (20') from the structure, shall be above the BFE.
However, if site conditions are such that this requirement cannot be obtained, the building commissioner may waive the twenty foot (20')
minimum setback distance if an Illinois registered professional engineer certifies that an alternative method to protect the building from
damages due to hydrostatic pressures has been met. A detailed soils analysis and structural design proving that a shorter setback distance
will keep the structure reasonably safe from flooding, shall be submitted to the village for review. In no case shall the setback distance be
less than four feet (4').
4. The ground around the building shall be compacted fill that meets all requirements of this subsection I and is at least five feet (5') thick
under the basement floor slab. Nothing in this subsection shall be interpreted to require the removal or replacement of fill that was placed as
part of a LOMR-F, if such fill consists of material, including soils of similar classification and degree permeability, such as those classified as
CH, CL, SC or ML according to ASTM Standard D-2487, Classification Of Soils For Engineering Purposes.
5. The fill material must be homogeneous (i.e., all of one material) and isotropic (i.e., having the same engineering properties) and in the same
direction.
6. All fill material and compaction shall be designed, certified and inspected by an Illinois registered professional engineer, as warranted by the
site conditions.
7. The basement floor shall be at an elevation that is no more than five feet (5') below the BFE.
8. There shall be a granular drainage layer beneath the floor slab, and minimum of one-fourth (1/4) horsepower sump pump with a backup
power supply shall be provided to remove seepage flow. The pump shall be rated at four (4) times the estimated seepage rate and shall
discharge above the BFE and away from the building in order to prevent flooding of the basement or uplift of the floor under the effect of the
seepage pressure.
9. The drainage system shall be equipped with a positive means of preventing backflow.
10. All foundation elements shall be designed to withstand hydrostatic pressure in accordance with accepted engineering practices.
11. If the applicant is unable to meet all of the requirements set forth in this subsection I, the building commissioner may allow the construction
of a basement below the BFE only if the applicant demonstrates that the proposed fill and structure meet the guidelines and requirements
set forth in FEMA technical bulletin 10-01 and are reasonably safe from flooding. In order to demonstrate that the proposed structure is
reasonably safe from flooding, the applicant shall submit a detailed engineering analysis of the proposed fill and foundation wall. The
engineered basement study shall be completed in accordance with the latest edition of FEMA technical bulletin 10-01, with the analysis of
the fill being prepared by an Illinois registered professional engineer.
12. In order to provide the required compensatory storage on site, in no case shall the depth of excavation in the front and side yards of the lot
exceed eighteen inches (18"), as measured from the previously existing natural grade. The rear yard shall be permitted to have a greater
depth of excavation, if necessary. All such excavation shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse or storm sewer
system. The use of mechanical means to drain the compensatory storage area will not be permitted. (Ord. 2005-11, 5-16-2005)
12-1-7: OCCUPATION AND USE OF DESIGNATED FLOODWAYS:
This section applies to proposed development, redevelopment, site modification or building modification within a designated floodway. The
designated floodway for Addison Creek and Salt Creek shall be as delineated on the designated floodway maps designated by IDNR/OWR
according to and referenced in section 12-1-2 of this chapter. Only those uses and structures will be permitted which meet the criteria in this
section. All floodway modifications shall be the minimum necessary to accomplish the purpose of the project. The development shall also meet
the requirements of section 12-1-9 of this chapter.
A. Development Permit: No person, firm, corporation or governmental body not exempted by state law shall commence any development in a
floodway without first obtaining a development permit from the building commissioner and IDNR/OWR.
B. Application For Permit: Application for a development permit shall be made on a form provided by the building commissioner. The application
shall include the following information:
1. Name and address of applicant;
2. Site location (including legal description) of the property, drawn to scale, on the designated floodway map, indicating whether it is proposed
to be in an incorporated or unincorporated area;
3. Name of stream or body of water affected;
4. Description of proposed activity;
5. Statement of purpose of proposed activity;
6. Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 353/387
7. Name and mailing address of the owner of the subject property if different from the applicant;
8. Signature of the applicant or the applicant's agent;
9. If the applicant is a corporation, the president or other authorized officer shall sign the application form;
10. If the applicant is a partnership, each partner shall sign the application form; and
11. If the applicant is a land trust, the trust officer shall sign the name of the trustee by him (her) as trust officer. A disclosure affidavit shall be
filed with the application, identifying each beneficiary of the trust by name and address and defining the respective interests therein.
12. Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which include as a minimum:
a. A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of the waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site, graphic or
numerical scale, and north arrow;
b. A plan view of the project and engineering study reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the
structure or work, elevations in mean sea level (1929 adjustment) datum or NGVD or North American vertical datum, adjacent property
lines and ownership, drainage and flood control easements, location of any channels and any existing or future access roads, distance
between proposed activity and navigation channel (when the proposed construction is near a commercially navigable body of water),
designated floodway limit, floodplain limit, specifications and dimensions of any proposed channel modifications, location and orientation
of cross sections, north arrow, and a graphic or numerical scale;
c. Cross section views of the project and engineering study reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions
of the work as shown in plan view, existing and proposed elevations, normal water elevation, 10-year frequency flood elevation, 100-year
frequency flood elevation, and graphic or numerical scales (horizontal and vertical);
d. A soil erosion and sediment control plan for disturbed areas. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading activities
and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a
description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the identification of a responsible party to ensure postconstruction
maintenance.
e. A copy of the designated floodway map, marked to reflect any proposed change in the designated floodway location.
13. Any and all other federal, state, and local permits or approval letters that may be required for this type of development.
14. Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be submitted showing that the proposed work will meet the permit criteria of subsection
D of this section.
15. If the designated floodway delineation, base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation will change due to the proposed project, the
application will not be considered complete until IDNR/OWR has indicated conditional approval of the designated floodway map change. No
structures may be built until a letter of map revision has been approved by FEMA.
16. The application for a structure shall be accompanied by drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line dimensions and existing
ground elevations and all changes in grade resulting from any proposed excavation or filling, and floodplain and floodway limits; sealed by a
registered professional engineer, licensed architect or registered land surveyor; the location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to
buildings; and the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed buildings subject to the requirements of section 12-1-9
of this chapter.
17. If the proposed project involves a channel modification, the applicant shall submit the following information:
a. A discussion of the purpose of and need for the proposed work;
b. A discussion of the feasibility of using alternative locations or methods (see subsection F4a of this section) to accomplish the purpose of
the proposed work;
c. An analysis of the extent and permanence of the impacts each feasible alternative identified in subsection F4a of this section would have
on the physical and biological conditions of the body of water affected; and
d. An analysis of the impacts of the proposed project, considering cumulative effects on the physical and biological conditions of the body of
water affected.
C. Issuance Of Permit: The building commissioner shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant copies of all other federal, state, and local
permits and approvals that may be required for this type of activity.
The building commissioner shall not issue the development permit unless all required federal and state permits have been obtained. A
registered professional engineer, under the employ or contract of the village shall review and approve applications reviewed under this
section.
D. Preventing Increased Damages And A List Of Appropriate Uses: The only development in a floodway which will be allowed are appropriate
uses, which will not cause a rise in the base flood elevation, and which will not create a damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood
heights or velocity or be a threat to public health and safety and welfare or impair the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of the
floodway or channel, or permanently impair existing water quality or aquatic habitat. Construction impacts shall be minimized by appropriate
mitigation methods as called for in this chapter. Only those appropriate uses listed in 17 Illinois administrative code part 3708 will be allowed.
The approved appropriate uses are as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 354/387
1. Flood control structures, dikes, dams and other public works or private improvements relating to the control of drainage, flooding, erosion,
or water quality or habitat for fish and wildlife.
2. Structures or facilities relating to the use of, or requiring access to, the water or shoreline, such as pumping and treatment facilities, and
facilities and improvements related to recreational boating, commercial shipping and other functionally water dependent uses;
3. Storm and sanitary sewer relief outfalls;
4. Underground and overhead utilities;
5. Recreational facilities such as playing fields and trail systems, including any related fencing (at least 50 percent open when viewed from any
1 direction) built parallel to the direction of flood flows, and including open air pavilions and toilet facilities (4 stall maximum) that will not
block flood flows nor reduce floodway storage;
6. Detached garages, storage sheds, or other nonhabitable accessory structures that will not block flood flows nor reduce floodway storage;
7. Bridges, culverts, roadways, sidewalks, railways, runways and taxiways and any modification thereto;
8. Parking lots built at or below existing grade where either:
a. The depth of flooding at the 100-year frequency flood event will not exceed one foot (1'); or
b. The applicant of a short term recreational use facility parking lot, formally agrees to restrict access during overbank flooding events and
accepts liability for all damage caused by vehicular access during all overbank flooding events;
9. Designated floodway regrading, without fill, to create a positive nonerosive slope toward a watercourse;
10. Floodproofing activities to protect previously existing lawful structures including the construction of watertight window wells, elevating
structures, or construction of floodwalls around residential, commercial or industrial principal structures where the outside toe of the
floodwall shall be no more than ten feet (10') away from the exterior wall of the existing structure, and, which are not considered substantial
improvements to the structure;
11. The replacement, reconstruction, or repair of a damaged building, provided that the outside dimensions are not increased, and if the
building was damaged to fifty percent (50%) or more of the market value before the damage occurred, the building will be protected from
flooding to the flood protection elevation;
12. Modifications to an existing building that would not increase the enclosed floor area of the building below the 100-year frequency flood
elevation, and which will not block flood flows including, but not limited to, fireplaces, bay windows, decks, patios, and second story
additions. If the building is improved to fifty percent (50%) or more of the market value before the modification occurred (i.e., a substantial
improvement), the building will be protected from flooding to the flood protection elevation.
E. Appropriate Uses: Appropriate uses do not include the construction or placement of any new structures, fill, building additions, buildings on
stilts, excavation or channel modifications done to accommodate otherwise nonappropriate uses in the floodway, fencing (including
landscaping or planting designed to act as a fence) and storage of materials except as specifically defined above as an appropriate use.
F. Construction Of Appropriate Uses: Within the designated floodway as identified on the floodway maps designated by IDNR/OWR, the
construction of an appropriate use, will be considered permissible provided that the proposed project meets the following engineering and
mitigation criteria and is so stated in writing with supporting plans, calculations and data by a registered professional engineer and provided
that any structure meets the protection requirements of section 12-1-9 of this chapter:
1. Preservation Of Flood Conveyance, So As Not To Increase Flood Stages Upstream: For appropriate uses other than bridge or culvert
crossings, on stream structures or dams, all effective designated floodway conveyance lost due to the project will be replaced for all flood
events up to and including the 100-year frequency flood. In calculating effective designated floodway conveyance, the following factors shall
be taken into consideration:
a. Designated floodway conveyance,
K = (1.486/n)(AR0.666)
where "n" is Manning's roughness factor, "A" is the effective flow area of the cross section, and "R" is the ratio of the area to the wetted
perimeter. (See Open Channel Hydraulics, Ven Te Chow, 1959, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York.)
b. The same Manning's "n" value shall be used for both existing and proposed conditions unless a recorded maintenance agreement with a
federal, state, or local unit of government can assure the proposed conditions will be maintained or the land cover is changing from a
vegetative to a nonvegetative land cover.
c. Transition sections shall be provided and used in calculations of effective designated floodway conveyance. The following expansion and
contraction ratios shall be used unless an applicant's engineer can prove to IDNR/OWR through engineering calculations or model tests
that more abrupt transitions may be used with the same efficiency:
(1) When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider section, the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of one
foot (1') horizontal for every four feet (4') of the flooded stream's length.
(2) When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow section, the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of one
foot (1') horizontal for every one foot (1') of the flooded stream's length.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 355/387
(3) When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical direction, a minimum of one foot (1') vertical transition for every ten feet (10') of
stream length shall be used.
(4) Transition sections shall be provided between cross sections with rapid expansions and contractions and when meeting the
designated floodway delineation on adjacent properties.
(5) All cross sections used in the calculations shall be located perpendicular to flood flows.
2. Preservation Of Floodway Storage So As Not To Increase Downstream Flooding: Compensatory storage shall be provided for any
designated floodway storage lost due to the proposed work from the volume of fill or structures placed and the impact of any related flood
control projects. Compensatory storage for fill or structures shall be equal to at least 1.0 times the volume of floodplain storage lost.
Artificially created storage lost due to a reduction in head loss behind a bridge shall not be required to be replaced. The compensatory
designated floodway storage shall be placed between the proposed normal water elevation and the proposed 100-year flood elevation. All
designated floodway storage lost below the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed 10-year flood elevation.
All designated floodway storage lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced above the proposed 10-year flood
elevation. All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse. If the compensatory storage will not be
placed at the location of the proposed construction, the applicant's engineer shall demonstrate to IDNR/OWR through a determination of
flood discharges and water surface elevations that the compensatory storage is hydraulically equivalent. There shall be no reduction in
floodway surface area as a result of a floodway modification, unless such modification is necessary to reduce flooding at existing structure.
3. Preservation Of Floodway Velocities So As Not To Increase Stream Erosion Or Flood Heights: For all appropriate uses, except bridges or
culverts or on stream structures, the proposed work will not result in an increase in the average channel or designated floodway velocities or
stage for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency event. In the case of bridges or culverts or on stream structures built for
the purpose of backing up water in the stream during normal or flood flows, velocities may be increased at the structure site if scour, erosion
and sedimentation will be avoided by the use of riprap or other design measures.
4. Construction Of New Bridges Or Culvert Crossings And Roadway Approaches: The proposed structure shall not result in an increase of
upstream flood stages greater than 0.1 foot when compared to the existing conditions for all flood events up to and including the 100-year
frequency event; or the upstream flood stage increases will be contained within the channel banks (or within existing vertical extensions of
the channel banks) such as within the design protection grade of existing levees or floodwalls or within recorded flood easements. If the
proposed construction will increase upstream flood stages greater than 0.1 feet, the developer must contact IDNR/OWR to obtain a permit
for a dam or waiver.
a. The engineering analysis of upstream flood stages must be calculated using the flood study flows, and corresponding flood elevations for
tailwater conditions for the flood study specified in section 12-1-5 of this chapter. Culverts must be analyzed using the U.S. DOT, FHWA
hydraulic chart for the selection of highway culverts. Bridges must be analyzed using the U.S. DOT/federal highway administration
hydraulics of bridge waterways calculation procedures.
b. Lost floodway storage must be compensated for per subsection F2 of this section.
c. Velocity increases must be mitigated per subsection F3 of this section.
d. If the crossing is proposed over a public water that is used for recreational or commercial navigation, an IDNR/OWR permit must be
received.
e. The hydraulic analysis for the backwater caused by the bridge showing the existing condition and proposed regulatory profile must be
submitted to IDNR/OWR for concurrence that a CLOMR is not required by subsection D of this section.
f. All excavations for the construction of the crossing shall be designed per subsection F8 of this section.
5. Reconstruction Or Modification Of Existing Bridges, Culverts, And Approach Roads:
a. The bridge or culvert and roadway approach reconstruction or modification shall be constructed with no more than 0.1 foot increase in
backwater over the existing flood profile for all flood frequencies up to and including the 100-year event, if the existing structure is not a
source of flood damage.
b. If the existing bridge or culvert and roadway approach is a source of flood damage to buildings or structures in the upstream floodplain,
the applicant's engineer shall evaluate the feasibility of redesigning the structure to reduce the existing backwater, taking into
consideration the effects on flood stages on upstream and downstream properties.
c. The determination as to whether or not the existing crossing is a source of flood damage and should be redesigned must be prepared in
accordance with 17 Illinois administrative code part 3708 (floodway construction in northeastern Illinois) and submitted to IDNR/OWR for
review and concurrence before a permit is issued.
6. On Stream Structures Built For The Purpose Of Backing Up Water: Any increase in upstream flood stages greater than 0.0 foot when
compared to the existing conditions, for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency event shall be contained within the
channel banks (or within existing vertical extensions of the channel banks) such as within the design protection grade of existing levees or
floodwalls or within recorded flood easements. A permit or letter indicating a permit is not required must be obtained from IDNR/OWR for
any structure built for the purpose of backing up water in the stream during normal or flood flow. All dams and impoundment structures as
defined in section 12-1-2 of this chapter shall meet the permitting requirements of 17 Illinois administrative code part 3702 (construction and
maintenance of dams). If the proposed activity involves a modification of the channel or floodway to accommodate an impoundment, it shall
be demonstrated that:
a. The impoundment is determined to be in the public interest by providing flood control, public recreation, or regional storm water detention;
b. The impoundment will not prevent the migration of indigenous fish species, which require access to upstream areas as part of their life
cycle, such as for spawning;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 356/387
c. The impoundment will not cause or contribute to degraded water quality or habitat conditions. Impoundment design should include
gradual bank slopes, appropriate bank stabilization measures, and a presedimentation basin.
d. A nonpoint source control plan has been implemented in the upstream watershed to control the effects of sediment runoff as well as
minimize the input of nutrients, oil and grease, metals, and other pollutants. If there is more than one municipality in the upstream
watershed, the municipality in which the impoundment is constructed should coordinate with upstream municipalities to ensure
comprehensive watershed control;
e. The project otherwise complies with the requirements of this section.
7. Floodproofing Of Existing Habitable, Residential And Commercial Structures: If construction is required beyond the outside dimensions of
the existing building, the outside perimeter of the floodproofing construction shall be placed no further than ten feet (10') from the outside of
the building. Compensation of lost storage and conveyance will not be required for floodproofing activities.
8. Excavation In The Floodway: When excavation is proposed in the design of bridges and culvert openings, including the modifications to and
replacement of existing bridge and culvert structures, or to compensate for lost conveyance or other appropriate uses, transition sections
shall be provided for the excavation. The following expansion and contraction ratios shall be used unless an applicant's engineer can prove
to IDNR/OWR through engineering calculations or model tests that more abrupt transitions may be used with the same efficiency:
a. When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider section, the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of one
foot (1') horizontal for every four feet (4') of the flooded stream's length;
b. When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow section, the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of one
foot (1') horizontal for every one foot (1') of the flooded stream's length; and
c. When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical direction, a minimum of one foot (1') vertical transition for every ten feet (10') of stream
length shall be used.
d. Erosion/scour protection shall be provided inland upstream and downstream of the transition sections.
9. Seeding And Stabilization Plan: For all activities located in a floodway, a seeding and stabilization plan shall be submitted by the applicant.
10. Soil Erosion And Sedimentation Measures: For all activities in the floodway, including grading, filling, and excavation, in which there is
potential for erosion of exposed soil, soil erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be employed consistent with the following
criteria:
a. The construction area shall be minimized to preserve the maximum vegetation possible. Construction shall be scheduled to minimize the
time soil is exposed and unprotected. In no case shall the existing natural vegetation be destroyed, removed, or disturbed more than
fifteen (15) days prior to the initiation of improvements.
b. Temporary and/or permanent soil stabilization shall be applied to denuded areas as soon as possible. As a minimum, soil stabilization
shall be provided within fifteen (15) days after final grade is reached on any portion of the site, and within fifteen (15) days to denuded
areas which may not be at final grade but will remain undisturbed for longer than sixty (60) days.
c. Sedimentation control measures shall be installed before any significant grading or filling is initiated on the site to prevent the movement
of eroded sediments off site or into the channel. Potential sediment control devices include filter fences, straw bale fences, check dams,
diversion ditches, and sediment traps and basins.
d. A vegetated buffer strip of at least twenty five feet (25') in width shall be preserved and/or reestablished, where possible, along existing
channels (see subsection F15 of this section). Construction vehicle use of channels shall be minimized. Temporary stream crossings shall
be constructed, where necessary, to minimize erosion. Necessary construction in or along channels shall be restabilized immediately.
e. Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be designed and implemented consistent with "Procedures And Standards For
Urban Soil Erosion And Sedimentation Control In Illinois" (1988) also known as the "Green Book" and "The Illinois Urban Manual"
(NRCS,1995).
11. Public Flood Control Projects: For public flood control projects, the permitting requirements of this section will be considered met if the
applicant can demonstrate to IDNR/OWR through hydraulic and hydrologic calculations that the proposed project will not singularly or
cumulatively result in increased flood heights outside the project right of way or easements for all flood events up to and including the 100-
year frequency event.
12. General Criteria For Analysis Of Flood Elevations:
a. The flood profiles, flows and floodway data in the designated floodway study, referenced in section 12-1-5 of this chapter, must be used
for analysis of the base conditions. If the study data appears to be in error or conditions have changed, IDNR/OWR shall be contacted for
approval and concurrence on the appropriate base conditions data to use.
b. If the 100-year designated floodway elevation at the site of the proposed construction is affected by backwater from a downstream
receiving stream with a larger drainage area, the proposed construction shall be shown to meet the requirements of this section for the
100-year frequency flood elevations of the designated floodway conditions and conditions with the receiving stream at normal water
elevations.
c. If the applicant learns from IDNR/OWR, local governments, or a private owner that a downstream restrictive bridge or culvert is scheduled
to be removed, reconstructed, modified, or a regional flood control project is scheduled to be built, removed, constructed or modified
within the next five (5) years, the proposed construction shall be analyzed and shown to meet the requirements of this section for both the
existing conditions and the expected flood profile conditions when the bridge, culvert or flood control project is built.
13. Conditional Letter Of Map Revision: If the appropriate use would result in a change in the designated floodway location or the 100-year
frequency flood elevation, the applicant shall submit to IDNR/OWR and FEMA all information, calculations and documents necessary to be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 357/387
issued a conditional designated floodway map revision and receive from IDNR/OWR a conditional concurrence of the designated floodway
change before a permit is issued. The final designated floodway map will not be changed by FEMA until as built plans or record drawings of
initial filling, grading, dredging, or excavating activities are submitted and accepted by FEMA and IDNR/OWR. In the case of
nongovernment projects, the municipality in incorporated areas and the county in unincorporated areas shall concur with the proposed
conditional designated floodway map revision before IDNR/OWR approval can be given. No filling, grading, dredging or excavating shall
take place until a conditional approval is issued. After initial filling, grading, dredging or excavating, no activities shall take place until a final
letter of map revision (LOMR) is issued by FEMA with concurrence from IDNR/OWR.
14. Professional Engineer's Supervision: All engineering analyses shall be performed by or under the supervision of a registered professional
engineer.
15. Buffer Strip: For all activities in the floodway involving construction within twenty five feet (25') of the channel, the following criteria shall be
met:
a. A natural vegetation buffer strip shall be preserved within at least twenty five feet (25') of the ordinary high water mark of the channel.
b. Where it is impossible to protect this buffer strip during the construction of an appropriate use, a vegetated buffer strip shall be
established upon completion of construction.
16. Construction To Proceed With Conditional Approval: After receipt of conditional approval of the designated floodway change and issuance
of a permit and a conditional letter of map revision, construction as necessary to change the floodway designation may proceed but no
buildings or structures or other construction that is not an appropriate use may be placed in that area until the designated floodway map is
changed and a final letter of map revision is received. The designated floodway map will be revised upon acceptance and concurrence by
IDNR/OWR and FEMA of the "as built" plans.
G. Development Activities In Delegated Communities Requiring State Review: For those projects listed below located in a designated floodway,
the following criteria shall be submitted to IDNR/OWR for their review and concurrence and/or permit prior to the issuance of a permit by a
community or county delegated state permitting authority in the floodway:
1. An engineer's analysis of the flood profile due to a proposed bridge pursuant to subsection F4 of this section.
2. An engineer's determination that an existing bridge or culvert crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis indicating the
proposed flood profile, pursuant to subsection F5 of this section.
3. Alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent storage pursuant to subsections F1, F2 and F8 of this section.
4. The construction of any IDNR/OWR projects, dams (as defined in section 12-1-2 of this chapter) and all other state, federal, or local units of
government projects, including projects of the municipality or county.
5. An engineer's determination that a proposed bridge affected by backwater from a downstream receiving stream may be built with a smaller
opening.
6. Projects which revise or establish the floodway and/or flood profiles.
7. Projects in public bodies of water.
H. Other Permits: In addition to the other requirements of this chapter, a development permit for a site located in a floodway shall not be issued
unless the applicant first obtains a permit or written documentation that a permit is not required from IDNR/OWR, issued pursuant to 615
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5 et seq. No permit from IDNR/OWR shall be required if IDNR/OWR has delegated this responsibility to the
village.
I. Permits For Dams: Any work involving the construction, modification or removal of a "dam" as defined in section 12-1-2 of this chapter per 17
Illinois administrative code part 3702 (rules for construction of dams) shall obtain an IDNR/OWR permit prior to the start of construction of a
dam. If the building commissioner finds a dam that does not have an IDNR/OWR permit, the building commissioner shall immediately notify
the IDNR/OWR Schaumburg office. If the building commissioner finds a dam which is believed to be in unsafe condition, the building
commissioner shall immediately notify the owner of the dam, the IDNR/OWR Schaumburg office, and the Illinois emergency management
agency (IEMA).
J. Activities That Do Not Require A Registered Professional Engineer's Review: The following activities may be permitted without a registered
professional engineer's review. Such activities shall still meet the other requirements of this chapter, including the mitigation requirements.
1. Underground and overhead utilities that:
a. Do not result in any increase in existing ground elevations, or
b. Do not require the placement of aboveground structures in the floodway, or
c. In the case of underground stream crossings, the top of the pipe or encasement is buried a minimum of three feet (3') below the existing
streambed, and
d. Overhead utility lines shall be constructed above the estimated 100-year frequency flood elevation or attached above the low chord of an
existing bridge (with the permission of the bridge owner). No supporting towers shall be placed in the watercourse and shall be designed
so as to not catch debris.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 358/387
e. Disturbance of stream side vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed
floodway areas, including the stream banks shall be restored to their original contours and seeded or otherwise stabilized upon
completion of construction.
f. A utility crossing carrying material which may cause water pollution as defined by the environmental protection act 415 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5 (1992 state bar edition) shall be provided with shutoff valves on each side of the body of water to be crossed.
g. All Illinois commerce commission, national electric safety codes, and federal requirements for clearance must be met.
2. Storm and sanitary sewer relief outfalls that:
a. Do not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent natural bank slope, and
b. Do not result in an increase in ground elevation, and
c. Are designed so as not to cause stream erosion at the outfall location.
3. Construction of sidewalks, athletic fields (excluding fences), properly anchored playground equipment and patios at grade.
4. Construction of shoreline and stream bank protection that:
a. Does not exceed one thousand feet (1,000') in length.
b. Materials are not placed higher than the existing top of bank.
c. Materials are placed so as not to reduce the cross sectional area of the stream channel or bank of the lake.
d. Stabilization utilizing native vegetation and gradual side slopes are the preferred mitigation methods for existing erosion problems. Where
high channel velocities, sharp bends or wave action necessitate the use of alternative stabilization measures, soil bioengineering
techniques, natural rock or riprap are preferred materials. Artificial materials such as concrete, construction rubble, and gabions should be
avoided unless there are no practicable alternatives.
5. Temporary stream crossings in which:
a. The approach roads will be one-half foot (1/2') or less above natural grade.
b. The crossing will allow stream flow to pass without backing up the water above the stream bank vegetation line or above any drainage tile
or outfall invert.
c. The top of the roadway fill in the channel will be at least two feet (2') below the top of the lowest bank. Any fill in the channel shall be
nonerosive material, such as riprap or gravel.
d. All disturbed stream banks will be seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon installation and again upon removal of
construction.
e. The access road and temporary crossings will be removed within one year after authorization. (Ord. 2005-11, 5-16-2005)
12-1-8: OCCUPATION AND USE OF SFHAs WHERE FLOODWAYS ARE NOT IDENTIFIED:
In SFHA or floodplains (including AE, AH, AO and unnumbered A zones) where no floodways have been identified and no base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevations have been established by FEMA, and draining more than a square mile, no development shall be permitted unless the
cumulative effect of the proposals, when combined with all other existing and anticipated uses and structures, shall not significantly impede or
increase the flow and passage of the floodwaters nor significantly increase the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation.
A. Development Permit: No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body, not exempted by state law, shall commence any development in an
SFHA or floodplain without first obtaining a development permit from the building commissioner. Application for a development permit shall be
made on a form provided by the building commissioner. The application shall be accompanied by drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing
property line dimensions; and existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling, sealed by a licensed
engineer, architect or surveyor; the location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings; and the elevations of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all proposed buildings subject to the requirements of section 12-1-9 of this chapter.
The application for a development permit shall also include the following information:
1. A detailed description of the proposed activity, its purpose, and intended use;
2. Site location (including legal description) of the property, drawn to scale, on the designated floodway maps, indicating whether it is proposed
to be in an incorporated or unincorporated area;
3. Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity;
4. Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which include as a minimum:
a. A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of the waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site, graphic or
numerical scale, and north arrow;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 359/387
b. A plan view of the project and engineering study reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the
structure or work, elevations in mean sea level (1929 adjustment) datum or NGVD, adjacent property lines and ownership, drainage and
flood control easements, distance between proposed activity and navigation channel (when the proposed construction is in or near a
commercially navigable body of water), floodplain limit, location and orientation of cross sections, north arrow, and a graphical or
numerical scale;
c. Cross section views of the project perpendicular to the flow of floodwater and engineering study reach showing existing and proposed
conditions including principal dimensions of the work as shown in plan view, existing and proposed elevations, normal water elevation, 10-
year frequency flood elevation, 100-year frequency flood elevation, and graphical or numerical scales (horizontal and vertical); and
d. A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for disturbed areas. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading
activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also
include a description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the identification of a responsible party to ensure
postconstruction maintenance.
5. Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be submitted showing that the proposed work will meet the criteria of subsection D of
this section.
6. Any and all other federal, state, and local permits or approvals that may be required for this type of development.
B. Comparison Of Elevation: Based on the best available existing data according to the Illinois state water survey's floodplain information
repository, the building commissioner shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. Should
no elevation information exist for the site, the developer's engineer shall calculate the elevation according to subsection 12-1-5D of this
chapter. Any development located on land that can be shown to have been higher than the base flood elevation of the current flood insurance
rate map identification is not in the SFHA and, therefore, not subject to the requirements of this chapter. The building commissioner shall
maintain documentation of the existing ground elevation at the development site and certification that this ground elevation existed prior to the
date of the site's first flood insurance rate map identification.
C. Issuance Of Permit: The building commissioner shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant copies of all other federal, state, and local
permits, approvals or permit-not-required letters that may be required for this type of activity. The building commissioner shall not issue the
development permit unless all required federal, state, and local permits have been obtained.
D. Preventing Increased Damages: No development in the SFHA, where a floodway has not been determined shall create a damaging or
potentially damaging increase in flood heights or velocity or threat to public health, safety and welfare or impair the natural hydrologic and
hydraulic functions of the floodway or channel, or impair existing water quality or aquatic habitat. Construction impacts shall be minimized by
appropriate mitigation methods as called for in this chapter.
E. Standards For Riverine SFHAs: Within all riverine SFHAs where the floodway has not been determined, the following standards shall apply:
1. Engineering Requirements: The developer shall have a registered professional engineer state in writing and show through supporting plans,
calculations, and data that the project meets the engineering requirements of subsections 12-1-7F1 through F12 of this chapter for the
entire floodplain as calculated under the provisions of subsection 12-1-5D of this chapter. As an alternative, the developer should have an
engineering study performed to determine a floodway and submit that engineering study to IDNR/OWR for acceptance as a designated
floodway. Upon acceptance of the floodway by IDNR/OWR, the developer shall then demonstrate that the project meets the requirements of
section 12-1-7 of this chapter for the designated floodway. The floodway shall be defined according to the definition in section 12-1-2 of this
chapter.
2. Development Permit: A development permit shall not be issued unless the applicant first obtains a permit from IDNR/OWR or written
documentation that a permit is not required from IDNR/OWR.
3. Permit Exemptions: No permit from IDNR/OWR shall be required if IDNR/OWR has delegated permit responsibility to the village per 17
Illinois administrative code part 3708 for designated floodways.
4. Permits For Dams: Any work involving the construction, modification or removal of a "dam" as defined in section 12-1-2 of this chapter per
17 Illinois administrative code part 3702 (rules for construction of dams) shall obtain an IDNR/OWR permit prior to the start of construction
of a dam. If the building commissioner finds a dam that does not have an IDNR/OWR permit, the building commissioner shall immediately
notify the IDNR/OWR Schaumburg office. If the building commissioner finds a dam which is believed to be in unsafe condition, the building
commissioner shall immediately notify the owner of the dam, the IDNR/OWR Schaumburg office, and the Illinois emergency management
agency (IEMA).
5. Engineering Requirement Exemptions: The following activities may be permitted without a registered professional engineer's review or
calculation of a base flood elevation and designated floodway. Such activities shall still meet the other requirements of this chapter:
a. Underground and overhead utilities that:
(1) Do not result in any increase in existing ground elevations, or
(2) Do not require the placement of aboveground structures in the floodway, or
(3) In the case of underground stream crossings, the top of the pipe or encasement is buried a minimum of three feet (3') below the
existing streambed, and
(4) Overhead utility lines shall be constructed above the estimated 100-year frequency flood elevation or attached above the low chord of
an existing bridge (with the permission of the bridge owner). No supporting towers shall be placed in the watercourse and shall be
designed so as to not catch debris.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 360/387
(5) Disturbance of stream side vegetation shall be kept to minimum during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation.
(6) A utility crossing carrying material which may cause water pollution as defined by the environmental protection act 415 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5 (1992 state bar edition) shall be provided with shutoff valves on each side of the body of water to be crossed.
(7) All Illinois commerce commission, national electrical safety codes, and federal requirements for clearance must be met.
b. Storm and sanitary sewer relief outfalls that:
(1) Do not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent natural bank slope, and
(2) Do not result in an increase in ground elevation, and
(3) Are designed so as not to cause stream erosion at the outfall location.
c. Construction of shoreline and stream bank protection that:
(1) Does not exceed one thousand feet (1,000') in length.
(2) Materials are not placed higher than the existing top of bank.
(3) Materials are placed so as not to reduce the cross sectional area of the stream channel by more than ten percent (10%).
(4) Stabilization utilizing native vegetation and gradual side slopes are the preferred mitigation methods for existing erosion problems.
Where high channel velocities, sharp bends or wave action necessitate the use of alternative stabilization measures, soil
bioengineering techniques, natural rock or riprap are preferred materials. Artificial materials such as concrete, construction rubble, and
gabions should be avoided unless there are no practicable alternatives.
d. Temporary stream crossings in which:
(1) The approach roads will be one-half foot (1/2') or less above natural grade.
(2) The crossings will allow stream flow to pass without backing up the water above the stream bank vegetation line or above any
drainage tile or outfall invert.
(3) The top of the roadway fill in the channel will be at least two feet (2') below the top of the lowest bank. Any fill in the channel shall be
nonerosive material, such as riprap or gravel.
(4) All disturbed stream banks will be seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon installation and again upon removal of
construction.
(5) The access road and temporary crossings will be removed within one year after authorization.
e. The construction of light poles, sign posts and similar structures;
f. The construction of sidewalks, driveways, athletic fields (excluding fences), patios and similar surfaces which are built at grade;
g. The construction of properly anchored, unwalled, open structures such as playground equipment, pavilions, and carports built at or below
existing grade that would not obstruct the flow of floodwaters;
h. The placement of properly anchored buildings not exceeding seventy (70) square feet in size, nor ten feet (10') in any one dimension
(e.g., animal shelters and toolsheds);
i. The construction of additions to existing buildings which do not increase the first floor area by more than twenty percent (20%), which are
located on the upstream or downstream side of the existing building, and which do not extend beyond the sides of the existing building
that are parallel to the flow of floodwaters;
j. Minor maintenance dredging of a stream channel where:
(1) The affected length of stream is less than one thousand feet (1,000').
(2) The work is confined to reestablishing flows in natural stream channels, or
(3) The cross sectional area of the dredged channel conforms to that of the natural channel upstream and downstream of the site.
6. Flood Carrying Capacity: The flood carrying capacity within any altered or relocated watercourse shall be maintained.
F. Compensatory Storage: Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for use, the volume of space which will be occupied by the
authorized fill or structure below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be compensated for and balanced by a
hydraulically equivalent volume of excavation taken from below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. The excavation volume
shall be at least equal to 1.0 times the volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure. In the case of streams and watercourses, such
excavation shall be made opposite or adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied. All floodplain storage lost below the existing 10-year flood
elevation shall be replaced below the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All floodplain storage lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation
shall be replaced above the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the
watercourse. (Ord. 2005-11, 5-16-2005)
12-1-9: PERMITTING REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO ALL FLOODPLAIN AREAS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 361/387
In addition to the requirements found in sections 12-1-6, 12-1-7 and 12-1-8 of this chapter for development in flood fringes, designated floodways,
and SFHA or floodplains where no floodways have been identified (zones A, AO, AH, AE, A1-A30, A99, VO, V1-30, VE, V, M, E, or D), the
following requirements shall be met:
A. Public Health Standards:
1. No developments in the SFHA shall include locating or storing chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, animal wastes, fertilizers,
flammable liquids, pollutants, or other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood protection elevation (FPE).
2. Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas and electric shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
3. Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
4. New and replacement water supply systems, wells, sanitary sewer lines and on site waste disposal systems may be permitted providing all
manholes or other aboveground openings located below the FPE are watertight.
B. Carrying Capacity And Notification: For all projects involving channel modification, fill, or stream maintenance (including levees), the flood
carrying capacity of the watercourse shall be maintained. In addition, the village shall notify adjacent communities in writing thirty (30) days
prior to the issuance of a permit for the alteration or relocation of the watercourse.
C. Protecting Buildings: All buildings located within a 100-year floodplain also known as an SFHA, and all buildings located outside the 100-year
floodplain but within the 500-year floodplain, shall be protected from flood damage below the flood protection elevation.
1. This building protection criteria applies to the following situations:
a. Construction or placement of a new building valued at more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or seventy (70) square feet.
b. "Substantial improvement" to an existing building as defined in section 12-1-2 of this chapter, including an increase to the first floor area
by more than twenty percent (20%). This alteration shall be figured cumulatively beginning with any alteration which has taken place
subsequent to April 1, 1990.
c. "Substantial damage" to an existing building as defined in section 12-1-2 of this chapter. This alteration shall be figured cumulatively
beginning with any alteration which has taken place subsequent to April 1, 1990.
d. "Repetitive loss" to an existing building as defined in section 12-1-2 of this chapter.
e. Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured home on an existing site. This building protection requirement does
not apply to returning a mobile home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it was removed to avoid flood damage; and
f. Installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days per year.
2. This building protection requirement may be met by one of the following methods:
a. A residential or nonresidential building, when allowed, may be constructed on permanent land fill in accordance with the following:
(1) The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the flood protection elevation.
(2) The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than six inches (6") deep before compaction and should extend at least ten feet (10')
beyond the foundation of the building before sloping below the flood protection elevation. The top of the fill shall be above the flood
protection elevation. However, the ten foot (10') minimum may be waived if a structural engineer certifies an alternative method to
protect the building from damages due to hydrostatic pressures. The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour. The fill shall not
adversely affect the flow or surface drainage from or onto neighboring properties.
b. A residential or nonresidential building may be elevated in accordance with the following:
(1) The building or improvements shall be elevated on crawl space, stilts, piles, walls, or other foundation that is permanently open to
floodwaters and not subject to damage by hydrostatic pressures of the base flood or 100-year frequency flood. Designs must either be
certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or the permanent openings, one on each wall, shall be no more than one foot
(1') above existing grade, and consist of a minimum of two (2) openings. The openings must have a total net area of not less than one
square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding below the base flood elevation.
(2) The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored and aligned in relation to flood flows and adjoining structures so as to
minimize exposure to known hydrodynamic forces such as current, waves, ice and floating debris.
(3) All areas below the flood protection elevation shall be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage. The lowest floor (including
basement) and all electrical, heating, ventilating, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall be located at or
above the flood protection elevation. Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines, submersible pumps, and other
waterproofed service facilities may be located below the flood protection elevation.
(4) The areas below the flood protection elevation may only be used for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area
other than a basement and not later modified or occupied as habitable space.
(5) Manufactured homes, and travel trailers to be installed on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days, shall be elevated to or
above the flood protection elevation; and, shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by being tied down in
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 362/387
accordance with the rules and regulations for the Illinois mobile home tie-down act issued pursuant to 77 Illinois administrative code
part 870. In addition, all manufactured homes shall meet the following elevation requirements:
(A) In the case of manufactured homes placed or substantially improved: 1) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, 2) in a
new manufactured home park or subdivision, 3) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or 4) in an
existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage from a flood, the
top of the lowest floor shall be elevated to or above the flood protection elevation.
(B) In the case of manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, the
manufactured home shall be elevated so that either the top of the lowest floor is above the base flood elevation or the chassis is at
least thirty six inches (36") in height above grade and supported by reinforced piers or other foundations of equivalent strength,
whichever is less.
(6) Recreational vehicles or travel trailers shall be required to meet the elevation and anchoring requirements of subsection C2b(5) of this
section unless:
(A) They are on site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days; and
(B) They are fully licensed, ready for highway use, and used only for recreation, camping, travel or seasonal use rather than as a
permanent dwelling. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only
by quick disconnect type utility and service devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
c. Only a nonresidential building may be structurally dry floodproofed (in lieu of elevation) provided that a registered professional engineer or
architect shall certify that the building has been structurally dry floodproofed below the flood protection elevation, the structure and
attendant utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the base flood or 100-year frequency flood. The building
design shall take into account flood velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and
impacts from debris or ice. Floodproofing measures shall be operable without human intervention and without an outside source of
electricity (levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered floodproofing for the purpose of this subsection).
d. A building may be constructed with a crawl space located below the flood protection elevation provided that the following conditions are
met:
(1) The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting
from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; and
(2) Any enclosed area below the flood protection elevation shall have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. A minimum of one opening on each wall having a total net area of not less than one square
inch per one square foot of enclosed area. The openings shall be no more than one foot (1') above grade; and
(3) The interior grade of the crawl space below the flood protection elevation must not be more than two feet (2') below the lowest
adjacent exterior grade; and
(4) The interior height of the crawl space measured from the interior grade of the crawl space to the top of the foundation wall must not
exceed four feet (4') at any point; and
(5) An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove floodwaters from the interior area of the crawl space within a reasonable
period of time after a flood event; and
(6) Portions of the building below the flood protection elevation must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; and
(7) Utility systems within the crawl space must be elevated above the flood protection elevation.
e. Critical facilities shall be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. In addition, all ingress and egress from any critical facility must be
protected to the 500-year flood elevation.
f. Toolsheds, detached garages, and other minor accessory structures on an existing single-family platted lot, may be constructed with the
lowest floor below the flood protection elevation in accordance with the following:
(1) The building is not used for human habitation.
(2) All areas below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be constructed with waterproof material. Structures located
in a designated floodway shall be constructed and placed on a building site so as not to block the flow of floodwaters and shall also
meet the appropriate use criteria of section 12-1-7 of this chapter. In addition, all other requirements of sections 12-1-6, 12-1-7 and 12-
1-8 of this chapter must be met.
(3) The structure shall be anchored to prevent flotation.
(4) Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed to the flood protection elevation.
(5) The building shall be valued at less than fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) and be less than five hundred (500) square feet in floor
size.
(6) The building shall be used only for the storage of vehicles or tools and may not contain other rooms, workshops, greenhouses or
similar uses.
(7) The building shall meet the permanent opening criteria of subsection C2b(1) of this section.
g. Existing buildings located within a designated floodway shall also meet the more restrictive appropriate use standards included in section
12-1-7 of this chapter. Nonconforming structures located in a designated floodway may remain in use and may only be enlarged, replaced
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 363/387
or structurally altered in accordance with subsection 12-1-7D of this chapter. A nonconforming structure damaged by flood, fire, wind or
other natural or manmade disaster may be restored unless the damage exceeds fifty percent (50%) of its market value before it was
damaged, in which case it shall conform to this chapter. (Ord. 2005-11, 5-16-2005)
12-1-10: OTHER DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS:
The board of trustees shall take into account flood hazards, to the extent that they are known in all official actions related to land management,
use and development.
A. New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements, and planned unit developments (PUDs) within the SFHA shall be
reviewed to assure that the proposed developments are consistent with sections 12-1-6, 12-1-7, 12-1-8, and 12-1-9 of this chapter and the
need to minimize flood damage. Plats or plans for new subdivisions, mobile home parks and planned unit developments (PUDs) shall include
a signed statement by a registered professional engineer that the plat or plans account for changes in the drainage of surface waters in
accordance with the plat act3.
B. Proposals for new subdivisions, manufactured home parks, travel trailer parks, planned unit developments (PUDs) and additions to
manufactured home parks and additions to subdivisions shall include base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation data and floodway
delineations. Where this information is not available from an existing study filed with the Illinois state water survey, the applicant's engineer
shall be responsible for calculating the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation per subsection 12-1-5D of this chapter and the
floodway delineation per the definition in section 12-1-2 of this chapter. The applicant's engineer shall submit the data to IDNR/OWR for
review and approval as best available regulatory data and then send it to the state water survey.
C. Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located and laid out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams
and channels. Wherever possible, the floodplains shall be included within parks or other public grounds.
D. The board of trustees shall not approve any planned unit development (PUD) or plat of subdivision located outside the corporate limits unless
such agreement or plat is in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
E. All other activities defined as development shall be designed so as not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages. (Ord. 2005-11,
5-16-2005)
12-1-11: VARIANCES:
No variances shall be granted to any development located in a "designated floodway" as defined in section 12-1-2 of this chapter. Whenever the
standards of this chapter place undue hardship on a specific development proposal, the applicant may apply to the zoning board of appeals for a
variance. The zoning board of appeals shall review the applicant's request for a variance and shall submit its recommendation to the board of
trustees.
A. No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that all of the following conditions are met:
1. The development activity cannot be located outside the SFHA;
2. An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not granted;
3. The relief requested is the minimum necessary;
4. There will be no additional threat to public health, safety, beneficial stream uses and functions, especially aquatic habitat, or creation of a
nuisance;
5. There will be no additional public expense for flood protection, lost environmental stream uses and functions, rescue or relief operations,
policing, or repairs to streambeds and banks, roads, utilities, or other public facilities;
6. The provisions of subsections 12-1-6F and 12-1-8D of this chapter shall still be met;
7. The activity is not in a designated floodway;
8. The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not represent a general problem; and
9. The granting of the variance will not alter the essential character of the area involved including existing stream uses.
B. The building commissioner shall notify an applicant in writing that a variance from the requirements of section 12-1-9 of this chapter that would
lessen the degree of protection to a building will:
1. Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty five dollars ($25.00) per one hundred dollars
($100.00) of insurance coverage;
2. Increase the risks to life and property; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 364/387
3. Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and that he will acknowledge in writing that he assumes the risk and
liability.
C. Variances requested in connection with restoration of a historic site or "historic structure" as defined in section 12-1-2 of this chapter may be
granted using criteria more permissive than the requirements of subsection A of this section, subject to the conditions that:
1. The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure; and
2. The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the structure being removed as a certified historic structure. (Ord. 2005-11, 5-16-2005)
12-1-12: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information
derived from engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural
causes. This chapter does not imply that development, either inside or outside of the SFHA, will be free from flooding or damage. This chapter
does not create liability on the part of the village or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results from reliance on this chapter
or any administrative decision made lawfully thereunder. (Ord. 2005-11, 5-16-2005)
12-1-13: PENALTY:
Failure to comply with the requirements of a permit or conditions of a variance resolution shall be deemed to be a violation of this chapter. Upon
due investigation, the building commissioner may determine that a violation of the minimum standards of this chapter exists. The building
commissioner shall notify the owner in writing of such violation.
A. If such owner fails after ten (10) days' notice to correct the violation:
1. The village may make application to the circuit court for an injunction requiring conformance with this chapter or make such other order as
the court deems necessary to secure compliance with this chapter.
2. Any person who violates this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense.
3. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
4. The village shall record a notice of violation on the title to the property.
B. The building commissioner shall inform the owner that any such violation is considered a wilful act to increase flood damages and, therefore,
may cause coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be suspended.
1. The building commissioner is authorized to issue an order requiring the suspension of the subject development. The stop work order shall
be in writing, shall indicate the reason for the issuance, and shall order the action, if necessary, to resolve the circumstances requiring the
stop work order. The stop work order constitutes a suspension of the permit.
2. No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or revoked until a hearing is held by the board of appeals. Written notice of
such hearing shall be served on the permittee and shall state: a) the grounds for compliance or reasons for suspension or revocation; and
b) the time and place of the hearing. At such hearing, the permittee shall be given an opportunity to present evidence on his/her behalf. At
the conclusion of the hearing, the board of appeals shall determine whether the permit shall be suspended or revoked.
C. Nothing herein shall prevent the village from taking such other lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith
shall accrue to the person or persons responsible. (Ord. 2005-11, 5-16-2005)
12-1-14: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. Where this chapter and other
ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. This
chapter is intended to repeal the original ordinance or resolution which was adopted to meet the national flood insurance program regulations, but
is not intended to repeal the resolution which the village passed in order to establish initial eligibility for the program. (Ord. 2005-11, 5-16-2005)
Title 13
REAL PROPERTY TRANSACTIONS
Chapter 1
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 365/387
13-1-1: TITLE INSURANCE REPORTS:
The requirement of an inspection of real estate shall be mandatory on all transfers of ownership of real estate in the village. Said requirement
shall further be reflected on all real estate title insurance reports conducted precedent to the transfer of ownership to give public notice of said
mandatory inspection. Copies of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be sent to all title insurance companies and the Cook County recorder
of deeds with notice that the mandatory inspection and village stamp is required on any transfer of ownership of real estate in the village. (Ord.
09-25, 8-3-2009)
13-1-2: VILLAGE INSPECTION:
A. Whenever any owner of real estate or the beneficial interest in a land trust, or any person or agent acting on behalf of such owner, offers to sell
any real estate located within the village, said owner, person or agent shall notify the village of such proposed sale.
B. Upon receipt of such notice, the village shall cause an inspection to be made of the land, building and structure located upon such real estate,
in order to determine if it is in compliance with the provisions of this code that pertain to health and safety.
C. Upon conclusion of said inspection, the building commissioner, or his designee, shall notify the owner or agent of any violations of applicable
codes and, prior to the issuance of the certificate of compliance, a reinspection shall be conducted to determine if the violations were
corrected. A certificate of compliance will be timely issued following the inspection or reinspection and provided that all violations have been
corrected and the real estate is in compliance with this code. Upon presentation of the certificate of compliance, the village will affix a stamp
upon the original deed or document of transfer.
D. If any owner, property agent, tenant, occupant or other person in control of the real estate or a dwelling unit contained therein fails or refuses to
consent to free access and entry to the real estate or dwelling unit under his control for any inspection pursuant to this chapter, the village may
apply to the circuit court of Cook County for an administrative search warrant or other appropriate court order authorizing such inspection.
E. The village does not warrant the condition of any property inspected and shall not be responsible for any claims arising out of the property or
the condition thereof. The village does not warrant that all deficiencies related to the real estate are listed in the certificate of compliance and
does not warrant anything as to the condition of the real estate or the liability thereof. (Ord. 09-25, 8-3-2009)
13-1-3: PAYMENT OF VILLAGE DEBTS REQUIRED:
In addition to complying with this code relating to health and safety, a certificate of compliance shall not be issued until all outstanding debts or
obligations due the village and related to the real estate in question have been paid in full. (Ord. 09-25, 8-3-2009)
13-1-4: INSPECTION FEES:
The inspection fee for any such inspection made at the request of any buyer, seller, real estate broker or any of their agents shall be at the
following rate schedule, payable in advance by the real estate owner at the time of the request:
A. Condominium units and single-family units: One hundred dollars ($100.00).
B. Two-family or three-family dwelling unit buildings: One hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).
C. Buildings with four (4) or more dwelling units: Two hundred twenty five dollars ($225.00).
D. Commercial and industrial buildings: Eleven cents ($0.11) per square foot with a three hundred fifty dollar ($350.00) minimum.
After the real estate owner pays the fees specified in this section, the village shall provide an initial inspection and, after the real estate owner
corrects any violation, a subsequent reinspection of the real estate. The initial inspection report shall be valid for a period of thirty (30) days.
For any additional reinspection(s) required beyond the initial and reinspection, an additional fee consistent with the above referenced fees
shall be charged per reinspection.
In the event that a temporary certificate of compliance is issued under section 13-1-5 of this chapter, the village shall, upon issuance of the
certificate of compliance, retain an administrative fee of one hundred seventy five dollars ($175.00) in addition to any costs and fees for the
establishment and maintenance of an escrow account, if applicable. The administrative fee shall be deducted from the amount placed in
escrow with the village as defined in section 13-1-5 of this chapter.
In the event that a real estate owner wishes to have an inspection of their property expedited, then an additional fee of fifty dollars ($50.00)
shall be assessed in addition to the above referenced fees. (Ord. 09-43, 9-21-2009)
13-1-5: TEMPORARY CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 366/387
In the event that all code violations are not abated and a certificate of compliance is not issued prior to closing of said real estate, an owner may
sell, transfer or convey real property upon issuance of a temporary certificate of compliance upon completion of the following conditions:
A. Written confirmation on an escrow agreement form provided by the building commissioner on the part of the buyer, grantee or transferee
certifying to the village that such buyer, grantee or transferee has assumed the obligation to abate all violations of this code that pertain to
health and safety within the time specified by the building commissioner or his designee; and
B. Based upon the violations of this code, the building commissioner shall assign an amount to be deposited in an escrow account for the
purpose of ensuring the real estate is brought into compliance. The value of the escrow shall be determined by the building commissioner or
his designee and the escrow amount shall be deposited prior to a temporary certificate of compliance and a village stamp being issued.
If the new real estate owner fails to abate all violations within the time period specified by the building commissioner or his designee, the new
real estate owner shall forfeit the entire escrow amount to the village. Forfeiture of said escrow amount does not relieve the new real estate
owner of the obligation to abate any and all violations of this code listed in the escrow agreement. Additionally, the new real estate owner shall
be responsible for abating any new violations of this code which have arisen since the establishment of the escrow agreement. The building
commissioner is authorized to issue citations for any violations of this code starting thirty (30) days following the surrender of the escrow
amount; and
C. Deposit of the reinspection fee with the village as a prepayment for reinspection following the abatement of all violations.
The building commissioner shall have the right to deny a request for a temporary certificate of compliance in his sole discretion. (Ord. 09-25,
8-3-2009)
13-1-6: EXEMPT TRANSFERS:
The following transfers are exempt from the provisions of this chapter:
A. Transfers involving real property acquired by or from any governmental body.
B. Transfers in which the deed, assignment, or other instrument of transfer secures debt or other obligations and no new or additional parties take
possession of the property.
C. Transfers in which the deed, assignment, or other instrument of transfer, without additional consideration, confirms, corrects, modifies or
supplements a deed, assignment, or other instrument of transfer previously recorded or delivered.
D. Transfers in which the deed is a tax deed.
E. Transfers in which the deed, assignment, or other instrument of transfer releases property which secures debt or other obligations.
F. Transfers in which the deed is otherwise pursuant to a court decree.
G. Transfers between a subsidiary corporation and its parent or between subsidiary corporation of a common parent either pursuant to a plan of
merger or consolidation or pursuant to a plan of reorganization providing for the sale of substantially all of the seller's assets.
H. Transfers from a subsidiary corporation to its parent for no consideration other than the cancellation or surrender of the subsidiary's stock and
transfers from a parent corporation to its subsidiary for no consideration other than the issuance or delivery to the parent of the subsidiary's
stock.
I. Transfers in which the deed or other instrument of transfer is issued to the mortgagee or secured creditor pursuant to a mortgage or security
interest foreclosure proceeding or sale or pursuant to a transfer in lieu of foreclosure.
J. Transfers in which an additional party is added to title and the existing or prior titleholder remains in title and continues to reside at the property.
K. Transfers by an executor or administrator to a legatee, heir, or distributee where the transfer is being made pursuant to will or by intestacy.
L. Transfers from a decedent to an executor or administrator.
M. Transfers from an incompetent to a conservator or similar legal representative, or from a conservator or similar legal representative to a former
incompetent upon removal of disability.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 367/387
N. Transfers from a bankrupt or person in receivership due to insolvency to the trustee in bankruptcy or receiver, from such receiver to such
trustee, or from such trustee to such receiver or upon redelivery or retransfer by any such transferee or successor thereto.
O. Transfers from trustee to surviving, substitute, succeeding, or additional trustees of the same trust.
P. Transfers upon the death of a joint tenant or tenant by the entirety to the survivor.
Q. Transfers into or out of a land trust for no additional consideration and where the titleholder or beneficial owner retains possession and
continues to reside at the property.
R. Upon the issuance of an occupancy permit to the owner of a newly constructed building or structure which has not been previously occupied,
the building commissioner shall also issue to said owner a certificate of compliance.
S. Such other transfers which are specifically exempted by Illinois or federal law. (Ord. 09-25, 8-3-2009)
13-1-7: PENALTY:
Any firm, person or corporation who participates in a sale or transfer in violation of this chapter as sellers, buyers, or agent shall be fined not less
than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for such offense. (Ord. 09-25, 8-3-2009)
Title 14
PUBLIC SAFETY
Chapter 1
FALSE ALARMS
14-1-1: IMPOSITION OF FEES FOR FALSE ALARMS:
The imposition of fees for false alarms shall apply to residential and nonresidential alarm systems and shall be governed by the provisions of this
chapter as set forth herein. (Ord. 2014-01, 1-8-2014)
14-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ALARM COORDINATOR: Means the person designated by the Chief of the Police and Chief of the Fire Department, respectively, who shall have
responsibility and authority for enforcing the provisions of this chapter. There shall be one Alarm Coordinator for each department.
ALARM SYSTEM: Means any assembly of equipment, mechanical, electrical or wireless, arranged to signal the occurrence of a fire, robbery,
illegal entry or other activity requiring urgent attention and to which the Police or Fire Departments are expected to respond.
ALARM USER: Means the person, other than a unit of local, State or Federal government, in control of any building, structure or facility, including
the owner and/or lessee, wherein an alarm system is maintained.
AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE: Means a device which is interconnected to a telephone line and is programmed to select a predetermined
telephone number and transmit by voice message or code signal an emergency message indicating a need for emergency response.
FALSE ALARM: Means an alarm signal eliciting a response by the Village Police Department or the Village Fire Department when a situation
requiring such a response by them does not in fact exist, but does not include an alarm signal caused by violent conditions of nature or other
extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the alarm user, including power outages and telephone service outages.
LOCAL ALARM SYSTEM: Means an alarm system which, when activated, causes an audible and/or visual signaling device to be activated only
on the premises within which the system is installed and which is intended to be heard or seen by others outside of the protected premises.
NONRESIDENTIAL ALARM SYSTEM: Means any alarm system installed or operated in a building or structure that does not contain residential
dwelling units. (Ord. 2014-01, 1-8-2014)
14-1-3: FALSE ALARM NOTICE AND DETERMINATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 368/387
Within thirty (30) days after each false alarm, the Alarm Coordinator shall notify the alarm user by mailing a notice to the address from which the
false alarm was received. If the alarm user believes that the alarm was not a false alarm, he shall reply to the Alarm Coordinator within ten (10)
days from the date that the notice was issued, stating the reasons why the alarm was not a false alarm. In the absence of such reply, the alarm
shall be conclusively presumed to be a false alarm. The Alarm Coordinator shall determine, based upon department records and the user's reply,
whether the alarm was false and so notify the user of his determination. If the alarm is determined to be a false alarm for which a fee is due, the
user shall remit to the Village the appropriate fee for such false alarm within thirty (30) days of notification by the Alarm Coordinator. (Ord. 2014-
01, 1-8-2014)
14-1-4: FALSE ALARM FEES:
An alarm user shall be assessed a fee for each false alarm in excess of two (2) during any calendar year. The fees shall be assessed as
hereinafter set forth:
Number Of False Alarms
In Calendar Year
Fees Assessed
Police Fire
First and second No fee assessed No fee assessed
Third $ 50.00 $100.00
Fourth 100.00 200.00
More than 4 200.00 400.00
(Ord. 2014-01, 1-8-2014)
14-1-5: REGISTRATION OF ALARM SYSTEM:
Within thirty (30) days of the installation or removal of an alarm system within the Village, the owner of the property shall register the alarm
system with the Village or notify the Village of the system's removal, unless the property is leased. If the property is leased, the lessee of the
property shall be responsible for registering the alarm system or notifying the Village of the system's removal within thirty (30) days of the
installation or removal. The registration fee per alarm system shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00) and thereafter an annual registration fee of
twenty five dollars ($25.00) shall be due each subsequent calendar year. Failure to register an alarm system or to notify the Village of a system's
removal shall result in a fine of twenty five dollars ($25.00). (Ord. 2014-01, 1-8-2014)
14-1-6: DISPLAY OF ALARM PERMIT:
Upon registration of an alarm system the Village shall issue to the alarm user a permit that shall be displayed in a conspicuous location upon the
premises. It shall be unlawful for the owner or lessee of an alarm system not to display the issued permit. (Ord. 2014-01, 1-8-2014)
14-1-7: AUTHORITY TO CREATE AND MAINTAIN MINIMUM STANDARDS:
The Chiefs of Police and Fire Departments may impose regulations prescribing minimum standards for the construction and maintenance of all
alarm systems and requiring inspection and approval of all such systems. Such regulations shall have the full force and effect of law upon their
adoption by ordinance by the Village Board after public hearing. (Ord. 2014-01, 1-8-2014)
14-1-8: LIMITATIONS AS TO THE VILLAGE'S LIABILITY:
The Village assumes no liability for any defects in the operation of any alarm system or for the failure or neglect of any person associated with the
installation, operation or maintenance of an alarm system for the transmissions of alarm signals; for the relaying of such signals and messages;
for the failure or neglect of any alarm user; for the transmission or receipt of alarm signals; or for any failure or neglect to respond upon receipt of
an alarm signal from any source. In the event the Village finds it necessary to revoke any direct connect alarm registration, or to otherwise provide
for disconnection of any alarm system, the Village shall have no liability for such action. (Ord. 2014-01, 1-8-2014)
Title 15
QUASI-CRIMINAL OFFENSES
Chapter 1
GENERAL PENALTY AND JUDICIAL REVIEW
15-1-1: PENALTY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 369/387
Whenever in this title, any act which is an offense, is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful, the violation of any such provision of this
title shall be punished by a fine not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), unless otherwise stated,
and every day that such violation continues and exists shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. All violations shall be prosecuted under the
provisions of the code hearing department as defined in title 1, chapter 13 of this code at the village hall or such other place as designated by the
corporate authorities.
A penalty imposed for violation of this title may also include or consist of, at the discretion of the hearing officer as defined in title 1, chapter 13 of
this code, a requirement that the defendant perform some reasonable public service work such as, but not limited to, the picking up of litter in
public parks or along public highways or the maintenance of public facilities. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
15-1-2: PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY:
A parent or legal guardian is liable for any and all fines assessed against an unemancipated minor who resides with such parent or legal
guardian. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
15-1-3: JUDGMENT:
Any fine or any penalty imposed in accordance with this title and remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, administrative
remedies created under this title and the conclusion of any judicial review procedures shall be a debt due and owing, the village and, as such,
may be collected in accordance with the applicable law. Payment in full of any fine or penalty resulting from an offense or violation under this title
shall constitute a final disposition of that violation. A default in the payment of a fine or penalty or any installment of a fine or penalty may be
collected by any means authorized for the collection of monetary judgments. The village attorney may retain attorneys and private collection
agents for the purpose of collecting any default in payment of any fine or penalty or installment of that fine or penalty. Any fees or costs incurred
by the village or any attorney fees shall be charged to the defendant. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
15-1-4: JUDICIAL REVIEW:
Judicial review of final determinations and final administrative decisions regarding violations under this title shall be subject to the provisions of
the administrative review law as is set forth in 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-101 et seq., incorporated herein by reference. (Ord. 09-48, 10-
19-2009)
Chapter 2
ADVERTISEMENTS
15-2-1: POSTING:
It shall be unlawful to post any bills or advertisements on any public property without authority of the Board of Trustees; and it shall be unlawful to
post any bill or advertisement on any private property without the written consent of the owner of the property thereof. (Ord. 2016-37, 9-6-2016)
15-2-2: DISTRIBUTING:
(Rep. by Ord. 2016-37, 9-6-2016)
15-2-3: UNLAWFUL BUSINESSES AND ITEMS:
It shall be unlawful to advertise any unlawful business or item in the Village. (Ord. 2016-37, 9-6-2016)
15-2-4: DEFACING:
It shall be unlawful to injure or deface any lawful advertisement or notice. (Ord. 2016-37, 9-6-2016)
Chapter 3
ALCOHOL RELATED OFFENSES
15-3-1: OPEN ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to transport, carry, possess or have any alcoholic liquor on any street, highway or public place in the village
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 370/387
except in the original package and with the seal unbroken, and except as provided by Illinois state statute. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
15-3-2: PUBLIC INTOXICATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to be in an intoxicated condition on any street or in any alley or public place of the village. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-
2009)
15-3-3: SALE OF LIQUOR FROM PACKAGED LIQUOR STORES:
It shall be unlawful to sell any open alcohol from the premises of a packaged liquor store. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
Chapter 4
RESERVED
(Ord. 2014-01, 1-8-2014)
Chapter 5
ANIMALS
15-5-1: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
No person shall cruelly treat any animal in the village in any way. Any person who inhumanely beats, underfeeds, fails to provide a clean water
source for drinking, fails to provide adequate shelter, overloads or abandons any animal shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this chapter. (Ord.
09-48, 10-19-2009)
15-5-2: DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS ANIMAL; DEFINITION:
A. Any animal that when unprovoked: 1) inflicts bites on or attacks a human being or domestic animal either on public or private property; or 2) in
a vicious or terrorizing manner approaches any person in an apparent attitude of attack on any public way or in any public place;
B. Any animal with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack without provocation, to cause injury or otherwise to endanger the safety
of human beings or domestic animals;
C. Any animal that attacks a human being or domestic animal without provocation; or
D. Any animal owned, harbored, trained or used for fighting against another animal or person. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
15-5-3: DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS ANIMAL; REQUIREMENTS:
A. Every dangerous or vicious animal allowed to be kept by state law shall have a license. In order to obtain a license for a dangerous or vicious
animal, the owner of the animal shall present to the health department proof that the owner has procured liability insurance in the amount of
one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), issued by an insurer authorized to underwrite risks in this state, covering any damage or injury
which may be caused by the dangerous or vicious animal during the license period. The insurance policy shall contain a provision that the
health department will be notified thirty (30) days prior to any cancellation of the policy. Each license shall bear a different number.
B. The owner of the dangerous or vicious animal shall have the license number of the animal tattooed on the upper inner lip of the animal by a
licensed veterinarian.
C. The owner of the dangerous or vicious animal shall post a sign no smaller than twenty four inches (24") square, bearing the legend "Warning-
Dangerous Animal" in print no smaller than three inches (3") high, and the license number of the animal in print no smaller than one inch (1")
high. The sign shall be posted at the entry to the building in which the animal is kept, in such a way as to be visible from the nearest public
sidewalk.
D. The owner of a dangerous or vicious animal shall not allow the animal outside the owner's dwelling unless: 1) the animal is in a locked
enclosure secure on all sides and on the top against intrusion by domestic animals and humans other than the owner; or 2) the animal is
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 371/387
muzzled and under restraint and under the direct control of the owner. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
15-5-4: DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS ANIMAL; VIOLATIONS:
Any dangerous or vicious animal kept, harbored or maintained in violation of this chapter shall be subject to impoundment and destruction by the
health department. If a dangerous or vicious animal possessed, harbored, kept or maintained in violation of this chapter bites or inflicts any other
injury on any person other than its owner, the owner of the animal shall be subject to a fine of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Any person
who otherwise possesses, harbors, keeps or maintains a dangerous or vicious animal in violation of this chapter shall be subject to the general
penalty provision of section 15-1-1 of this title. The requirements of this section shall not apply to dogs owned by law enforcement agencies and
used in law enforcement work. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
15-5-5: DISTURBING THE PEACE:
It shall be unlawful to harbor or keep any animal which disturbs the peace by loud noises at any time of the day or night. Such an animal shall be
deemed a nuisance for the purposes of this chapter and this code. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
15-5-6: DISEASED ANIMALS:
No domestic animal afflicted with a contagious or infectious disease shall be allowed to run at large or to be exposed in any public place in the
village whereby the health of man or beast may be affected, nor shall such diseased animal be shipped or removed from the premises of the
owner thereof, except under the supervision of the health department or of the state veterinarian and no diseased animals shall be brought into
the village.
It is the duty of the health department to secure such disposition of any diseased animal and such treatment of affected premises as to prevent
the communication and spread of the contagion or infection, except in cases where the state veterinarian is empowered to act, and in all such
cases, the health department shall cooperate with the state veterinarian so far as such cooperation may be necessary to the protection of the
health of the citizens of the village.
All animals kept within the village shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. It shall be the duty of any owner or custodian of any
animals to report to the health officer the occurrence of any disease such as rabies, glanders or anthrax among those animals which is
transmissible to human beings. Any animal infected with such a disease shall be cared for or disposed of as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 09-48,
10-19-2009)
15-5-7: LICENSE REQUIRED, FEE:
Every person who owns, keeps or harbors a dog or cat, within the limits of the village shall, during the month of March of each year or within ten
(10) days of the date such dog or cat is acquired, report this fact to the village clerk-collector, together with the name, breed, color and sex of
every dog or cat so owned, kept or harbored by such person and shall pay to the clerk-collector as a yearly license fee, the sum of fifteen dollars
($15.00) for each dog or cat so owned, kept or harbored, regardless of sex, age, color or breed. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
15-5-8: TAGS REQUIRED:
Upon the payment of the fee the village clerk-collector shall furnish the owner or keeper of each dog so licensed with a license tag marked with
the initials BDT for dogs and BCT for cats which tags shall be numbered consecutively and shall be of a different design or pattern each year.
Every dog and cat so owned, kept or harbored within the limits of the village shall be provided by its owner or keeper with a leather or chain collar
to which the license tag shall be securely fastened. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
15-5-9: RABIES INOCULATION:
No license for any dog or cat shall be issued unless the owner thereof presents with his application for a license a certificate from a duly licensed
registered veterinarian showing that the dog or cat for which the license is sought has been inoculated within the past twelve (12) months with a
prophylactic serum to prevent rabies. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
15-5-10: MUZZLES OR LEASHES:
No owner of any dog within the limits of the village shall permit any such dog to leave the premises of the owner at any time unless the dog is
securely leashed or is muzzled in such manner as to fully prevent the dog from biting any person or animal. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
15-5-11: DEFECATING ON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY:
No person shall cause or permit any dog or cat owned by him to create a nuisance by defecating or urinating upon any public street, sidewalk or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 372/387
other place or upon any premises not owned or controlled by the person owning or keeping the dog or cat. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
15-5-12: IMPOUNDMENT:
A. Dogs: It is the duty of the chief of police, or any person designated by him, to capture and impound, either at a licensed pound within the village
or at one in close proximity to the village, each dog found at large off the premises of its owner and within the limits of the village, which is
without a muzzle, leash, collar or tag as required by this chapter.
B. Cats: It is the duty of the chief of police, or any person designated by him, to capture and impound, either at a licensed pound within the village
or at one in close proximity to the village, each cat found at large off the premises of its owner and within the limits of the village, which is
without collar and tag as required herein. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
15-5-13: REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED DOGS AND CATS:
A. Dogs: The chief of police, or any person or entity designated by him, shall promptly notify the owner of any dog so impounded, if the same can
be ascertained, and the owner may redeem the dog, provided the dog exhibits no evidence of disease, within five (5) days from the time of its
capture by providing proof of rabies inoculation and paying the license fee or fine as provided herein.
B. Cats: The chief of police, or any person or entity designated by him, shall promptly notify the owner of any cat so impounded, if the same can
be ascertained, and the owner may redeem the cat, provided the cat exhibits no evidence of disease, within five (5) days from the time of its
capture by providing proof of rabies inoculation and paying the license fee or fine as provided herein. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
15-5-14: DESTRUCTION OF UNREDEEMED AND VICIOUS DOGS AND CATS:
A. Dogs: It is the duty of the chief of police, or any person or entity designated by him, to destroy any dog unredeemed at the expiration of five (5)
days from the time of capture, or to provide for its donation to a licensed animal shelter facility, and it shall be lawful for the village police to kill
any vicious dog at large within the limits of the village which cannot safely be taken up and impounded. Any such destruction or donation of
impounded dogs shall be by humane means prescribed by the state of Illinois animal control act.
B. Cats: It is the duty of the police chief, or any person or entity designated by him, to destroy any cat unredeemed at the expiration of five (5)
days from the time of capture, or to provide for its donation to a licensed animal shelter facility and it shall be lawful for the village police to kill
any vicious cat at large within the limits of the village which cannot safely be taken up and impounded. Any such destruction or donation of
impounded cats shall be by humane means prescribed by the state of Illinois animal control act. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
15-5-15: KENNELS:
The possession of three (3) or more dogs by any person shall constitute prima facie evidence of the maintenance of a dog kennel for the sale of
dogs. All persons operating a dog kennel within the limits of the village shall pay an annual license fee as prescribed in this code. (Ord. 09-48, 10-
19-2009)
15-5-16: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR CATS:
A. Number Of Cats Restricted: It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a licensed kennel, pet shop or shelter operator, to keep or harbor
more than two (2) cats over the age of six (6) months. The keeping of more than two (2) cats over the age of six (6) months is declared to be a
public nuisance and is declared to be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare.
B. Cat Bites: In the event that a cat bites a person, the chief of police, or any person designated by him, shall immediately notify the animal
control administrator, pursuant to the state of Illinois animal control act, and said cat shall be impounded as provided therein. (Ord. 09-48, 10-
19-2009)
Chapter 6
ASSAULT AND BATTERY, FIGHTING
15-6-1: UNLAWFUL:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit an assault or battery or to fight in any public place in the village. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 373/387
Chapter 7
BARBED WIRE, ELECTRIC FENCES
15-7-1: UNLAWFUL:
It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain anywhere in the village a fence equipped with or having barbed wire spikes or any similar device, or any
electric charge sufficient to cause shock, within seven feet (7') of the ground level. This chapter shall not apply to invisible perimeter fences for the
retention of animals. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
Chapter 8
DAMAGE TO PUBLIC PROPERTY
15-8-1: UNLAWFUL:
It shall be unlawful for anyone to injure, deface or interfere with any public property without proper authority from the governing public body. (Ord.
09-48, 10-19-2009)
Chapter 9
DANGEROUS EXCAVATIONS
15-9-1: UNLAWFUL:
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any real property located within the village to maintain or permit the existence upon such property of any
excavation, pit, hole, ditch or other manmade depression in the earth, which endangers the public health, welfare and safety or the real or
personal property of another. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
Chapter 10
DISORDERLY CONDUCT
15-10-1: UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES:
A person commits disorderly conduct when that person knowingly:
A. Does any act in such unreasonable manner as to provoke, make or aid in making a breach of peace; or
B. Does or makes any unreasonable or offensive act, utterance, gesture or display which, under the circumstances, creates a clear and present
danger of a breach of peace or imminent threat of violence; or
C. Refuses or fails to cease and desist any peaceful conduct or activity likely to produce a breach of peace where there is an imminent threat of
violence, and where the police have made all reasonable efforts to protect the otherwise peaceful conduct and activity, and have requested
that said conduct and activity be stopped and explained the request if there be time; or
D. Fails to obey a lawful order of dispersal by a person known by him to be a police officer under circumstances which acts are likely to cause
substantial harm or serious inconvenience, annoyance or alarm; or assembles for the purpose of using force or violence to disturb the public
peace; or
E. Goes about begging or soliciting funds on the public ways, except as provided for by ordinance or upon lawful authority of the village; or
F. Carries in a threatening or menacing manner, without authority of law, any dagger, razor, dangerous knife, stiletto, knuckles, slingshot, billy,
stun gun or taser, crossbow, common or compound bows, underwater spear gun, blackjack, sand club, sandbag, throwing star, nunchaku,
broken bottle or other piece of glass, air gun, air pistol, spring gun, spring pistol, BB gun, paintball gun, pellet gun or any implement that is not
a firearm which impels a breakable paintball containing washable marking colors, or a pellet constructed of hard plastic, steel, lead or other
hard materials with a force that reasonably is expected to cause bodily harm, look alike weapon which by its appearance, including shape,
color, size, markings or lack thereof, or any other identifying physical characteristic, would lead a reasonable person to believe that the object
is a weapon which could cause bodily harm, an object containing noxious or deleterious liquid, gas or substance or other dangerous weapon;
or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 374/387
G. While on public or private grounds adjacent to any building in which a school or any class thereof is in session, wilfully makes or assists in the
making of any noise or diversion which disturbs or tends to disturb the peace or good order of such school session or class thereof.
H. The use of loudspeakers, amplifiers or organized chanting or shouting within three hundred feet (300') of any school or class thereof is
presumed to disturb the peace or good order of such school session or class thereof.
I. No person shall maliciously turn in or cause to be turned in a false alarm including, but not limited to, abuse of the 911 system, filing false police
reports, or other improper usage of the police or fire dispatch system. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
Chapter 11
DISTURBING ASSEMBLAGES
15-11-1: UNLAWFUL:
It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb any lawful assemblage or gathering in the village. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
Chapter 12
FIREWORKS
15-12-1: PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to sell, store, possess, discharge or set off any fireworks or to give any pyrotechnic display in the village, except in connection
with public exhibitions as is herein provided. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
15-12-2: SALE OF FIREWORKS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, possess, offer for sale or keep for the purpose of selling any fireworks in the village at any time. (Ord.
09-48, 10-19-2009)
15-12-3: PUBLIC DISPLAY:
No public exhibition of fireworks or pyrotechnics shall be given unless a permit therefor is first secured from the village. All such public displays
shall be under the supervision of a competent person, and shall be superintended by the fire chief or some other member of the fire department
assigned this duty by him. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
Chapter 13
GAMBLING
15-13-1: PROHIBITED:
A. Generally: It shall be unlawful to gamble or to attend any gambling resort or to make any bet, lottery or gambling hazard or to buy or sell any
chances or tickets in any gambling game, arrangement or device, except as provided herein.
B. Sporting Events: It shall be unlawful for any person to place, make, accept, relay, deliver or pay any wager or bet on any sporting event or
other competition.
C. Exceptions:
1. Lottery: This chapter shall not apply to the lottery owned and operated by the state, bingo, casino nights, raffles or such similarly situated
events hosted by not for profit organizations and which are allowed by the state and which have received the necessary permitting from the
state and village.
2. Video Gaming: This chapter shall not apply to "video gaming" as defined by the Illinois gaming act, 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 40. (Ord.
13-71, 11-18-2013)
15-13-1-1: VIDEO GAMING:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 375/387
A. Authority To Regulate: This section is passed pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes sections 5/11-42-2 and 5/11-55-1, and 35 Illinois
Compiled Statutes section 510/1 et seq., 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 40/1 et seq.
B. Definitions:
VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL: Any electronic video game machine that, upon insertion of cash, electronic cards or vouchers or any
combination thereof, is available to play or simulate the play of a video game, including, but not limited to, video poker, line up, and blackjack,
as authorized by the village, utilizing a video display and microprocessors in which the player may receive free games or credits that can be
redeemed for cash. The term does not include a machine that directly dispenses coins, cash, or tokens or is for amusement purposes only.
The village adopts the definitions contained within 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 40/5, "Definitions", and any amendments thereto.
C. License Required: No person shall keep or display for operating or patronage by the public within the village any video gaming terminal without
first having obtained a written license therefor from the village, which license shall be framed and hung in plain view in a conspicuous place on
the licensed premises, and such posted license may include more than one device on such licensed premises. It shall be a prerequisite to any
license from the village that the person keeping the video gaming terminal have a valid license from the state of Illinois for each such device
and the loss or suspension of any such license by the state of Illinois shall automatically result in the same status for the license issued
hereunder, without refund of any license fee.
D. Fee: There hereby is imposed on the privilege of operating every video gaming terminal in the village, as defined by the Illinois video gaming
act, 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 40/1 et seq., an annual fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for each such device.
E. Application Form Required: An application for an amusement device license shall be made to the village on forms furnished by the village. The
application shall set forth the number of video gaming terminals for which permission is sought for a particular premises, shall describe the
number and type of each different device or machine that the applicant intends to operate and shall be accompanied by payment of the
appropriate fee. The applicant shall include a copy of the license from the state of Illinois for each video gaming terminal at that location.
F. Penalty: Violations of this section shall be subject to the general penalty contained in title 1, chapter 4, "General Penalty", of this code. (Ord.
13-71, 11-18-2013)
15-13-2: GAMBLING DEVICES:
It shall be unlawful to possess any gambling device or paraphernalia with the intent to use the same for an unlawful purpose, and any such device
or paraphernalia kept with such intent may be confiscated by the chief of police or his designee. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
15-13-3: GAMBLING HOUSES:
It shall be unlawful to maintain or patronize any establishment maintained as a gambling house or resort, except as authorized by the Illinois
gaming act, 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 40 et seq., and this chapter. (Ord. 13-71, 11-18-2013)
15-13-4: ADVERTISING:
It shall be unlawful to advertise any gambling house or gambling resort on any street, in any alley of public place within the village, except as
authorized by the Illinois gaming act, 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 40 et seq., and this chapter. (Ord. 13-71, 11-18-2013)
Chapter 14
INDECENT ACTIVITIES; FIGHTING
15-14-1: UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
1. Profanity: Use profanity on any street, alley or other public place in the village.
2. Indecent Publications: Keep any profane, obscene or adult publication, printed or written matter, picture, product, or other representation in
any place frequented by or where it may come into the possession of minors or to disclose or expose any such material to a minor.
3. Fighting: Knowingly start fights, fight or commit any assault or battery in any public place in the village.
4. Adult Stores; Minors: Permit any person under the age of eighteen (18) years old to be on the premises of any "adult store" or any other
location that houses an adult use, as defined in this code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 376/387
5. Urination And Defecation In Public: Urinate or defecate in or on a public street, alley, sidewalk, yard, park, building, structure, plaza, public
or utility right of way, or other public place, other than in a restroom or in public view. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
Chapter 15
INTERFERING WITH VILLAGE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
15-15-1: UNLAWFUL:
It shall be unlawful to interfere with or hinder any officer or employee of the village while engaged in the duties of his office. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-
2009)
Chapter 16
LITTERING; VILLAGE PARKING LOTS
15-16-1: PROHIBITED:
No person shall litter or otherwise cause the placement of garbage or trash in a public place, including village owned parking lots, except in
receptacles designated for same. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
15-16-2: VILLAGE PARKING LOTS:
No person shall use village owned parking lots, except for parking purposes, unless otherwise permitted; no person shall use village owned
parking lots to repair or maintain a vehicle parked therein. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
Chapter 17
LOITERING
15-17-1: DEFINITIONS:
Definitions under this section shall be as follows:
LOITERING: Remaining idle in essentially one location and includes the concept of spending time idly; to be dilatory; to linger; to sleep in a public
place; to stand around and shall also include the colloquial expression "hanging around".
PUBLIC PLACE: Any place to which the general public has access and a right to resort for business, entertainment, or other lawful purpose, but
does not necessarily mean a place devoted solely to the uses of the public. It shall also include the front or immediate area of any store, shop,
restaurant, tavern or other place of business and also public grounds, areas, parks or schools. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
15-17-2: PROHIBITED ACTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, loaf, wander, stand or remain idle either alone and/or in consort with others in a public place in such
manner so as to:
A. Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building by hindering or impeding or tending to hinder or
impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic or pedestrians.
B. Commit in or upon any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building any act or thing which is an
obstruction or interference to the free and uninterrupted use of property or with any business lawfully conducted by anyone in or upon or
facing or fronting on any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building, all of which prevents the free and
uninterrupted ingress, egress and regress, therein, thereon and thereto. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
15-17-3: VIOLATIONS:
When any person causes or commits any of the conditions or acts enumerated in this chapter, a police officer or any law enforcement officer shall
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 377/387
order that person to stop causing or committing such conditions or acts and to move on or disperse. Any person who fails or refuses to obey such
orders shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
Chapter 18
MINORS
15-18-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following definitions apply:
CURFEW HOURS: A. Eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday until six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of the
following day;
B. One minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on Saturday; and
C. One minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on Sunday.
EMERGENCY: An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not
limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of
life.
ESTABLISHMENT: Any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any
place of amusement or entertainment.
GUARDIAN: A. A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or
B. A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the court.
MINOR FOR PURPOSES OF CURFEW: Any person under seventeen (17) years of age.
OPERATOR: Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term
includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a corporation.
PARENT: A person who is:
A. A natural parent, adoptive parent, or stepparent of another person; or
B. At least seventeen (17) years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets,
highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, and shops.
SERIOUS BODILY INJURY: Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or
protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
15-18-2: CURFEW OFFENSES:
A. A minor commits an offense if he remains in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the village during curfew hours.
B. A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he knowingly permits, or by insufficient control allows, the minor to remain in any public
place or on the premises of any establishment within the village during curfew hours.
C. The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment commits an offense if he knowingly allows a minor to remain upon the premises of
the establishment during curfew hours. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
15-18-3: CURFEW DEFENSES:
It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the minor was:
A. Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 378/387
B. On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, without any detour or stop;
C. In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
D. Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
E. Involved in an emergency;
F. On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of a next door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the police
department about the minor's presence;
G. Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults or sponsored by the village, a civic organization, or
another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop;
H. Exercising first amendment rights protected by the United States constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the
right of assembly; or
I. Married or had been married or is an emancipated minor under the emancipation of mature minor act, as amended.
J. It is a defense to prosecution that the owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly notified the police department that a minor
was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
15-18-4: POLICE DETENTION:
Each member of the police force is hereby authorized to take custody of without warrant, any person violating any provisions of this chapter and
retain such person until he or she is turned over to the custody of the parent, guardian or other person having the legal care and custody of such
child. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
15-18-5: ENFORCEMENT:
Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the public
place. The officer shall not issue a citation or take custody of the minor under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense
has occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances, no defense in this chapter is present. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
15-18-6: TOBACCO:
See chapter 26 of this title. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
15-18-7: TRUANCY:
See chapter 28 of this title. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
15-18-8: VANDALISM:
See chapter 29 of this title. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
Chapter 19
OBSCENE PUBLICATIONS AND PRODUCTIONS
15-19-1: SALES AND DISTRIBUTION:
A. It is unlawful for any person to knowingly sell, give, deliver, present, publish or exhibit obscene material, or obscene productions of any sort,
including, but not limited to, writings, pictures, movies, performances, acts, plays or dances, to any person.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 379/387
B. For the purpose of this section, a material or a production shall be considered obscene if, applying contemporary community standards for the
average person to whom it is sold, given, delivered, presented, published or exhibited:
1. It, as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest; and
2. It contains either patently offensive representations or descriptions of ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, or
patently offensive representations or descriptions of masturbation, erectory functions and lewd exhibition of the genitals; and
3. It, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value or otherwise is not found to be obscene. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-
2009)
15-19-2: SALES PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, or exhibit for sale, in sealed form or in any form which indicates that the sale thereof is surreptitious or
contrary to law, any book, pamphlet or literature of any kind bearing the title of some well known book of salacious character or bearing the title of
a book of which the contents are actually lewd, lascivious, obscene, immoral, or indecent. It shall likewise be unlawful to sell or exhibit for sale,
any book, pamphlet or literature of any kind having anything about it which indicates that its contents are of an obscene, immoral, lewd, lascivious
or indecent character; or to sell, offer or exhibit for sale, any of said materials under the guise or pretense that the same is obscene, immoral,
lewd, lascivious or indecent; or in a manner that indicates concealment of anything as contrary to law or immoral contained therein; or to use any
pretense, trick, fraud, artifice or device to convey the impression that such materials are lewd, lascivious, indecent, obscene or immoral, whether
such pretense, trick, fraud, artifice or device is a misrepresentation in regard to the contents of the same or not. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
15-19-3: SALE TO MINORS:
It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to exhibit, sell, offer to sell, give away, circulate or distribute or attempt to distribute to any person
under the age of eighteen (18) years, any obscene book, pornographic material, magazine, pamphlet, paper, writing, card, advertisement,
circular, print, picture, photograph, motion picture film, play, image, instrument, statue, drawing or other material.
"Obscene" for the purpose of this section is defined as follows: Whether to the average person under eighteen (18) years of age to whom the
material is exhibited, sold, offered for sale, given away, circulated or distributed, applying contemporary community standards, the dominant
theme of the material taken as a whole appeals to prurient interests.
In determining whether the publication or other material is obscene and whether the dominant theme of the material taken as a whole appeals to
prurient interests, consideration shall be given to whatever artistic, literary, historical or educational value the publication or other material may
have for persons under the age of eighteen (18) years in the community and whether the probability of the appeal to prurient interests is so great
as to outweigh whatever artistic, literary, historical, educational or other merit the publication or other material may possess. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-
2009)
Chapter 20
CANNABIS AND CANNABIS PARAPHERNALIA
15-20-1: DEFINITIONS:
CANNABIS: Includes marijuana, hashish and other substances which are identified as including any part of the plant Cannabis sativa, whether
growing or not; the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of such plant; and any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or
preparation of such plant, its seeds or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other cannabinol derivatives, including its naturally
occurring or synthetically produced ingredients, whether produced directly or indirectly by extraction, or independently by means of chemical
synthesis or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis; but shall not include the mature stalks of such plant, fiber produced from such
stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of such plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of such mature
stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil or cake or the sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of germination.
CANNABIS PARAPHERNALIA: Includes all equipment, products and materials of any kind which are peculiar to, or marketed for use, or are
used, in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing,
testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human
body cannabis in violation of the cannabis control act. It includes, but is not limited to:
A. Kits peculiar to and marketed for use, or used in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing cannabis;
B. Isomerization devices peculiar to, or marketed for use, or used in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is cannabis;
C. Testing equipment peculiar to, or marketed for private home use in, or used for, identifying or analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity
of cannabis;
D. Diluents and adulterants peculiar to, or marketed for use in, or used for, cutting cannabis or a controlled substance by private persons;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 380/387
E. Objects peculiar to, marketed for use in, or used for ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing cannabis, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil
into the human body including, where applicable, the following terms:
1. Water pipes;
2. Carburetion tubes and devices;
3. Smoking and carburetion masks;
4. Carburetor pipes;
5. Electric pipes;
6. Air driven pipes;
7. Chillums;
8. Bongs;
9. Ice pipes or chillers;
F. Any item whose purpose, as announced or described by the seller, is for use in violation of this section. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
15-20-2: UNLAWFUL:
It is unlawful for any person knowingly to possess any quantity of any substance containing cannabis and/or paraphernalia as described herein
for the use thereof, except that the effect of this section shall be limited to persons knowingly possessing less than thirty grams (30 g) of any
substance containing cannabis. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
15-20-3: POSSESSION OF PARAPHERNALIA:
A. A person who knowingly possesses an item of drug paraphernalia with the intent to use it in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing
cannabis into the human body, or in preparing cannabis substance for that use, is guilty of the offense hereunder.
B. In determining intent, the proximity of the cannabis drug paraphernalia or the presence of cannabis on the drug paraphernalia may be
considered. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
15-20-4: EXEMPT ITEMS; DETERMINATION:
A. Items marketed for the use in the preparation, compounding, packaging, labeling, or other use of cannabis as an incident to lawful research,
teaching, or chemical analysis and not for sale; or
B. Items marketed for, or historically and customarily used in connection with the planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting,
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing,
concealing, injecting, ingesting, or inhaling of tobacco or any other lawful substance.
C. Items exempt under this section include, but are not limited to, garden hoes, rakes, sickles, baggies, tobacco pipes, and cigarette rolling
papers.
D. Items which are marketed for decorative purposes, when such items have been rendered completely inoperable or incapable of being used for
any illicit purpose prohibited by this section. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
15-20-5: CONSIDERATIONS:
In determining whether or not a particular item is exempt under this chapter, all other logically relevant factors should be considered, including the
following:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 381/387
A. The general, usual, customary, and historical use to which the item involved has been put;
B. Expert evidence concerning the ordinary or customary use of the item and the effect of any peculiarity in the design or engineering of the item
upon its functioning;
C. Any written instructions accompanying the delivery of the item concerning the purposes or uses to which the item can or may be put;
D. Any oral instructions provided by the seller of the item at the time and place of sale or commercial delivery;
E. Any national or local advertising, concerning the design, purpose or use of the item involved, and the entire context in which such advertising
occurs;
F. The manner, place and circumstances in which the item was displayed for sale, as well as any item or items displayed for sale or otherwise
exhibited upon the premises where the sale was made;
G. Whether the owner or anyone in control of the object is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed
distributor or dealer of tobacco products;
H. The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
Chapter 21
PROSTITUTION
15-21-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter:
PROSTITUTION, PANDERING AND SOLICITING FOR A PROSTITUTE: Have the same meanings given them in the Illinois criminal code, as
amended.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any street, sidewalk, bridge, alley or alleyway, plaza, park, driveway, parking lot or transportation facility or the doorways and
entranceways to any building which fronts on any of the aforesaid places, or a motor vehicle in or on any such place, or any other public way.
(Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
15-21-2: SOLICITATION:
A. Any person who remains or wanders about in a public place and beckons to, or repeatedly attempts to engage passersby in conversation, or
repeatedly interferes with the free passage of other persons, for the purpose of prostitution or of soliciting for a prostitute, shall be guilty of a
violation of this chapter.
B. Any person who remains or wanders about in a public place and beckons to, or repeatedly stops, or repeatedly attempts to stop, or repeatedly
attempts to engage passersby in conversation, or repeatedly stops or attempts to stop motor vehicles, or repeatedly interferes with the free
passage of other persons, for the purpose of pandering shall be guilty of a violation of this section. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
15-21-3: VIOLATION:
A. Any person who appears in a public place and exposes the genitals, vulva, pubis, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anus, anal region or pubic
hair region, or any portion of the female breast at or below the upper edge of the areola, for the purpose of prostitution shall be guilty of a
violation of this chapter.
B. Any person who responds to the beckoning of a prostitute in a public place by inquiring about, negotiating for, accepting an offer of or engaging
in an act of prostitution, or by allowing another into his or her motor vehicle for purposes of inquiring about, negotiating for, accepting an offer
of or engaging in an act of prostitution, shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter. The chief of police shall make available to local
newspapers, radio and television stations the names of all persons charged with violating this chapter. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
15-21-4: VEHICLE IMPOUNDMENT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 382/387
A. A motor vehicle that is used in the violation of this chapter or in the commission of prostitution, soliciting for a prostitute, soliciting for a juvenile
prostitute as, or patronizing a juvenile prostitute, shall be subject to seizure and impoundment as provided in title 7, chapter 4.2 of this code.
B. Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this section, the
police officer shall provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility controlled by the city or its agents. When the vehicle is towed, the police
officer shall notify the person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation, if there is such a person, of the fact
of the seizure and of the vehicle owner's right to request a preliminary hearing. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
Chapter 22
PUBLIC NUDITY
15-22-1: DEFINITION:
As used in this chapter, "nudity" means the display of the human male or female genitalia; pubic hair; buttocks; perineum; anal or pubic regions;
female breast, at or below the areola thereof, with no covering or with a less than fully opaque covering; or, male genitalia, in a discernible turgid
state, with or without covering. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
15-22-2: PROHIBITED:
No person shall knowingly or intentionally, in a public place other than a nonretail adult business, appear in a state of nudity in the village. This
section shall not apply to public nudity necessarily incidental to breastfeeding a child. "Public place" shall, for the purposes of this chapter, mean
any place, or a part of a place, to which the public, or a section of the public, ordinarily has access, whether or not by payment or by invitation
(including, for example, a shop, restaurant, hotel, cinema or club). (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
Chapter 23
REFUSE DEPOSITS
15-23-1: UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
A. Windblown Refuse: Deposit or leave any refuse or material in such a place or condition that it can be blown by the wind so as to be scattered
or cause clouds of dust or particles; and it shall be unlawful to permit the escape of soot, ashes or other solid products or results of
combustion so as to be windblown or scattered.
B. Deposits On Streets: Dump or deposit, or cause to be dumped or deposited any grass, leaves, branches, garbage, refuse, hazardous or
harmful materials, or any other things in the roadway or gutter of any public street in the village. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
Chapter 24
RESISTING ARREST
15-24-1: UNLAWFUL:
Whoever in the village shall resist any member of the police force or any other person duly authorized to perform police duty in the discharge of
his duties, or shall in any way interfere with, prevent or hinder him in the discharge of his duty as such member, or shall offer or endeavor to do so
shall be punished as provided in chapter 1 of this title. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
Chapter 25
RETAIL THEFT
15-25-1: PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit an act of retail theft within the village limits. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
15-25-2: DEFINITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 383/387
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
FULL RETAIL VALUE: The merchant's stated or advertised price of the merchandise.
LEGAL GUARDIAN: A person appointed guardian, or given custody, of a minor by a circuit court of the state, but does not include a person
appointed guardian, or given custody, of a minor under the juvenile court act of 1987, 705 Illinois Compiled Statutes 405/1 et seq.
MERCHANDISE: Any item of tangible personal property.
MERCHANT: An owner or operator of any retail mercantile establishment or any agent, employee, lessee, consignee, officer, director, franchisee
or independent contractor of such owner or operator.
MINOR: A person who is above eleven (11) years but not yet eighteen (18) years of age.
PARENT: The lawful father and mother of a minor child, whether by birth or adoption.
PERSON: Any natural person or individual.
POLICE OFFICER: Has the meaning and encompasses the powers and duties ascribed to that term in this code and Illinois law.
PREMISES OF A RETAIL MERCANTILE ESTABLISHMENT: Includes, but is not limited to, the retail mercantile establishment; any common use
areas in shopping centers and all parking areas set aside by a merchant or on behalf of a merchant for the parking of vehicles for the
convenience of the patrons of such retail mercantile establishment.
RETAIL MERCANTILE ESTABLISHMENT: Any place where merchandise is displayed, held, stored or offered for sale to the public.
SHOPPING CART: Those pushcarts of the type or types which are commonly provided by grocery stores, drugstores or other retail mercantile
establishments for the use of the public in transporting commodities in stores and markets and, incidentally, from the stores to a place outside the
store.
THEFT DETECTION REMOVAL DEVICE: Any tool or device specifically designed and intended to be used to remove any theft detection device
from any merchandise.
THEFT DETECTION SHIELDING DEVICE: Any laminated or coated bag or device designed and intended to shield merchandise from detection
by an electronic or magnetic theft alarm sensor.
TO CONCEAL MERCHANDISE: Although there may be some notice of its presence, that merchandise is not visible through ordinary
observation.
UNDER RING: To cause the cash register or other sales recording device to reflect less than the full retail value of the merchandise. (Ord. 09-48,
10-19-2009)
15-25-3: VIOLATION:
A person commits the offense of retail theft when he or she knowingly:
A. Takes possession of, carries away, transfers or causes to be carried away or transferred any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for
sale in a retail mercantile establishment with the intention of retaining such merchandise or with the intention of depriving the merchant
permanently of the possession, use or benefit of such merchandise without paying the full retail value of such merchandise; or
B. Alters, transfers, or removes any label, price tag, marking, indicia of value or any other markings which aid in determining value affixed to any
merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale, in a retail mercantile establishment and attempts to purchase such merchandise
personally or in consort with another at less than the full retail value with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of such
merchandise; or
C. Transfers any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale, in a retail mercantile establishment from the container in or on which
such merchandise is displayed to any other container with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of such merchandise;
or
D. Under rings with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of the merchandise; or
E. Removes a shopping cart from the premises of a retail mercantile establishment without the consent of the merchant given at the time of such
removal with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the possession, use or benefit of such cart; or
F. Represents to a merchant that he or another is the lawful owner of property, knowing that such representation is false, and conveys or attempts
to convey that property to a merchant who is the owner of the property in exchange for money, merchandise credit or other property of the
merchant; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 384/387
G. Uses or possesses any theft detection shielding device or theft detection device remover with the intention of using such device to deprive the
merchant permanently of the possession, use or benefit of any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale in a retail mercantile
establishment without paying the full retail value of such merchandise; or
H. Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the owner and thereby intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit
of the property when a lessee of the personal property of another fails to return it to the owner, or if the lessee fails to pay the full retail value of
such property to the lessor in satisfaction of any contractual provision requiring such, within ten (10) days after written demand from the owner
for its return. A notice in writing, given after the expiration of the leasing agreement, by registered mail, to the lessee at the address given by
the lessee and shown on the leasing agreement shall constitute proper demand. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
15-25-4: RIGHT TO DETAIN:
Any merchant who has reasonable grounds to believe that a person has committed retail theft may detain such person, on or off the premises of
a retail mercantile establishment, for all or any of the following purposes:
A. To request and to verify any and all identification;
B. To make reasonable inquiry as to whether such person has in his possession unpurchased merchandise and, to make reasonable investigation
as to the ownership of the merchandise;
C. To inform a peace officer of the detention of the person and surrender that person to the custody of a peace officer; and/or
D. In the case of a minor, to immediately make a reasonable attempt to inform the parents, guardian or other private person interested in the
welfare of that minor and, at the merchant's discretion, a police officer, of the minor's detention and to surrender custody of such minor to
either the minor's parents, guardian, private interested person or police officer. A merchant may make a detention as permitted herein off the
premises of a retail mercantile establishment only if such detention is pursuant to an immediate pursuit of such person. Merchant shall be
deemed to have reasonable grounds to make a detention for the purposes of this section if the merchant detains a person because such
person has in his possession either a theft detection shielding device or a theft detection device remover.
E. In the case of a minor person who is accused of violating any of the provisions of this section and who is residing with a parent or guardian at
the time of such purported violation, the juvenile department of the village police department shall, within three (3) days thereof, notify such
parent or guardian, in writing, either by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, that such minor has been accused of retail theft.
(Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
15-25-5: DOLLAR LIMIT ENFORCEMENT:
The code hearing department of the village as defined in title 1, chapter 13 of this code shall only enforce the provisions of this chapter if the retail
value of the item subject to retail theft is less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
Chapter 26
TOBACCO
15-26-1: MINORS:
No minor under eighteen (18) years of age shall buy any cigar, cigarette, smokeless tobacco or tobacco in any of its forms. No person shall sell,
purchase for, distribute samples of or furnish any cigar, cigarette, smokeless tobacco or tobacco in any of its forms, to any minor under eighteen
(18) years of age. For the purpose of this chapter, "smokeless tobacco" means any tobacco products that are suitable for dipping or chewing.
(Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
15-26-2: VENDING MACHINES:
A. Tobacco products listed above may be sold through a vending machine only in the following locations:
1. Factories, businesses, offices, private clubs, and other places not open to the general public.
2. Places to which minors under eighteen (18) years of age are not permitted access.
3. Places where alcoholic beverages are sold and consumed on the premises.
4. Places where the vending machine is under the direct supervision of the owner of the establishment or an employee over eighteen (18)
years of age. The sale of tobacco products from a vending machine under direct supervision of the owner or an employee of the
establishment is considered a sale of tobacco products by that person. As used in this subsection, "direct supervision" means that the
owner or employee has an unimpeded line of sight to the vending machine. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 385/387
15-26-3: LUNCH WAGONS:
The sale or distribution of cigarettes from a lunch wagon engaging in any sales activity within one thousand feet (1,000') of any public or private
elementary or secondary school grounds is prohibited. For the purpose of this section, "lunch wagon" means a mobile vehicle designed and
constructed to transport food and from which food is sold to the general public. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
15-26-4: SALE AND DISTRIBUTION OF CIGARETTES:
It shall be unlawful to sell individual cigarettes or cigars (if packed in multiple sealed units) in any quantities less than a full sealed pack. (Ord. 09-
48, 10-19-2009)
Chapter 27
TRESPASSES
15-27-1: UNLAWFUL:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit a trespass within this municipality upon either public or private property. Without constituting any
limitation upon the provisions of this section, any of the following acts by any person shall be deemed included among those that constitute
trespasses in violation of the provisions hereof and appropriate action may be taken hereunder at any time, or from time to time, to prevent or
suppress any violation or violations of this section, the aforesaid enumerated acts so included, being as follows:
A. Any entry upon the premises or any part thereof, of another, including any public property in violation of a notice posted or exhibited at the
main entrance to such premises or at any point of approach or entry or in violation of any notice, warning or protest given orally or in writing,
by any owner or occupant thereof; or
B. An entry into or upon any vehicle or watercraft made without the consent of the person having the right to the possession or control thereof, or
a failure or refusal to leave any such vehicle or watercraft after being requested to leave by the person having such right; or
C. A failure or refusal to depart from the premises of another in case of being requested either orally or in writing, to leave by any owner or
occupant thereof; or
D. The pursuit of a course of conduct or action incidental to the making of an entry upon the land of another in violation of a notice posted or
exhibited at the main entrance to such premises or any point of approach or entry, or in violation of any notice, warning or protest given orally
or in writing by any owner or occupant thereof. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
Chapter 28
TRUANCY
15-28-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
LEGAL GUARDIAN: A person appointed guardian, or given custody, of a minor by a circuit court of the state, but does not include a person
appointed guardian or given custody of a minor under the juvenile court act of 1987, 705 Illinois Compiled Statutes 405/1 et seq.
MINOR: Any person over five (5) but who shall not have reached eighteen (18) years of age.
PARENT: The lawful father or mother of a minor child whether by birth or adoption.
UNEMANCIPATED MINOR: A minor still under the care and custody of his parents. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
15-28-2: ABSENCE:
It shall be unlawful for any minor enrolled in a public, private or parochial school within the corporate limits of the village to absent himself from
attendance at such school without prior written permission of his parent or legal guardian having been filed with the proper school authorities.
Emergencies or unforeseen absences due to illness or other causes beyond the control of the absentee minor shall not constitute truancy if
permission for such absence has, in substance, been obtained from the parent or legal guardian, and such permission is confirmed in writing and
filed with the proper school authorities within twenty four (24) hours after such absence. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
15-28-3: PRESENCE ON PUBLIC WAY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 386/387
It shall be unlawful for any juvenile, between the age of seven (7) and sixteen (16) years who is subject to compulsory school attendance
pursuant to the Illinois school code, whether attending a public, private or parochial school, who has been expelled or suspended from attending
such school, and who is not otherwise subject to the truancy laws established by the Illinois school code, to be upon any public road, street, alley,
park or other lands used for public purposes or in any public place of business or amusement within the village during the daytime hours when
such schools are in session. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
15-28-4: PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY:
It shall be unlawful for a parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor residing with said parent or legal guardian to knowingly allow or
knowingly permit said minor child to violate or attempt to violate any portion of this chapter. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
15-28-5: COMMUNITY SERVICE:
In addition to or in lieu of the penalties applicable to this chapter a period of community service not to exceed one hundred sixty (160) hours may
be imposed upon a minor who violates any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
Chapter 29
VANDALISM
15-29-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the terms specified have the following meanings ascribed to them:
ACTS OF VANDALISM: Include any of the following:
Recklessly or knowingly damaging or destroying any property of another person without his or her consent; or
Recklessly or knowingly by means of fire or explosive device, damaging, debasing or destroying any property of another person without his
or her consent; or
Recklessly or knowingly starting a fire on land of another person without his or her consent; or
Recklessly or knowingly depositing on the land or in the building of another person, without his consent, any stink bomb, any offensive
smelling compound or any other offensive or dangerous compound or item and thereby interfering with the use and occupancy by another,
of the land or building; or
Recklessly or knowingly and without authority entering into or obtaining control over any building, house trailer, motor vehicle, aircraft or
watercraft, or any part thereof, of another person without his or her consent.
LEGAL GUARDIAN: A person appointed guardian or given custody of a minor by a circuit court of the state, but does not include a person
appointed guardian or given custody of a minor under the juvenile court act.
MINOR: A person who is above the age of eleven (11) years, but not yet eighteen (18) years of age.
PERSON: Includes any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.
PROPERTY: Includes any real estate including improvements thereon, and tangible personalty.
RESTITUTION: Includes paying to a person who owns property damaged or destroyed by an act of vandalism in an amount equal to the
damages incurred as a result of the act of vandalism and shall also include undertaking at the direction of the police department juvenile officer
tasks designed to correct damage resulting from acts of vandalism or other work which will provide a benefit to the village and its citizens. (Ord.
09-48, 10-19-2009)
15-29-2: PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully, maliciously or negligently break, deface, injure or destroy any property within the village, whether
such property is owned by the state, county, village or any other governmental body or owned by any private person. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
15-29-3: PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY:
Upon the occurrences of the events described as follows, the parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor residing with such parent or
legal guardian shall be presumed, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, to have failed to exercise proper parental responsibility, and said
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=811 387/387
minor shall be deemed to have committed the acts described below with the knowledge and permission of the parent or guardian, in violation of
this chapter:
A. An unemancipated minor residing with said parent or legal guardian shall either be adjudicated to be in violation of any ordinance, law or
statute by exhibiting wilful and malicious acts causing injury to a person or property or shall have incurred nonjudicial sanctions from another
official agency resulting from an admission of guilt of violation of any ordinance, law or statute prohibiting wilful and malicious acts causing
injury to a person or property; and
B. If any time within one year following receipt of the notice set forth above, said minor is either adjudicated to be in violation of any ordinance,
law or statute as described in subsection A of this section, or shall have incurred nonjudicial sanctions from another official agency resulting
from an admission of guilt of violation of any ordinance, law or statute as described in subsection A of this section. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
Chapter 30
WEAPONS
15-30-1: DANGEROUS WEAPONS:
The sale and use of bows and arrows, BB guns, slingshots and other dangerous weapons is prohibited except as otherwise provided. (Ord. 09-
48, 10-19-2009)
15-30-2: CONCEALED WEAPONS:
It shall be unlawful to carry any concealed weapons in the village without first having a license to carry such concealed weapon duly issued under
the laws of the state of Illinois. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
15-30-3: DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS:
It shall be unlawful to discharge any firearms or air gun in the village; provided that this section shall not be construed to prohibit any officer of the
law to discharge a firearm in the performance of his duty, nor any citizen to discharge a firearm when lawfully defending his person or property.
(Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)
15-30-4: HUNTING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt or to engage in killing any animal other than as prescribed by law in the village. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-
2009)
Chapter 31
WHISTLES AND TRAINS
15-31-1: UNLAWFUL:
It shall be unlawful to blow or cause to be sounded any whistle or siren of any stationary engine or steam engine in the village except as a signal
for starting or stopping work, or in emergencies to avoid or prevent injury to persons or theft of property. (Ord. 09-48, 10-19-2009)