Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 1-101. [Ch. 1, Sec. 1] How code designated and cited.
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections
shall constitute and be designated "The Code of the City of Bloomington,
Illinois, 1960" and may be so cited. Such ordinances may also be cited as
the "Bloomington City Code, 1960."
§ 1-102. [Ch. 1, Sec. 2] Definitions and rules of construction.
A. In the interpretation and construction of this Code, the following
definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless they are
inconsistent with the manifest intent of Council or the context clearly
requires otherwise:
City. The words "City" or "the City" mean the City of Bloomington in
McLean County, State of Illinois, except as otherwise provided.
Council. The words "Council" or "the Council" mean the Council of the
City of Bloomington, Illinois.
County. The words "county" or "the county" mean McLean County in the
State of Illinois.
In the City. The words "in the City" or "within the City" mean and
include all territory over which the City now has or shall hereafter
acquire jurisdiction for the exercise of its police powers or other
regulatory powers.
Occupant or tenant. The words "occupant" or "tenant" applied to a
building or land mean any person who holds a written or oral lease of
or actually occupies the whole or part of such building or land, either
alone or with others.
Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or," if the
sense requires it.
Owner. The word "owner" applied to a building or land shall include any
part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint
tenant of the whole or a part of such building or land.
Person. The word "person" means any individual, partnership,
corporation, joint stock association or any City or state or any
subdivision thereof; and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee, or
personal representative thereof.
Personal property includes every species of property except real
property as defined in this section.
1:1
§ 1-103. [Ch. 1, Sec. 3] Captions of sections.
The captions of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are
intended as mere catch words to indicate the contents of the section and
shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of
the section, nor unless expressly so provided shall they be so deemed when
any such sections, including the captions, are amended or reenacted.
§ 1-104. [Ch. 1, Sec. 4] Provisions construed as continuations of
existing ordinances.
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are substantially the
same as those of the ordinances existing at the time of the adoption of
this Code shall be construed as a continuation thereof and not as new
enactments.
§ 1-105. [Ch. 1, Sec. 5] Severability of parts of Code.
Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, or word of this
Code be declared invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the
remaining words, phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of
this Code, since the same would have been enacted by Council without
Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next
before and next after, respectively.
Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal property.
Real property shall include lands, tenements, and hereditaments and
shall embrace all chattels real.
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" means that portion of a street between
the curblines, or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent
property lines intended for the use of pedestrians.
State. The word "state" or "the state" mean the State of Illinois.
Street. The word "street" means the entire width between property
lines of every way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof
is open to the use of the public, as a matter of right for purposes of
vehicular traffic.
Tense. Words in the present tense include the future.
B. Other definitions and rules of construction. In addition to the definitions
and rules of construction hereinabove set out, the provisions of Chapter
131, Section 1 et seq., Ill. Rev. Stat. 1959, so far as the same are
applicable and not inconsistent with the manifest intent of the City
Council, are hereby adopted for the construction of the various
provisions of the Code of 1960 and all general ordinances passed
hereafter.
§ 1-102 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 1-105
1:2
the incorporation in this Code of any such invalid or unconstitutional word,
phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section.
§ 1-106. [Ch. 1, Sec. 6] General penalty; continuing violations. [Ord.
No. 2009-51]
Whenever in this Code or in any future Ordinance of the City any act is
prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever
in such Code or such Ordinance the doing of any act is required or the
failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is
provided therefore, the violation of any such provision in this Code or any
such Ordinance shall be punished by a fine of not less than $50 nor more
than $500. Each day any violation of any provision of this Code or of any
such Ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 1-107. [Ch. 1, Sec. 7] Suits for violating Code and ordinances.
[Ord. No. 2004-108]
All actions brought to enforce any fine, imprisonment, penalty or forfeiture
under this Code or other Ordinances of the City shall be brought in the
corporate name of the City as plaintiff. No prosecution, recovery, conviction,
or acquittal for a violation of any provision of this Code or any other
Ordinance of the City shall constitute a defense to any prosecution of the
same party for any other violation of the same provision of the Code or
same Ordinance or any Code provision or Ordinance, although the different
causes of action existed at the same time, and if united, would not have
exceeded the jurisdiction of the court or magistrate.
§ 1-108. [Ch. 1, Sec. 8] Process in ordinance violation cases. [Ord.
No. 2004-108]
In all actions for the violation of any provision of this Code or other
Ordinance of the City, the first process shall be an Appearance Notice on
a bond form or Complaint, a Notice to Appear, a Summons or a Warrant.
If process is accomplished through the service of Summons by a special
process server, then the Corporation Counsel or any other attorney
representing the City in the matter for which Summons was served, may
request the court to tax a $16 service fee as a cost in the proceeding.
§ 1-109. [Ch. 1, Sec. 9] Citations charging violation of certain
ordinances and settlement by payment of minimum fines or
alternative disposition.
A. Any City employee or other person designated by the City Manager may
issue citations to persons who are believed to have violated the sections
of the Bloomington City Code hereinafter specified. The citations may
give the alleged violator the option to settle the case by paying the fine
set forth in Subsection F if payment is made within the time and in the
manner set forth in Subsection B of this section. [Ord. No. 2009-51]
§ 1-105 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-109
1:3
B. Payments in settlement of violations set forth in Subsection F shall be
made within 15 days after the date the citation was issued to the person
accused of such violation. Payment shall be made by cash, credit card or
check made payable to the City of Bloomington. Failure to make
payment within the said fifteen-day period will result in referral of the
citation to the Legal Department for further action. [Ord. No.
2009-51]
C. The original copy of any citation issued pursuant to this section shall be
delivered to the Finance Department. The Finance Department shall
hold citations for the fifteen-day period allowed for settlement by
payment of the fine and at the end of that period of time the citation
shall be delivered to the Legal Department for the filing of a complaint
for ordinance violation in the McLean County Circuit Court.
D. At the discretion of the corporation counsel or his or her designee,
citations may be settled by payment of the fine provided in Subsection F
or by alternative disposition as provided in Subsection G. The
corporation counsel or his or her designee may elect to reject the
settlement of any violation of the sections of the City Code specified in
Subsection F and proceed to filing a complaint for such violation in the
McLean County Circuit Court. [Ord. No. 2009-51]
E. The amount stated in Subsection F shall be the fine for settlement
pursuant to the provisions of this section notwithstanding that the fine
stated for such violation in another section of the code may be lower
than the fine stated in this section. [Ord. No. 2009-51]
F. The violations for which citations may be issued and the fines which
shall be paid to settle the case are as follows: [Ord. No. 2009-51]
G. Any citation for ordinance violation issued pursuant to this section may
be settled by alternative disposition. As defined in this section:
ALTERNATIVE DISPOSITION — Community service, counseling, and/or
education programs.
COMMUNITY SERVICE —
COUNSELING — Participation in a drug or alcohol counseling or
treatment program approved for participation in the City of
Any reasonable public service work, including, but not limited to,
the picking up of litter in public parks or along public highways or
the maintenance of public facilities:
(1)
The performance of hours of service with an agency, organization
or school approved for participation in the City of Bloomington
Alternative Disposition Program by the corporation counsel or his
or her designee.
(2)
Each eight hours of community service shall be the equivalent of
$100 in fines.
(3)
§ 1-109 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 1-109
1:4
§ 1-110. [Ch. 1, Sec. 9.1] Administrative adjudication.
Bloomington Alternative Disposition Program by the corporation
counsel or his or her designee.
EDUCATION PROGRAM — Any curriculum, course of study, or class
approved for participation in the City of Bloomington Alternative
Disposition Program by the corporation counsel or his or her designee.
Such programs may include, but are not limited to, job training,
literacy, smoking cessation, and general education degree
courses.[Ord. No. 2009-51]
H. When imposing a sentence following conviction for violation of any
ordinance contained in this Code, the Court may, upon recommendation
by the corporation counsel, impose a sentence of alternative disposition
as defined in Subsection G. Each eight hours of community service shall
be the equivalent of $100 in fines. Defendant shall pay all court costs.
[Ord. No. 2009-51]
A. Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning:
ALLEGED VIOLATOR — Person charged with violating any ordinance
or law in the City of Bloomington.
BUILDING CODE — Any City ordinance or law that establishes
construction, plumbing, heating, electrical, fire prevention, sanitation
or other health and safety standards that are applicable to structures in
the City.
CHRONIC PROPERTY — A property location that has had more than
one violation issued against the property location within 12 calendar
months of the initial violation occurrence.
CODE VIOLATION — Non-compliance with any building code or nonbuilding
code ordinance or law adopted by the City.
COURT COSTS — The costs associated with operating the City's
administrative court, including the payment of the hearing officer, City
attorneys, clerical staff and service fees.
HEARING OFFICER — Also known as an Administrative Law Judge,
is a licensed attorney in the State of Illinois who is appointed by the
City Manager and who meets the requirements of Subsection D of this
section whose duty it is to:
Preside at an administrative hearing called to determine whether
or not a Code violation exists;
(1)
Hear testimony and accept evidence from the inspector, the
building or property owner and all interested parties relevant to
the existence of a Code violation;
(2)
(3) Take judicial notice of all public records of McLean County, Illinois;
§ 1-109 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-110
1:5
INSPECTOR/PUBLIC OFFICIAL — A City employee whose duties may
include the inspection and examination of structures or property in the
City to determine if zoning or other Code violations exist.
NON-BUILDING CODE — Any City ordinance or law, except for a
building code ordinance or law, which prohibit certain actions or
behaviors that are contrary to the public's health, safety and welfare.
OFFICER — A full or part-time Bloomington Police Department Officer
or Security Officer.
Preserve and authenticate the record of the hearing and all exhibits
and evidence introduced at the hearing; and
(4)
Issue and sign a written finding, decision and order stating whether
a Code violation exists.
(5)
B. Code Hearing Division.
(1) There is hereby established a Code Hearing Division, the function
of which is to expedite the prosecution and correction of Code
violations in the manner set out in this section. The Administrative
Law Judge and such other agents or employees assigned to assist
the Administrative Law Judge by the City Manager shall constitute
the Code Hearing Division.
(2) The adoption of this section does not preclude the City from using
other lawful methods to enforce the provisions of this Code.
C. Powers of the Hearing Officer. The Administrative Law Judge shall have
the following powers:
(1) Preside at an administrative hearing called to determine whether
or not a Code violation exists;
(2) Hear testimony and accept evidence that is relevant to the
existence of a Code violation;
(3) Issue subpoenas directing witnesses to appear and give relevant
testimony at the hearing, upon the request of the parties or their
representatives;
(4) Preserve and authenticate the record of the hearing and all exhibits
and evidence introduced at the hearing;
(5) Issue a written determination based on the evidence presented at
the hearing, stating whether a Code violation exists. The
determination shall be in writing and shall include a written finding
of fact, decision and order including the fine, penalty, or action with
which the defendant must comply; and
(6) Impose court costs in the amount of $110 for each case that
appears in Administrative Court. When a violation is not abated
and/or behavioral fine is not paid in full prior to the first court
§ 1-110 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 1-110
1:6
appearance in Administrative Court, the minimum penalties shall
be imposed consistent with applicable Code provisions and upon
finding a party liable for the charged violation. In lieu of court
costs, the Administrative Law Judge may approve a plea agreement
in behavioral cases if offered by both the attorney representing the
City and the defendant. The maximum monetary fine under this
section shall not exceed $50,000. The fine shall be exclusive of
costs of enforcement or costs imposed to secure compliance with
the City's ordinances and shall not be applicable to cases to enforce
the collection of any tax imposed and collected by the municipality.
(7) Issue a determination of chronic property, status and order reinspection
dates at a minimum of three months, six months and 12
months.
D. Requirements of the Administrative Law Judge.
(1) Prior to conducting a hearing as provided under this section, the
Administrative Law Judge shall have successfully completed a
formal training program which includes the following:
(a) Instruction on the rule of procedure of the administrative
hearings which he or she will conduct;
(b) Orientation to each subject area of the Code violations that
they will adjudicate;
(c) Observation of administrative hearings;
(d) Participation in hypothetical cases, including ruling on
evidence and issuing final orders;
(2) The Administrative Law Judge must be an attorney licensed to
practice law in the State of Illinois for at least three years. The
Corporation Counsel and City Manager shall certify that all
requirements provided under this Subsection D have been met.
E. Code hearing procedure.
(1) When an inspector, public official, or officer finds a code violation,
he shall note the violation on a violation notice and report form,
indicating the name and address of the property owner of alleged
violator, the type and nature of the violation, the date and time the
violation was observed, the names of witnesses to the violation, and
the address of the property or location where the violation was
observed. A chronic property which has been to Administrative
Court once already within a rolling calendar year, shall be
immediately referred to Administrative Court on any and all future
violations. Individuals who have not been to Administrative Court
within a rolling calendar year on a property code violation will first
be sent a notice and abatement opportunity in accordance with the
procedures of the Community Development Department.
§ 1-110 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-110
1:7
(2) The violation report form shall be forwarded by the inspector or
officer to the Code Hearing Division where a docket number shall
be affixed to the form and a hearing date noted in the blank spaces
provided for that purpose on the form. For any Code violation, the
hearing date shall not be less than 14 days after a Code violation is
reported by the inspector or officer. Hearings shall be scheduled
with reasonable promptness, provided that an alleged violator shall
have at least 16 days after service of process to prepare for a
hearing. If service is provided by mail, the fifteen-day period shall
begin to run on the day that the notice is deposited in the mail.
(3) One copy of the violation report form shall be maintained in the
files of the Code Hearing Division and shall be part of the record of
hearing; one copy of the report form shall be returned to the
inspector or officer; and one copy of the report form shall be served
by personal service or first class mail on the alleged violator or the
owner of the property, in the case of a code violation, along with a
summons commanding the owner to appear at the hearing. For
Code violations, if the name of the owner of the property cannot be
ascertained or if service on the owner cannot be made by mail,
service may be made on the owner by posting or nailing a copy of
the violation report form on the front door of the property where
the violation was found, not less than 16 days before the hearing
date.
(4) Parties shall be served with process in a manner reasonably
calculated to give them actual notice, including, as appropriate,
personal service of process upon a party or its employees or agents;
service by mail at a party's address; or notice that is posted upon
the property where a Code violation is found when the party is the
owner or manager of the property.
(5) Parties shall be given notice of the hearing which includes the type
and nature of the Code violation to be adjudicated, the date and
location of the hearing, the legal authority and jurisdiction under
which the hearing is to be held, and the penalties for failure to
appear at the hearing.
(6) Parties shall be provided with an opportunity for a hearing during
which they may be represented by counsel, present witnesses, and
cross examine opposing witnesses. Parties may request the
Administrative Law Judge to issue subpoenas to direct the
attendance and testimony of relevant witnesses and the production
of relevant documents.
(7) If the Administrative Law Judge determines the property falls
within the chronic property definition, the property owner shall be
notified in Administrative Court that this property location is
considered a chronic property and the provisions of this subsection
shall apply. Chronic property shall not be offered dismissal of the
case upon payment of court costs and abatement. Rather, a code
§ 1-110 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 1-110
1:8
violation issued on a chronic property shall be placed on an
inspection schedule with minimum inspections being held at three
months from the first administrative court date, six-month
inspection from the first administrative court date and a 12 month
status check from the first administrative court date. If the
property has no further violations within that twelve-month time
frame, the Administrative Court case shall be dismissed upon
payment of court costs, any applicable re-inspection fees, and the
minimum fines. If violations are found within the twelve-month
period, the Administrative Law Judge shall order a fine of no-less
the minimum set forth in the applicable City Code provisions.
F. Subpoenas. At any time prior to the hearing date, the Administrative
Law Judge assigned to hear the case may, at the request of the
inspector, the officer, attorney for the City, or the alleged violator or his
attorney, issue subpoenas directing witnesses to appear and give
testimony at the hearing.
G. Default.
(1) If on the date set for hearing the alleged violator or his attorney
fails to appear, the Administrative Law Judge may find the alleged
violator in default and shall proceed with the hearing and accept
evidence relevant to the existence of a Code violation.
(2) No violation may be established except upon proof by a
preponderance of the evidence; provided, however, that a violation
notice or a copy thereof, issued and signed in accordance with
Subsection E shall be prima facie evidence of the correctness of the
facts specified therein.
H. Representation at Code hearings and continuances.
(1) The case for the City may be presented by an attorney designated
by the City Manager. However, in no event shall the case for the
City be presented by an employee of the Code Hearing Division.
The case for a dwelling owner involving a Code violation may be
presented by the owner, his attorney, or any other agent or
representative as allowed by law. The case for an alleged violator
involving a Code violation may be presented by the alleged violator
or his attorney.
(2) For Code violations, continuances shall only be authorized by the
Administrative Law Judge and/or by agreement with City Legal.
Lack of preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance in
proceedings under this section except in cases where good cause is
shown at the hearing.
I. Evidence at hearing.
(1) At the hearing, an Administrative Law Judge shall preside and shall
hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the existence
§ 1-110 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-110
1:9
or nonexistence of a Code violation. The strict rules of evidence
applicable to judicial proceedings shall not apply to hearings
authorized by this section. Evidence, including hearsay, may be
admitted only if it is of a type commonly relied upon by reasonably
prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs.
(2) All testimony shall be given under oath or affirmation.
J. Retaliatory action against occupants prohibited. No action for eviction,
abatement of a nuisance, forcible entry and detainer or other similar
proceedings shall be threatened or instituted against an occupant of a
dwelling solely because such occupant agrees to testify or testifies at a
Code violation hearing.
K. Defenses to Code violations. It shall be a defense to a Code violation
charged under the Bloomington City Code if the owner, his attorney, or
any other agent or representative proves to the Hearing Officer's
satisfaction that:
(1) The Code violation alleged in the notice did not in fact exist at the
time of the alleged violation; or
(2) For violations of a building code or property code, the Code
violation has been removed or remedied by the alleged violator at
the time of the hearing, but only if the alleged violator has not had a
Code violation within the previous 24 months. The violator shall be
required to provide proof of compliance.
L. Findings, decision, order of the Hearing Officer, hearing costs.
(1) At the conclusion of the hearing, the Administrative Law Judge
shall make a determination, on the basis of the evidence presented
at the hearing, whether or not a Code violation exists. The
determination shall be in writing and shall be designated as the
findings, decision and order. The findings, decision and order shall
include the Hearing Officer's findings of fact, a decision whether or
not a Code violation exists based upon the findings of fact, and an
order, ordering the owner to correct the violation or dismissing the
case in the event a violation is not proved. If a Code violation is
proved, the order may also impose the sanctions that are provided
in the Code for the violation proved. A copy of the findings, decision
and order shall be served on the owner within five days after they
are issued. Service shall be in the same manner as the report form
and summons are served pursuant to Subsection E of this section.
Payment of fines shall be made as directed by the City Manager and
the disposition of fine money may be determined, from time to time,
by separate ordinance or resolution of the City Council.
(2) In the event that the order provided for the correction of the
violation, the Administrative Law Judge shall establish a hearing
date which would be after the date established for the correction of
the violation in order to determine compliance with the order. At
§ 1-110 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 1-110
1:10
such time, the Administrative Law Judge shall hear testimony and
accept any evidence relevant to the abatement of the violation in
accordance with the order.
(3) Unless a finding of not liable is made by the Administrative Law
Judge, the Administrative Law Judge shall order payment of court
costs in the amount of $110. The costs shall become an amount due
and owing to the City and shall be part of the order issued against
the violator.
M. Administrative review law to apply. Any final decision by an
Administrative Law Judge that a Code violation does or does not exist
shall constitute a final determination for purposes of judicial review and
shall be subject to review under the Illinois Administrative Review Law.
Any person filing for judicial review under the Administrative Review
Law shall be subject to the assessment of costs for the preparation and
certification of the record of proceedings before the Hearing Officer.
Any failure to pay such fee shall subject the party seeking review to the
provisions of 735 ILCS 5/3-109, including dismissal of the complaint on
a motion by the City.
N. Enforcement of judgment.
(1) Any fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, or part of any fine, other
sanction, or costs imposed, remaining unpaid after the exhaustion
of or the failure to exhaust judicial review procedures under the
Illinois Administrative Review Law are a debt due and owing the
municipality and may be collected in accordance with applicable
law.
(2) After expiration of the period in which judicial review under the
Illinois Administrative Review Law may be sought for a final
determination of a Code violation, unless stayed by a court of
competent jurisdiction, the findings, decision and order of the
Administrative Law Judge may be enforced in the same manner as a
judgment entered by a court of competent jurisdiction.
(3) In any case in which a defendant has failed to comply with a
judgment ordering a defendant to correct a Code violation or
imposing any fine or other sanction as a result of a Code violation,
any expenses incurred by a municipality to enforce the judgment,
including, but not limited to, attorney's fees, court costs, and costs
related to property demolition or foreclosure, after they are fixed
by a court of competent jurisdiction or a Hearing Officer, shall be a
debt due and owing the municipality and may be collected in
accordance with applicable law. Prior to any expenses being fixed
by an Administrative Law Judge pursuant to this Subsection N(3),
the City shall provide notice to the defendant that states that the
defendant shall appear at a hearing before the Administrative Law
Judge to determine whether the defendant has failed to comply
with the judgment. The notice shall set the date for such a hearing,
§ 1-110 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-110
1:11
§ 1-111. [Ch. 1, Sec. 10] Two copies of Code to be kept up to date by
City Clerk. [Ord. No. 2004-108]
The City Clerk shall keep two copies of this Code current. These copies shall
be printed, pasted, or otherwise mounted on paper sufficiently thick and
tough to withstand heavy usage, and shall be preserved by the City Clerk
in a book or binder in loose-leaf form, or in such other form as the City
Clerk may consider most expedient, so that all amendments thereto and all
general Ordinances hereafter passed may be inserted in their appropriate
places in such volumes, and all sections of this Code or Ordinances repealed
from time to time may be extracted therefrom for the purpose of
maintaining such two copies in such condition that they will show all
general Ordinances passed up to date at any time in such manner that ready
reference may be had thereto.
which shall not be less than seven days from the date that notice is
served. If notice is served by mail, the seven-day period shall begin
to run on the date that the notice was deposited in the mail.
(4) Upon being recorded in the manner required by Article XII of the
Code of Civil Procedure1 or by the Uniform Commercial Code,2 a
lien shall be imposed on the real estate or personal estate, or both,
of the defendant in the amount of any debt due and owing the City
under this section. The lien may be enforced in the same manner as
a judgment lien pursuant to a judgment of a court of competent
jurisdiction.
(5) An Administrative Law Judge may set aside any judgment entered
by default and set a new hearing date, upon a petition filed within
21 days after the issuance of the order of default, if the
Administrative Law Judge determines that the petitioner's failure
to appear at the hearing was for good cause or at any time if the
petitioner establishes that the City did not provide proper service
of process. If any judgment is set aside pursuant to this Subsection
N(5), the Administrative Law Judge shall have authority to enter an
order extinguishing any lien which has been recorded for any debt
due and owing the City as a result of the vacated default judgment.
O. Findings and sanctions to run with property on Code violations. The
order to correct a Code violation and the sanctions imposed by the City
as the result of a fine of a Code violation under this section shall attach
to the property as well as to the owner of the property, so that a finding
of a Code violation against one owner cannot be avoided by conveying
or transferring the property to another owner. Any subsequent
transferee or owner of property takes subject to the findings, decision
and order of a Hearing Officer under this section. [Ord. No. 2018-81]
1. Editor's Note: See 735 ILCS 5/12-101 et seq.
2. Editor's Note: See 810 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.
§ 1-110 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 1-112
1:12
§ 1-112. [Ch. 1, Sec. 11] Filing of proposed ordinances prior to
introduction to Council. [Ord. No. 2004-108]
Ten copies of all ordinances of a general and permanent nature shall be
submitted to the City Clerk prior to the introduction of such Ordinances to
the City Council. One copy of such Ordinance shall be delivered to the Legal
Department of the City by the City Clerk, one to the City Manager and one
each to the members of the Council.
§ 1-113. [Ch. 1, Sec. 12] Enacting style of ordinances. [Ord. No.
2004-108]
The enacting style of all Ordinances shall be: "Be it ordained by the City
Council of the City of Bloomington."
§ 1-114. [Ch. 1, Sec. 13] Ordinances to be signed. [Ord. No.
2004-108]
All Ordinances passed by the City Council must be signed by the Mayor or
by two members of the Council.
§ 1-115. [Ch. 1, Sec. 14] Record and memorandum of ordinances -
required.
§ 1-116. [Ch. 1, Sec. 15] Proof of ordinances.
§ 1-117. [Ch. 1, Sec. 16] Publication of ordinances; effective dates.
A. The City Clerk shall record, in a book used exclusively for that purpose,
all ordinances passed by the City Council. Immediately following each
ordinance, the City Clerk shall make a memorandum of the date of the
passage and publication, where required, of the ordinance.
B. This record and memorandum, or a certified copy thereof, shall be
prima facie evidence of the contents, passage, and of the publication or
posting of ordinances. [Ord. No. 2004-108]
A. The contents of all City ordinances, the date of passage, and the date of
publication or posting, where required may be proved by the certificate
of the City Clerk, under the seal of the City.
B. Whenever City ordinances are printed in book or pamphlet form, and
purport to be published by authority of the City Council, such book or
pamphlet shall be prima facie evidence of the contents, passage, and
legal publication of such ordinances, as of the dates mentioned in such
book or pamphlet, in all courts and administrative tribunals. [Ord. No.
2004-108]
A. All ordinances of the City imposing any fine, penalty, imprisonment or
forfeiture, or making any appropriation shall: (1) be printed in book or
pamphlet form, published by authority of the City Council; or (2) be
published at least once, within 10 days after passage, in one or more
§ 1-112 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-117
1:13
§ 1-118. [Ch. 1, Sec. 17] Custody and distribution of copies of Code.
[Ord. No. 2004-108]
All the printed books containing the revised ordinances shall be in the
custody and keeping of the City Clerk. He shall deliver one copy thereof to
each officer of the City, and to such other persons as the City Manager may
direct. The City Manager shall have authority to extend to, or reciprocate
courtesies of other cities, by presenting to them a copy of the revised
ordinances bound at the expense of the City in such a manner as to him may
seem advisable.
§ 1-119. [Ch. 1, Sec. 18] Price and cost of ordinances printed in
book, etc., form. [Ord. No. 2004-108]
Printed copies containing this Code and any ordinance imposing any fine,
penalty, imprisonment, or forfeiture, or making any appropriation which
may be printed in book or pamphlet form, published by authority of the City
Council, shall so long as such books or pamphlets are in supply be available
for distribution to the public. The City Manager may impose a reasonable
price commensurate with the cost of the printing thereof for the distribution
of such book or pamphlet to the public.
§ 1-120. [Ch. 1, Sec. 19] Effect of repeal of repealing ordinance.
[Ord. No. 2004-108]
When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision
shall be itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive such
former ordinance, clause, or provision unless it shall be therein so expressly
provided.
§ 1-121. [Ch. 1, Sec. 20] Corporate seal. [Ord. No. 2004-108]
A seal or disc in a circular form with the words "City of Bloomington,
Illinois" on the outer circle, and in the interior and center of said circle
the word "seal" shall be the seal of the City of Bloomington, to be used
in all cases that have been or shall hereafter be provided by the laws of
the United States, the laws of the several respective states of the United
States, and the ordinances of the said City of Bloomington, and in all cases
in which by laws and customs of corporations it is necessary to use a seal
by a corporation.
newspapers published in the City. No such ordinance shall take effect
until 10 days after it is so published.
B. All other ordinances, resolutions and motions shall take effect upon
their passage unless they otherwise provide. [Ord. No. 2004-108]
§ 1-117 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 1-122
1:14
§ 1-122. [Ch. 1, Sec. 21] Same - custodian; official use. [Ord. No.
2004-108]
The City Clerk shall be the custodian of the corporate seal. He shall affix
the impression of the corporate seal to all commissions or other official
documents required to be issued by him and attest or countersign the same.
He shall affix the seal to all official acts of the Mayor which require it and,
if necessary, attest the same. He shall also certify, under the corporate seal,
copies of any records, ordinances, documents, or papers in his office when
required by any City officer or other person. In no case shall the impression
of the corporate seal be binding upon the City, unless it be authorized by
the laws or ordinances of the City and is attested by the official signature of
the City Clerk.
§ 1-123. [Ch. 1, Sec. 22] Official time. [Ord. No. 2004-108]
Official time shall be that designated by the law of the State of Illinois.
§ 1-124. [Ch. 1, Sec. 23] Grade - datum for City levels. [Ord. No.
2004-108]
Base for City Levels. The permanent grades of streets and alleys in the City
hereinafter fixed, are referred to a plane as base or datum for all City levels;
said plane referred to is 120.58 feet below the center of an aluminum plate
placed near the southeast corner of the McLean County Court House by the
United States Geological Survey.
§ 1-125. [Ch. 1, Sec. 30] Schedule of fees.
A. The City's Schedule of Fees for the various licenses, permits, services
and other fees required under this Code or as otherwise established by
law be on file with the City Clerk and shall be available for public
inspection or copying and be made available on the City's website.
B. Except for the fees identified in Subsection C, beginning in 2021, there
shall be a biennial review of the Schedule of Fees as set forth herein. As
part of each review, the director of each City Department may requires
up to a 5% increase in the fees and charges within their department,
except where a fee is set by law. Requests must be submitted to the City
Clerk be each director by December 31 of the year proceeding the
proposed biennial modification. The newly revised Schedule of Fees
shall thereafter be presented to the City Council and said revised fees
shall go into effect May 1 of the year unless the City Council votes to
revert to the previously approved fee or charge. The first biennial
increase shall be May 1, 2021.
C. The following fees shall not be subject to biannual review, and instead
shall be adjusted on January 1 of every year by multiplying the then
current fee by 1.03 and the product shall be the new fee for such
services:
§ 1-122 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-125
1:15
Schedule of Fees
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION
(1) Fees to be paid as part of an annexation, either per lot for
residential or per square foot for commercial; and
(2) Emergency medical services as identified in § 17-401C.
D. In addition to the biennial review, the City Council may otherwise
amend the Schedule of Fees by approval of an ordinance from time-totime
as it deems appropriate.
E. All references to "Schedule of Fees" made throughout this Code shall be
to the Schedule of Fees adopted by the City Council and on file with the
City Clerk, as may be amended from time-to-time.
F. When there is any conflict between a fee set forth in this Code and the
Schedule of Fees, the fee set forth in the Schedule of Fees shall control
and govern. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
§ 1-125 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 1-125
1:16
ARTICLE I
Officers and Employees Generally
§ 2-101. [Ch. 2, Sec. 1] Oath of officers.
Before assuming the duties of their respective offices or employment all City
officers and heads of the principal subordinate departments shall take and
subscribe the oath or affirmation prescribed by law. This oath or affirmation
when subscribed shall be filed with the City Clerk.
§ 2-102. [Ch. 2, Sec. 2] Bonds of officers and employees.
§ 2-103. [Ch. 2, Sec. 3] Same - payment of premiums.
The cost of obtaining bonds of officers or employees payable to the City
shall be paid by the City.
§ 2-104. [Ch. 2, Sec. 4] Same - blanket bond.
The Director of Finance is authorized and directed to obtain a public
employee's faithful performance blanket position bond indemnifying the
City against any loss caused to the City through the failure of any officer
or employee to faithfully perform his duties; provided, however, that this
section shall not apply to the City Clerk, Director of Finance, City Treasurer,
Police Magistrate, or City Manager.
§ 2-105. [Ch. 2, Sec. 5] Same - continuing liability.
All bonds of officers and employees shall be continuing in effect so long as
the officers and employees named therein shall continue in office and until
payment is made by such officers and employees of all moneys received
by them; provided that liability under any such bond may be terminated
in respect to any official act which shall be taken, or occur after 10 days'
written notice to the assured of the termination or cancellation of any bond
by any surety during the continuance in office or employment of any officer
or employee, such officer or employee shall execute a new bond in the same
A. City officers (except the Mayor and Council members) and municipal
employees, charged with the custody of money or property shall before
entering upon the duties of their respective offices or employment,
execute bonds with good and sufficient sureties to be approved by the
City Council, payable to the City, in such penal sums as may be directed
by resolution or ordinance of the City Council, conditioned for the
faithful performance of the duties of the office or employment, and the
payment of all money received by such officer or employee, according
to law and of the ordinances of the City. [Ord. No. 2019-34]
B. The bond required of the respective officers and employees of this City,
except the City Clerk, shall be filed with and recorded and preserved by
the City Clerk. The bond of the City Clerk shall be filed with, recorded,
and preserved by the City Treasurer.
§ 2-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-105
1:17
manner, of the same character, and with the same conditions and penalties
as are required by this article.
§ 2-106. [Ch. 2, Sec. 6] Duties generally.
Each officer shall perform all duties required of his office by State law and
ordinances of the City.
§ 2-107. [Ch. 2, Sec. 7] Duty to deliver property to successor.
Every person retiring from office after having been an officer of the City
shall, within five days after notification and request, deliver to his successor
in office all property, bond and effects of every description in his possession
belonging to the City or appertaining to his office, under a penalty of not
less than $50 or more than $200 for each offense.
§ 2-108. [Ch. 2, Sec. 8] Officers not to be interested in contract.
No municipal officer shall be interested, directly or indirectly, in any
contract, work or business of the municipality, or in the sale of any article
whenever the expense, price or consideration of the contract, work or
business, or sale is paid either from the treasury or by any assessment
levied by any statute or ordinance. No municipal office shall be interested,
directly or indirectly, in the purchase of any property which belongs to the
municipality, or is sold for taxes or assessments, or is sold by virtue of legal
process in the suit of the municipality.
§ 2-109. [Ch. 2, Sec. 8A] Prohibition on the solicitation and
acceptance of gifts.
A. Adoption of State Gift Ban Act. The State Gift Ban Act (5 ILCS 425/1 et
seq.) is adopted as required by Section 83 of said Act. The solicitation or
the acceptance of gifts prohibited to be solicited or accepted under the
State Gift Ban Act is prohibited by any elected or appointed official or
any employee of the City. [Ord. No. 1999-82]
B. Ethics officer. To the extent authorized by law and to the extent
required by Section 35 of the State Gift Ban Act, the City Manager, or
such person as the City Manager may designate in a writing kept on file
in the office of the City Clerk, is appointed to serve as the "ethics
officer" of the City. The duties of the ethics officer shall be as provided
in Section 35 of the Act. [Ord. No. 1999-82]
C. State legislative ethics commission; complaints. All complaints for
violations of the State Gift Ban Act and this Ordinance shall be filed
with the State legislative ethics commission created by Section 45(a)(6)
of the Act. [Ord. No. 1999-82]
D. Future amendments to State Gift Ban Act. Any amendment to the State
Gift Ban Act that becomes effective after the passage of this Ordinance
shall be incorporated into this Ordinance by reference and shall be
§ 2-105 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 2-109
1:18
§ 2-110. [Ch. 2, Sec. 8B] State Officials and Employees Ethics Act.
applicable to the solicitation and acceptance of gifts. However, any
amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by
municipalities shall not be incorporated into this Ordinance by
reference without formal action by the corporate authorities of the City.
[Ord. No. 1999-82]
E. If the Illinois Supreme Court declares the State Gift Ban Act
unconstitutional in its entirety, then this Ordinance shall be repealed as
of the date that the Supreme Court's decision becomes final and not
subject to any further appeals or rehearings. The Ordinance shall be
deemed repealed without further action by the corporate authorities of
the City if the Act is found unconstitutional by the Illinois Supreme
Court. If the Illinois Supreme Court declares part of the State Gift Ban
Act unconstitutional but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder
of the Act or does not address the remainder of the Act, then the
remainder of the Act as adopted by this Ordinance shall remain in full
force and effect; however, that part of the Ordinance relating to the part
of the Act found unconstitutional shall be deemed repealed without
further action by corporate authorities of the City. [Ord. No. 1999-82]
A. The regulations of Sections 5-15 (5 ILCS 430/5-15) and Article 10 (5
ILCS 430/10-10 through 10-40) of the State Officials and Employees
Ethics Act, 5 ILCS 430/1-1 et seq., (hereinafter referred to as the "Act"
in this section) are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to
the officers and employees of the City to the extent required by 5 ILCS
430/70-5.
B. The solicitation or acceptance of gifts prohibited to be solicited or
accepted under the Act, by any officer or any employee of the City, is
hereby prohibited.
C. The offering or making of gifts prohibited to be offered or made to an
officer or employee of the City under the Act, is hereby prohibited.
D. The participation in political activities prohibited under the Act, by any
officer or employee of the City, is hereby prohibited.
E. For purposes of this section, the terms "officer" and "employee" shall be
defined as set forth in 5 ILCS 430/70-5(c).
F. The penalties for violations of this section shall be the same as those
penalties set forth in 5 ILCS 430/50-5 for similar violations of the Act.
G. This section does not repeal or otherwise amend or modify any existing
ordinances or policies which regulate the conduct of City officers and
employees. To the extent that any such existing ordinances or policies
are less restrictive than this section, however, the provisions of this
section shall prevail in accordance with the provisions of 5 ILCS 430/
70-5(a).
§ 2-109 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-110
1:19
§ 2-111. [Ch. 2, Sec. 9] Fees for certain services. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
Any City officer, upon whom the duty devolves, is hereby authorized to
demand and receive as fees those set forth in the Schedule of Fees.
§ 2-112. [Ch. 2, Sec. 10] Violation of Code.
Any officer violating any provision of this Code shall be deemed guilty of
misconduct in office and liable to removal therefor.
§ 2-113. [Ch. 2, Sec. 11] Compensation.
H. Any amendment to the Act that becomes effective after the effective
date of this section shall be incorporated into this section by reference
and shall be applicable to the solicitation, acceptance, offering and
making of gifts and to prohibited political activities. However, any
amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by
municipalities shall not be incorporated into this section by reference
without formal action by the corporate authorities of the City.
I. If the Illinois Supreme Court declares the Act unconstitutional in its
entirety, then this section shall be repealed as of the date that the
Illinois Supreme Court's decision becomes final and not subject to any
further appeals or rehearings. This section shall be deemed repealed
without further action by the Corporate Authorities of the City if the Act
is found unconstitutional by the Illinois Supreme Court.
J. If the Illinois Supreme Court declares part of the Act unconstitutional
but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the Act, or does
not address the remainder of the Act, then the remainder of the Act as
adopted by this section shall remain in full force and effect; however,
that part of this section relating to the part of the Act found
unconstitutional shall be deemed repealed without further action by the
Corporate Authorities of the City." [Ord. No. 2004-38]
A. The salary for the Mayor shall be $12,000, per annum, paid in bi-weekly
installments. The salary for each Council member shall be $4,800, per
annum, paid in bi-weekly installments. Expenses incurred by elected
officials while performing official duties shall be reimbursed or paid in
accordance with the law and policies established by the City. The City
Council shall further determine, by ordinance, the future salary or
compensation of the City Manager. [Ord. No. 2019-34]
B. Collective bargaining agreements with City employees represented by
an exclusive representative pursuant to Section 6(c) of the Illinois
Public Labor Relations Act shall be ratified by the City Council by
means of a motion, a resolution, or an ordinance. [Ord. No. 1993-97]
C. The City Manager shall periodically determine the future salary or
compensation of all officers and employees of the City not covered by
Subsection A or B In determining such future salaries and
§ 2-110 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 2-113
1:20
§ 2-114. [Ch. 2, Sec. 12] Tenure of office - not to affect.
This chapter shall not be construed as affecting the tenure of office of any
official or employee who holds his position subject to the Fire and Police
Commissioners Act, excepting insofar as this Ordinance provides for the
abolition of certain specific positions.
compensation, the City Manager shall not exceed the amounts
designated for salaries and compensation set forth in the annual budget
ordinance; however, the City Manager has the discretion to spend less
than the full amount designated for salaries and compensation set forth
in the annual budget ordinance. Full-time employees who receive a
salary increase are authorized to agree to a reduction of the salaries
provided for in order to participate either in a deferred compensations
program or a reimbursement program under the City of Bloomington's
Flex Cash Plan. [Ord. No. 1993-97]
§ 2-113 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-114
1:21

ARTICLE II
City Council
§ 2-201. [Ch. 2, Sec. 13] How composed.
A. Membership. Effective May 1, 2007, the City Council shall be composed
of a Mayor elected at large and nine Aldermen (also sometimes referred
to within the City Code and City as Council member(s), alderperson,
Alderman, alderwomen and/or alderwoman). For the terms of office
commencing on and after May 1, 2015, one Council member shall be
elected for a four-year term from each of wards 2, 4, 6 and 8 as
described in Subsection B of this section; the Council member must live
in the ward from which he or she is elected. For the terms of office
commencing on and after May 1, 2013, one Council member shall be
elected for a four-year term from each of wards 1, 3, 5, 7 and 9 as
described in Subsection B of this section; the Council member must live
in the ward from which he or she is elected. The Mayor shall be elected
for a four-year term of office commencing on or after May 1, 2013.
[Ord. No. 2019-34]
B. Ward boundaries. The nine wards of the City shall consist of the
following territory:
(1) Ward 1: The territory included in Precincts. 18, 19, 20, 21 and 23 as
determined by Bloomington Board of Election Commissioners as of
the effective date of this Ordinance.
(2) Ward 2: The territory included in Precincts 2, 13, 35, 45, 47 and 52
as determined by Bloomington Board of Election Commissioners as
of the effective date of this Ordinance.
(3) Ward 3: The territory included in Precincts 10, 25, 34, 42, 50 and
51 as determined by Bloomington Board of Election Commissioners
as of the effective date of this Ordinance.
(4) Ward 4: The territory included in Precincts 1, 9, 22, 24, 27 and 28
as determined by Bloomington Board of Election Commissioners as
of the effective date of this Ordinance.
(5) Ward 5: The territory included in Precincts 15, 16, 29, 30, 31 and
39 as determined by Bloomington Board of Election Commissioners
as of the effective date of this Ordinance.
(6) Ward 6: The territory included in Precincts 6, 12, 17, 26 and 46 as
determined by Bloomington Board of Election Commissioners as of
the effective date of this Ordinance.
(7) Ward 7: The territory included in Precincts 4, 5, 7 and 41 as
determined by Bloomington Board of Election Commissioners as of
the effective date of this Ordinance.
§ 2-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-201
1:23
(8) Ward 8: The territory included in Precincts 8, 11, 32, 33, 40, 44 and
48 as determined by Bloomington Board of Election Commissioners
as of the effective date of this Ordinance.
(9) Ward 9: The territory included in Precincts 3, 14, 36, 37, 38, 43 and
49 as determined by the Bloomington Board of Election
Commissioners as of the effective date of this ordinance. [Ord. No.
2011-54]
C. Newly annexed properties. All property annexed to the City of
Bloomington and, therefore, not included in descriptions of perimeter
established by the Board of Election Commissioners, shall without
further action of the City Council become a part of the ward to which it
is contiguous, unless it is contiguous to more than one ward, in which
case, the Ordinance annexing such property to the City of Bloomington
shall specify the ward or wards to which said property shall be added.
[Ord. No. 1991-89]
D. Inauguration date. All members of the City Council elected at a
consolidated municipal election, upon qualifying, shall take office on
the May I following their election. [Ord. No. 1981-29]
E. Candidates for elected offices of the City of Bloomington (Mayor and
Council member) may not run or hold themselves out to be candidates
of or nominated or endorsed by political parties. Ballots including
primary ballots, for Bloomington municipal elections shall be in the
form provided by the Election Code of the State of Illinois (111. Rev.
Stat. ch. 463) as heretofore and hereafter amended, except as herein
otherwise provided, but such ballots shall designate no party, platform,
political principle, appellation, or mark whatever. Nor shall any circle
be printed at the head of the ballots. (Ordinance No. 1981-90 - approved
by referendum on November 22, 1982) [Ord. No. 2019-34]
F. No primary election will be held with respect to any elective office of
the City of Bloomington (Mayor or Council members) for which the
names of not more than two persons are entitled to be printed on the
primary ballot as a candidate for the nomination for such office, and
such persons having filed the statement of candidacy and petition
required by the Election Code of the State of Illinois (111. Rev. Stat. ch.
464) as heretofore or hereafter amended shall be the candidates for
office at the general municipal election. (Ordinance No. 1981-90 -
approved by referendum on November 22, 1982) [Ord. No. 2019-34]
G. Each Council member shall designate to the City Clerk whether they
would like the title of alderperson, Alderman or alderwomen designated
on City nameplates, business cards and documents. In addition, the
Mayor and each Council member may designate any pronouns they
3. Editor's Note: See 10 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.
4. Editor's Note: See 10 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.
§ 2-201 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 2-201
1:24
§ 2-202. [Ch. 2, Sec. 14] Powers of Council.
§ 2-203. [Ch. 2, Sec. 15] Meetings - regular and adjourned.
§ 2-204. [Ch. 2, Sec. 16] Special meetings - reconsideration of vote.
would like to associate with their name on said nameplates, business
cards and documents. [Ord. No. 2019-34]
A. The powers of the City Council shall be purely legislative, except as may
be otherwise provided by statute.
B. The Council shall approve for payment all expenses and liabilities of the
City of Bloomington.
A. Beginning September 2018, regular meetings of the City Council of the
City of Bloomington shall be held on the second and fourth Monday of
each month at the hour of 6:00 p.m. in the Council Chambers of the City
Hall in the City of Bloomington, Illinois, or at such other place in said
City as the Council shall designate; provided, however, that should any
such regular meeting fall upon any holiday recognized by and under the
laws of the United States or the State of Illinois, then said regular
meeting so falling on said holiday shall be held on the day following
such regular meeting date at the same hour and at the place aforesaid.
[Ord. No. 2018-70]
B. An adjourned meeting may be held for the purpose of completing the
unfinished business of a regular meeting at such time as may be
determined by the Council. [Ord. No. 2011-63]
C. On the third Monday of each month at 6:00 p.m., the City Council shall
meet as a Committee of the Whole. The agenda for such meeting shall
be prepared by the City Manager in consultation with the Mayor. A
portion of the meeting shall be dedicated to previewing upcoming nonroutine
agenda items, including a standing item for the consideration of
Agenda Initiatives as set forth in § 2-210A(2). A time for public
comment shall be conducted the manner set forth in § 2-501 of this
chapter. No final action, beyond action on setting future agenda items
and/or Agenda Initiatives, may be taken at a meeting of a Committee of
the Whole unless it has been called as a Special Meeting as required by
§ 2-204 of this chapter. To the extent appropriate, the Rules set forth in
§ 2-208 of this chapter shall govern the proceedings of meetings of a
Committee of the Whole. For purposes of this section, a nonroutine
agenda item shall include: (1) the expenditure of money over $250,000;
(2) development agreements; (3) amending the City Code; and/or (4)
the implementation or modification of policies. The failure to preview a
non-routine agenda item at a Committee of the Whole shall not prohibit
its consideration and/or action at a future meeting. [Ord. No.
2018-70]
§ 2-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-204
1:25
§ 2-205. [Ch. 2, Sec. 16.1] Executive session.
§ 2-206. [Ch. 2, Sec. 16.2] Work session. [Ord. No. 2015-46]
The City Council may meet in a work session meeting prior to the
commencement of a regular or special meeting. The work session shall
be devoted exclusively to the subjects for which the preliminary receipt
and discussion of information is deemed appropriate as identified on the
work session agenda. Work sessions are primarily designed for informal
presentation and discussion among Council members and City staff.
Although questions may be asked and answered at the direction of the
Chairperson, there will normally be no public input at work sessions beyond
any public comment period as required by § 2-501, nor will the Council
take any final action by vote at a work session. However, nothing herein
shall prevent a polling of the Council or the taking of any informal vote on
A. Special meetings of the Council may be called by the Mayor, the Mayor
pro tem in the absence of the Mayor, three members of the Council in
the absence of the Mayor and the Mayor pro tem, or by any five
members of the Council. The call for any such special meeting shall be
in writing, signed by the Mayor, the Mayor pro tem or the required
number of the members of the Council, and shall state the object and
purpose of such meeting and the time for holding the same. It shall be
filed with the City Clerk at least 48 hours before the time set therein for
said meeting.
B. Any special meeting attended by all of the members of the Council shall
be a regular meeting for the transaction of any business that may come
before such meeting.
C. No vote of the Council shall be reconsidered or rescinded at a special
meeting unless at such special meeting there be present as large a
number of Council members as were present when such vote was taken.
[Ord. No. 2019-34]
A. Executive sessions are meetings that are closed to the public, that are
part of a regular or special meeting, which allow the City Council to
discuss certain matters of a sensitive nature which affect the City of
Bloomington. Areas which may be discussed in executive session are
specified in Section 2 of the Illinois Open Meetings Act (5 ILCS 120/2).
Examples include, but are not limited to, collective bargaining matters,
land acquisition, pending litigation, and appointment, employment or
dismissal of an employee.
B. When a motion is made to recess to an executive session and approved
by a majority vote of the quorum present, only that specific topic can be
discussed and no final action may be taken on it during the closed
executive session in accordance with the Open Meetings Act. Once the
purpose of the closed executive session has concluded, the City Council
may move to adjourn the executive session and reconvene the regular
or special meeting. [Ord. No. 2012-7]
§ 2-204 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 2-206
1:26
any matter under discussion. Work sessions shall be open to the public and
notice procedures for regular and special meetings shall be followed.
§ 2-207. [Ch. 2, Sec. 17] Regular meetings; seating; order of
business.
A. All regular meetings of the Council shall convene promptly at the hour
set by § 2-203 of this chapter. On the day of each regular meeting, the
Mayor, the members of the Council, the City Manager, the Corporation
Counsel, and the City Clerk shall take their regular stations in the
Council Chambers, and the business of the Council shall be taken up for
consideration in the following order:
(1) Call to order. Whenever possible, the City Clerk or the Chairperson
shall announce the call to order both five and two minutes in
advance to assure that all attendees are seated and ready to
conduct the meeting. [Ord. No. 2012-7]
(2) Pledge of allegiance.
(3) Silent prayer.
(4) Roll call of attendance. [Ord. No. 2012-7]
(5) Appointment recognition. Under this agenda item the Mayor may
recognize those persons being appointed to offices and positions in
the City of Bloomington, whether such appointments are subject to
confirmation or not. During this period after brief introductions,
the City Council may ask questions of the appointee. [Ord. No.
2016-25]
(6) Public comment. Public comment shall be allowed as provided for
in § 2-501 of this chapter. [Ord. No. 2016-25]
(7) Consent agenda.
(a) Items shown on the consent agenda are considered routine
and, unless removed from the consent agenda as herein
provided, will be disposed of in one motion and second to
approve the consent agenda. There shall be no discussion after
a motion and second to approve the consent agenda. The effect
of approval of said motion is to dispose of each matter
contained therein according to the recommendation furnished
to the Council by the City Manager. The Clerk shall record each
Council member's yes or no vote on the roll-call for approval of
the consent agenda as his or her vote on each item contained
therein. [Ord. No. 2012-7]
(b) Before a motion and second, the Chairperson shall inquire if
any items should be removed from the consent agenda for
further discussion and separate vote as part of the regular
agenda. Any item shall be removed from the consent agenda at
§ 2-206 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-207
1:27
§ 2-208. [Ch. 2, Sec. 18] Rules for conduct of meetings.
the request of a Council member, City Manager or Corporation
Counsel. Items removed from the consent agenda will be
placed on the regular agenda and be taken up at that time.
[Ord. No. 2012-7]
(8) Regular agenda. This item includes all other business of the City,
except as provided herein. [Ord. No. 2010-56]
(9) City Manager's reports and discussion. Under this item, the City
Manager may bring to the Council's attention any matter not on the
regular or consent agenda which, in his or her opinion, require
official Council consideration; it may include announcements and
other matters. [Ord. No. 2012-7]
(10) Mayor's discussion. Under this item, the Mayor may bring to the
Council's attention any matter not on the regular or consent
agenda which, in his or her opinion, require official Council
consideration; it may include announcements, veto messages, and
other matters. [Ord. No. 2012-7]
(11) Council member discussion. Under this item, a Council member
may bring to the Council's attention any matter not on the regular
or consent agenda which, in his opinion, require official Council
consideration; it may include announcements and other matters.
[Ord. No. 2019-34]
(12) Adjournment. [Ord. No. 2010-56]
A. The following rules shall govern the Council in its deliberations:
(1) The Mayor, while present, shall preside as Chairperson at all
meetings of the City Council. In the Mayor's absence from the
meeting, the Mayor Pro Tem shall serve as the Chairperson, or if
the Mayor Pro Tem is also absent, the Council members present
shall designate by vote another Council member to serve as
Chairperson. The meetings of the City Council shall be called to
order and conducted by the Chairperson. [Ord. No. 2012-7]
(2) A majority of the members of the Council shall constitute a quorum
to do business. [Ord. No. 2012-7]
(3) The Chairperson's powers include, but are not limited to, the
following:
(a) To rule motions in or out of order. In doing so, he or she may
consult with legal counsel who shall serve as the
parliamentarian.
(b) To regulate the course of the meeting in accordance with these
rules and applicable laws and ordinances. This includes the
responsibility to regulate speakers and attendees.
§ 2-207 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 2-208
1:28
(c) To determine whether a speaker has gone beyond reasonable
standards of courtesy in his or her remarks and to entertain
and rule on objections from other members on this ground.
(d) To entertain and answer questions of parliamentary law or
procedure. In doing so, he or she may consult with legal
counsel who shall serve as parliamentarian.
(e) To call a brief recess at any time.
(f) To adjourn in an emergency. [Ord. No. 2012-7]
(4) The separate yes, no, and abstain votes of each Council member
shall be taken electronically, and if electronic voting is unavailable,
by roll call upon the consideration of all ordinances, and all
propositions to create any liability against the City, or for the
expenditure or appropriation of its money, and in all other cases at
the request of any member, which shall be entered on the journal of
its proceedings. The concurrence of a majority of the members
elected to the Council shall be necessary to the passage of any such
ordinance or proposition except where otherwise provided by law
or by ordinance. [Ord. No. 2013-67]
(5) Questions of parliamentary law at the meetings of the Council shall
be addressed as provided below. To the extent not provided for in
these rules, and to the extent it does not conflict with Illinois law,
City ordinances, or with the spirit of these rules, the Council shall
refer to Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised, to answer
unresolved procedural questions.
(a) Substantive motion. A substantive motion may deal with any
subject within the Council's legal powers, duties and
responsibilities. A substantive motion is out of order while
another substantive motion is pending.
(b) Procedural motion. The following enumeration of procedural
motions are in order. Unless otherwise noted each motion is
debatable, may be amended, and requires a majority of the
votes cast, a quorum being present, for adoption. Procedural
motions are in order while a substantive motion is pending.
The following is an exhaustive list; if a procedural motion is not
on the list, then it is not available. In order of priority, if
applicable, the procedural motions are:
[1] Motion to appeal a procedural ruling of the chairperson. A
decision of the Chairperson ruling a motion in or out of
order, determining whether a speaker has gone beyond
reasonable standards of courtesy in his or her remarks, or
entertaining and answering a question of parliamentary
law or procedure may be appealed to the Council. This
appeal is in order immediately after such decision is
announced and at no other time. The Council member
§ 2-208 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-208
1:29
making the motion need not be recognized by the
Chairperson and the motion, if timely made, may not be
ruled out of order. If the appeal is seconded, the Council
member making the appeal may briefly explain the ruling,
but there shall be no debate on the appeal, and no other
Council member shall participate in the discussion. The
Chairperson shall then put the question, "Shall the
decision of the Chair be sustained?" If a majority of the
members present vote "Aye," the ruling of the Chair is
sustained; otherwise, it is overruled.
[2] Motion to adjourn. This motion may be made only at the
conclusion of action on a pending substantive matter; it
may not interrupt deliberation of a pending matter. This
motion, if passed, requires the Council to immediately
adjourn to its next regularly scheduled meeting. A motion
to adjourn shall always be in order, except: 1) when a
Council member is in possession of the floor; 2) when the
Council members are voting; 3) when adjournment was the
last preceding motion; and 4) when it has been decided
that the previous question shall be taken.
[3] Motion to recess. Council members may propose a brief
recess during its proceedings. This motion, if passed,
requires the Council to immediately take a recess.
Normally, the Chairperson determines the length of the
recess, which may range from a few minutes to an hour.
[4] Motion to call to follow the agenda. This motion, if passed,
requires the Council to conform to its agenda or order of
business. This motion must be made at the first reasonable
opportunity (when the item of business that deviates from
the agenda is proposed) or the right to make it is waived
for the out-of-order item in question.
[5] Motion to suspend rules. This motion, if passed, allows the
body to suspend its own rules of order, conduct or
procedure for a particular purpose. The motion should
specifically state the portion of the rules that are being
suspended. This motion requires a two-thirds vote. This
motion must be specific and state the reason for
suspending the rules.
[6] Motion to go into closed session (executive session). The
Council may go into closed session only for one or more of
the permissible purposes listed under Section 2 of the
Illinois Open Meetings Act (5 ILCS 120/1). The motion to
go into closed session shall cite one or more of these
purposes and shall be adopted at an open meeting.
§ 2-208 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 2-208
1:30
[7] Motion to leave closed session (executive session). This
motion provides a procedural mechanism for returning
from closed session to an open meeting.
[8] Motion to divide a complex motion (Question) and consider
it by paragraph. This motion is in order whenever a
Council member wishes to consider and vote on subparts
of a complex motion separately.
[9] Motion to defer consideration (Table). The Council may
defer a substantive motion for later consideration at an
unspecified time. A substantive motion, the consideration
of which has been deferred, expires 100 days thereafter
unless a motion to revive consideration is adopted. If
consideration of a motion has been deferred, a new motion
with the same effect cannot be introduced while the
deferred motion remains pending. A Council member who
wishes to revisit the matter during that time must take
action to revive consideration of the original motion, or
else move to suspend the rules.
[10] Motion to move the previous question (limit debate). This
motion may be made at any time after a substantive
motion is made. If made before 20 minutes of debate and
the opportunity of each Council member to make both an
initial comment and a rebuttal comment as provided under
§ 2-210E of this chapter, the motion requires a two-thirds
vote. If made after at least 20 minutes of debate and after
the opportunity of each Council member to make both an
initial comment and a rebuttal comment as provided under
§ 2-210E of this chapter, the motion requires a majority
vote.
[11] Motion to postpone to a certain time or day. This motion
allows the Council to postpone consideration of an item to
a specified day. If consideration of a motion has been
postponed, a new motion with the same effect cannot be
introduced while the postponed motion remains pending.
A Council member who wishes to revisit the matter must
either wait until the specified time, or move to suspend the
rules.
[12] Motion to amend. An amendment to a motion must be
pertinent to the subject matter of the motion. An
amendment is improper if adoption of the motion with that
amendment added would have the same effect as rejection
of the original motion. A proposal to substitute completely
different wording for a motion or an amendment shall be
treated as a motion to amend. A motion maybe amended,
and that amendment may be amended, but no further
§ 2-208 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-208
1:31
amendments may be made until the last offered
amendment is disposed of by a vote.
[13] Motion to revive consideration. The Council may vote to
revive consideration of any substantive motion earlier
deferred by adoption of a motion to defer consideration
(table). The motion is in order at any time within 100 days
after the day of a vote to defer consideration. A substantive
motion on which consideration has been deferred expires
100 days after the deferral unless a motion to revive
consideration is adopted.
[14] Motion to reconsider. The Council may vote to reconsider
its action on a matter. The motion to do so must be made
by a member who voted with the prevailing side (the
majority) and 1) at the meeting during which the original
vote was taken, including any continuation of that meeting
through recess or adjournment to a time and place certain,
or 2) at the next regularly scheduled Council meeting
following the meeting during which the original vote was
taken. The motion cannot interrupt deliberation on a
pending matter but is in order at any time before final
adjournment of the meeting.
[15] Motion to rescind or repeal. The Council may vote to
rescind actions it has previously taken or to repeal items
that it has previously adopted. This motion is used at a
later meeting and has the purpose of canceling the action
the Council took at a previous meeting. This motion can be
made by any Council member, no matter how he or she
voted on the original motion. The motion requires a
majority vote if a Council member provides notice to the
Council, prior to the meeting, that the motion will be
made, or a two-thirds vote if such notice is not provided.
[16] Motion to prevent reintroduction for six months. This
motion shall be in order immediately following the defeat
of a substantive motion and at no other time. The motion
requires, for adoption, a two-thirds vote. If adopted, the
restriction imposed by the motion remains in effect for six
months.
B. These rules may be amended at any regular meeting or at any properly
called special meeting that includes amendment of the rules as one of
the stated purposes of the meeting, so long as the amendment is
consistent with generally accepted principles of parliamentary
procedure. [Ord. No. 2012-7]
§ 2-208 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 2-209
1:32
§ 2-209. [Ch. 2, Sec. 18.1] Conflict of interest. [Ord. No. 2012-7]
A Council member prevented from voting by a conflict of interest, such
conflict resulting from the Council member having a substantial financial
interest in an official matter or a personal interest in an official matter such
that he or she cannot render a fair and impartial decision, shall leave the
City Council chambers during the debate, shall not vote on the matter, and
shall otherwise comply with the rules concerning conflicts of interest. The
Chairperson shall make reasonable effort to inform any Council member,
who has left the room for such reason and who is nearby, that the agenda
has advanced and that the absent member may re-enter the meeting room.
§ 2-210. [Ch. 2, Sec. 18.2] Agenda items and voting.
A. Agenda items. In accordance with this section, items can be placed on a
meeting agenda by: (i) the Mayor; (ii) the intended Chairperson of the
meeting, in the absence of the Mayor; (iii) the City Manager or designee
thereof; or (iv) by the Agenda Initiative process. For each regular
agenda item, the City Manager (or his designee) in consultation with
the Mayor (or the Chairperson of the meeting, in the absence of the
Mayor), shall designate a time for the presentation of the agenda item
and a time for the Council discussion. Once the time allotted for on the
agenda item has expired, the item shall either be tabled to a date
certain or called upon for a vote unless the Council, by a majority vote,
votes to extend, for a specified amount of time, the time for discussion
and consideration of the time at the meeting. [Ord. No. 2018-49]
(1) Regular meeting agendas. For each regular meeting of the City
Council, the City Manager shall be responsible for placing items on
the agenda he or she believes to be in the best interests of the City.
Initiatives of the City Council may also be placed on the agenda
after following the process set forth in Subsection A(2) below.
While the Mayor reserves the right to direct the placement of items
on a regular meeting agenda, the Mayor shall utilize the agenda
initiative process outlined in Subsection A(2) in relation to any nonroutine
City matters or proposals. [Ord. No. 2018-49]
(2) Agenda initiatives. A agenda initiative is a proposal of the Mayor or
a Council member that involves, for example: (1) the expenditure of
money not within the City budget; (2) modifications to the City
Code; (3) formation/modification of City policies; (4) the
introduction of an ordinance or resolution; (5) the formation/
modification of committees; and/or (6) appropriating City staff time
from an existing operational activity or need. All agenda initiatives
shall be on a form completed by either the Mayor or individual
Council member supporting the initiative. The form shall be
derived by the City Manager and must specify the nature of the
request, the estimated cost and/or staff time (if known), and what,
if any, existing projects or programs are proposed to be reduced in
lieu of the new project. A portion of each Committee of the Whole
shall be dedicated to the agenda initiatives of the Council members
§ 2-209 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-210
1:33
§ 2-211. [Ch. 2, Sec. 24] Submission of matters for Council
consideration. [Ord. No. 2012-07]
All reports, communications, ordinances, resolutions, contract documents,
or other matters to be submitted to the Council shall be delivered to the
City Manager, or his or her designee, no later than a time to be determined
by the City Manager. The City Manager shall determine the order of agenda
items and cause the agenda and supporting documents to be prepared for
distribution. The City Clerk shall post the agenda and distribute supporting
documents to the Council and Mayor for consideration.
and/or Mayor, if any. The Agenda Initiative Form, once completed
and timely submitted, will be included in the meeting packet. At
the Committee of the Whole, a majority of the Alderman present
can vote to: (1) have the initiative placed on a future City Council
agenda for further consideration or action; (2) have staff evaluate
and prepare an analysis on the proposed initiative and bring it
back for further Council discussion; or (3) deny the initiative being
placed on a future agenda and/or having City staff evaluate and
analyze the proposed initiative. The same agenda initiative cannot
be brought forward more than once in a six-month period unless
two-thirds of the City Council votes to place the agenda initiative
back on the table for consideration. [Ord. No. 2019-34]
B. Voting.
(1) No vote may be taken on a matter that has not been included on the
agenda that was provided prior to the meeting in accordance with
the Open Meetings Act. However, the proposed motion, for a
matter that has been properly included on the agenda, may be
modified and voted upon to the extent that it only extends into
subject matter that would be reasonably related to the announced
agenda item.
(2) No vote on an agenda item shall be taken without a quorum of a
majority of Council members present.
(3) Subject to limitations in these rules, the Chairperson may call for a
voice vote or a roll call vote. The City Clerk, or designee thereof,
shall conduct each roll call vote in a specific order that will rotate
from meeting to meeting.
(4) No Council member may vote by agency, proxy, or if not in
attendance, except that Council members may participate, be in
attendance, and vote by electronic means as authorized by law.
(5) The Chairperson may vote as allowed under Illinois statutes. [Ord.
No. 2012-7]
§ 2-210 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 2-212
1:34
§ 2-212. [Ch. 2, Sec. 25] Filing of resolutions, etc.
All petitions and resolutions shall be filed with the City Clerk and entered
on the minutes.
§ 2-213. [Ch. 2, Sec. 26] Final action on matters after public
hearing - limitation on rehearing.
§ 2-214. [Ch. 2, Sec. 27] Nominating petitions - office of Alderman.
[Ord. No. 2006-99]
Except where otherwise provided in state statutes, nominating petitions for
the office of Alderman of each ward in the City of Bloomington shall contain
the names and signatures of a number of registered voters residing in the
ward which the candidate seeks to represent equaling not less than 5% nor
more than 8% of 1/9 of the number of persons who voted in the last regular
municipal election.
§ 2-215. [Ch. 2, Sec. 28] Other proceedings of Council.
All proceedings of the Council not specifically provided for in this article
shall be in accordance with the rules of order and procedure to be adopted
by the City Council.
A. Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, the City Council
shall not rehear matters which matters which have been referred to any
body, agency, or person for public hearing. [Ord. No. 1981-71]
B. The provisions of Subsection A notwithstanding, the City Council may,
upon passage of a proper motion to suspend the rules, permit one
spokesman for each side a limited period of time not to exceed five
minutes to summarize his or her side's position to the City Council.
[Ord. No. 1981-71]
C. When, in the judgment of the City Council, unique circumstances
require, the Council may upon a proper motion to do so suspend the
operation of this section. [Ord. No. 1981-71]
D. This provision is directory, and the failure of the City Council to follow
its provisions in any matter before it shall not be grounds for
invalidation of any action taken on such matter. [Ord. No. 1981-71]
§ 2-212 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-215
1:35

ARTICLE III
Departments, Boards, Commissions, Etc.
§ 2-301. [Ch. 2, Sec. 29] Departments enumerated. [Ord. No.
2019-13]
In addition to the Office of the City Manager, the administrative service of
the City shall be organized into the following departments which are hereby
established:
Community Development
Economic Development
Finance Department
Fire Department
Legal Department
Parks, Recreation and Cultural Arts Department
Human Resources Department
Police Department
Public Works Department
§ 2-302. [Ch. 2, Sec. 30] Boards and commissions - enumerated.
A. In addition to the operating departments named in the preceding
section, there shall also be the following Boards and Commissions:
Bloomington-Normal Sister Cities Committee
Board of Fire and Police Commissioners
Board of Library Trustees
Board of Zoning Appeals
Building Board of Appeals
Citizen's Beautification Committee
Cultural Commission
Firemen's Pension Board
Historic Preservation Commission
Housing Authority Board
Human Relations Commission
Liquor Commission
Planning Commission
Police Pension Board
Property Maintenance Review Board
Technology Commission
Transportation Commission
§ 2-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-302
1:37
§ 2-303. [Ch. 2, Sec. 31] Same - appointment and terms.
§ 2-304. [Ch. 2, Sec. 32] Same - vacancies.
In case any vacancy shall occur in the membership of boards or
commissions of a fixed term, the vacancy shall be filled in the same manner
as the original appointment. All appointments to fill vacancies shall be for
the unexpired term.
§ 2-305. [Ch. 2, Sec. 33] Cooperation between departments.
It shall be the duty of every department, subject to such orders as the City
Manager may establish, to furnish to any other department such service,
labor, and materials as may be requisitioned by the head of this department
and as its own facilities permit, through the same procedures and subject to
the same audit and control as other expenditures are incurred.
§ 2-306. [Ch. 2, Sec. 34] Reports and records.
B. Such Boards and Commissions shall be so organized and have such
powers and duties as required by the laws of the State and this Code.
[Ord. No. 2019-05]
A. All members of said Boards and Commissions shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the approval of the City Council except where otherwise
provided by law or by ordinance. Effective May 1, 2014, new members
whose terms of office are not otherwise expressly provided for by law or
ordinance, shall hold their respective offices for the term of three years.
The City Council reserves the right to extend appointments beyond this
three-year term. New members shall serve no more than three
consecutive three-year terms (a total of nine years). An existing Board
or Commission member, who has served a total of nine consecutive
years prior to May 1, 2014, shall no longer be eligible to serve on the
Board or Commission until a one-year period off the Board or
Commission, at which time he or she may be appointed. For an existing
Board or Commission member who has not served a total of nine
consecutive years prior to May 1, 2014, his or her consecutive service
prior to such time shall count towards the total nine-year term
limitation.
B. Once an individual's term has expired, after a one-year period off the
Board or Commission, he or she is eligible to be appointed to the same
Board or Commission for a new term pursuant to the term restrictions
provided in this section.
C. The Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson of any Board or Commission
shall each serve a term of one year and shall be eligible for re-election;
but no member shall serve as Chairperson or Vice-Chairperson for more
than two consecutive years. [Ord. No. 2014-04]
§ 2-302 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 2-306
1:38
§ 2-307. [Ch. 2, Sec. 35] Responsibilities generally of department
heads.
The heads of departments established in § 2-301 of this Code shall be
immediately responsible to the City Manager for the effective
administration of their respective departments and all activities assigned
thereto. The City Manager may set aside any action taken by such
department head and may supersede him in the functions of his office. In
case of a vacancy in such office or during the absence of any department
head appointed by him, the City Manager may designate an interim acting
head or may perform personally the functions of the office. All department
heads shall keep informed as to the best practices in their particular fields
and shall inaugurate, with the approval of the City Manager and subject to
the limitations of the annual appropriation ordinance, such new practices as
appear to be of benefit to the service and to the public.
§ 2-308. [Ch. 2, Sec. 36] Inventories; responsibilities for shortages.
Each department head of the City shall file an annual inventory of all
property in his department with the City Manager prior to the first regular
meeting of the City Council in January of each year. Each department head
shall also file with the City Manager such a property inventory within one
week of the time his office becomes vacant by resignation or otherwise.
Each incoming department head shall check the inventory of his respective
department and report any discrepancies or shortages to the City Manager
at its next regular meeting after such officer shall have been appointed
and shall have qualified. The value of property not accounted for shall be
charged to the official in charge of the department during whose term such
shortage occurred, and in the event the value of the property is not paid to
the City within 10 days from the time demand is made, appropriate action
A. A report of the activities of each department established by § 2-301 of
this chapter and the City Clerk's Office shall be made to the City
Manager within five days following the close of each month, and an
annual report shall also be filed with the City Manager within 30 days
after the end of each fiscal year. Each of such department head and the
City Clerk shall establish a system of records and reports in sufficient
detail to furnish all information necessary for proper control of
departmental activities and to form a basis for the periodic reports of
the City Manager.
B. All department heads, other officials, and the secretaries of the Boards
and commissions shall be held responsible for the preservation of all
public records under their jurisdiction, and shall provide for a system of
filing and indexing for the same. All public records, reports,
correspondence, or other date related to the business of the
department, office, institution, board, or commission shall be the
property of the City and in the event any official or employee retires
from the service for any reason whatsoever, shall be turned over to his
successor.
§ 2-306 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-308
1:39
shall be commenced in the name of the City against the official and the
surety on their bonds for recovery thereof.
§ 2-309. [Ch. 2, Sec. 37] Budget estimates.
The head of every department and office shall prepare and submit to the
City Manager on or before the 15th day of February in each year an
estimate of the whole cost and expense of providing for and maintaining his
office during the ensuing fiscal year, which estimate shall be in detail, and
such other information as may be required by the City Manager for use by
the City Manager in preparing his proposed budget for submission to the
City Council. Each department head may require the head of any division
in his department to prepare similar estimates of the cost and expense of
maintaining such division for use in preparing departmental estimates.
§ 2-310. [Ch. 2, Sec. 38] City Manager.
The City Manager shall be appointed by the City Council for an indefinite
term as provided by law. Before taking office, the City Manager shall
furnish a fidelity bond in the amount of $5,000, conditioned upon the
faithful performance of his duties with a corporation licensed to do business
in Illinois as surety. Such bond shall be filed with the Clerk after being
approved by the City Council.
§ 2-311. [Ch. 2, Sec. 39] Same - powers and duties generally.
A. The Manager shall have and exercise all powers and duties assigned to
him by statute and such other authority as may be granted by the City
Council. He shall be charged with the enforcement of all laws and
ordinances within the municipality insofar as their enforcement is
within the powers of the City. He shall exercise all powers conferred by
law upon the municipality but not specifically conferred upon any
official.
B. The Manager shall attend all meetings of the City Council, shall keep
the Council informed as to the affairs of the City, and shall recommend
to the Council such actions as may be necessary or expedient for the
welfare of the City.
C. The City Manager shall supervise the administration of the affairs of the
City; make such recommendations to the Council as he may deem
necessary; keep the Council advised on the financial condition and
future needs of the City; appoint, remove, suspend, and discipline all
officers and employees of the administrative departments established
by § 2-301 of this Code (other than those under tenure of office laws),
authorized by the City Council to be hired at such compensation as may
be set or authorized by the City Council. All employees of departments
established by § 2-301 of this Code shall perform their duties subject to
the direction of the City Manager or that of the superior to whom the
Manager may assign such employee. The Manager may, however,
§ 2-308 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 2-311
1:40
delegate to any official or employee the authority to hire or discharge
any employees so authorized.
D. All appointive offices of the City established by § 2-301 of this Code
shall be filled by appointment by the Manager, except where otherwise
provided by law; and the Manager shall report to the Mayor and
Council such appointments, or any removal from office made by him as
soon as possible after the appointment or removal.
E. Every administrative department of the City established under § 2-301
of this Code and the Office of City Clerk shall be under the supervision
and control of the Manager, who shall have the power to remove from
office any officer appointed by the Manager. He shall be responsible for
the efficient and economical conduct of all such departments.
F. The City Manager is hereby authorized and directed to assign officers
and employees appointed by him to one or more of the departments
established in § 2-301 of the Code and to require such appointive officer
or employee to perform duties in two or more of such departments
without further authority from the Council.
G. The City Manager shall also have the powers and duties specifically
provided for in Illinois Revised Statutes, 1959, Chapter 24, Paragraph
20-7.
H. The Manager shall examine and report on all proposed contracts to
which the City may be a party, and shall sign on behalf of the City any
contract authorized by the City Council, excepting where the Council
directs that some other officer or officers shall do so. [Ord. No.
2015-06]
I. It shall be the duty of the Manager to see to it that all terms of any
contract to which the City is a party are fully performed by all parties
thereto.
J. The Manager shall be general purchasing agent of the City, and except
where specific provision to the contrary is made by law or by the
Council, he shall make all purchases of construction, repair,
maintenance, services, goods, supplies, materials, and equipment
authorized by the Council, in the manner prescribed by and subject to
the limitations imposed by law. No purchase shall be made or obligation
incurred except upon authorization by the Council, and no expense
shall be incurred except for purposes for which no prior appropriation
is required by law if the amount thereof is not covered by an
unexpended appropriation for the purpose. [Ord. No. 2015-06]
K. It shall be the duty of the Manager to cause to be prepared each year
the annual appropriation ordinance in time for consideration and
enactment by the Council during the first quarter of the fiscal year; and
to prepare the tax levy ordinance for passage and file a certified copy
thereof with the County Clerk within the time required by law.
§ 2-311 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-311
1:41
L. He shall keep current accounts of the amounts appropriated and the
amounts spent out of each appropriation, showing the unexpended
appropriations at all times and shall see that the expenditures do not
exceed the amount available for expenditure.
M. It shall be the duty of the Manager to keep current accounts showing at
all times the fiscal condition of the City, including the current and
anticipated expenses, appropriations, cash on hand, and anticipated
revenues of all municipal funds and accounts; and he shall see to the
collection of all money due the municipality.
N. The Manager shall keep a current inventory showing all real and
personal property of the City and its location and shall be responsible
for the care and custody of all such property, including equipment,
buildings, parks and all other City property, which is not by law
assigned to some other officer or body for care and control.
O. It shall be the duty of the Manager to prepare or cause to be prepared
all reports which the City or any department established by § 2-301 of
this Code are required by law to prepare.
P. The Manager shall prepare and have custody of all municipal records
required by law to be kept by the City and not by a specific officer.
Q. Where the law requires or provides for certification of any records or
documents by any officer of the City, the Manager shall cause such
records or documents to be property prepared and presented to such
officer for his signature.
R. The Manager shall cause to be kept a complete set of maps and plats
showing the location of all City utilities and other municipal properties,
all street and other public places and all lots or parcels of land
subdivided according to law.
S. The Manager shall maintain an office in the City Hall and shall spend
such time in the performance of his duties as may be required by
Council.
T. Whenever the same person serves as the Director of Finance and
Treasurer, the City Manager shall consult with the City Council prior to
any dismissal of the Director of Finance. [Ord. No. 1977-31]
U. The Manager shall have the authority to adopt regulations and
implement ban notifications as such relate to City property for
individuals that commit City Code violations or other criminal activity
on City property. Any such banishment shall not exceed six months and
may be appealed to an administrative hearing officer appointed by the
City. A ban may be overturned in the event a conviction or default on the
underlying violation is not obtained or if the individual can prove by
clear and convincing evidence that the underlying Code Violation or
criminal charge was not related to the public health and/or safety of
others and therefore banishment from City property furthers no
§ 2-311 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 2-311
1:42
§ 2-312. [Ch. 2, Sec. 40] Same - Manager Pro Tempore. [Ord. No.
2017-105]
In case of a vacancy in the office of the City Manager, or in case of
the City Manager's absence from the City, temporary disability to act as
City Manager, discharge by the Council, or resignation, the Mayor shall
act as Manager during such absence or incapacity, unless the Council
shall appoint, by resolution, a Manager pro tempore who shall possess the
powers and duties of the Manager. No Manager pro tempore, however, may
appoint or remove a department director or any other employee that reports
directly to the City Manager pro tempore prior to informing and seeking
the advice of the City Council in a closed session as authorized by law and
he or she shall provide advance written notice to the City Council prior any
other employee terminations. The resolution appointing the Manager pro
tempore shall provide what, if any, compensation shall be provided and shall
set forth the length of the appointment and/or the conditions upon which
the appointment shall be nullified.
§ 2-313. [Ch. 2, Sec. 41] Same - executive orders and administrative
regulations.
The City Manager may issue executive orders, not inconsistent with laws
or ordinance, outlining the general administrative procedures of the City,
which orders shall be binding upon all departments, officials, and
employees subject to his authority; he may provide for a system of
administrative regulations to be issued by department heads and for the
manner of issuing, approving, numbering, indexing and filing such orders
and regulations.
§ 2-314. [Ch. 2, Sec. 42] Mayor.
compelling City interest. Absent a threat of violence or individual being
out of order, no banishment shall prevent an individual from attending
a public meeting on City property. [Ord. No. 2016-63]
A. The Mayor shall have and exercise all powers and duties assigned to
him by statute and such other authority as may be granted by the
Council.
B. The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the Council, and all
ceremonial occasions.
C. The Mayor shall be recognized as the official head of the City by the
courts for the purpose of serving civil process and by the government
for all legal purposes.
D. Except where such matters are subject to a veto, the Mayor shall sign
on behalf of the City any document or deed authorized by the Council.
[Ord. No. 2015-06]
§ 2-311 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-314
1:43
§ 2-315. [Ch. 2, Sec. 43] City Clerk - duties generally.
E. The Mayor shall appoint members of any board or commission provided
by the statutes of the State of Illinois or in this Code with the approval
of the Council.
F. The Mayor may consult with the Corporation Counsel on matters
pertaining to the general provisions of the City ordinances and
questions which arise before the City Council.
G. The Mayor may request reports of the City Manager on matters
pertaining to operations of the various departments which shall be
made available by the Mayor to all Council members of the City. [Ord.
No. 2019-34]
H. Whenever the City Council takes formal action on a matter, the effect of
which is to direct or cause an ordinance to be drafted implementing
such action, such action may, at the election of the Mayor, be
considered as an ordinance for purposes of the Mayor's veto power. If
the Mayor makes such an election, he shall so state in his veto message
to the Council. [Ord. No. 1982-7]
A. Bond - oath. Before entering upon the duties of his office, the City Clerk
shall take the oath prescribed by law and shall give bond in the penal
sum of $5,000, with sureties to be approved by the Council. Said bond
shall be filed with the City Treasurer.
B. Shall be Town Clerk In addition to the duties imposed upon him by law
and ordinance as City Clerk, the said City Clerk shall, ex officio, be
Town Clerk of the Town of the City of Bloomington, and shall perform all
the duties and exercise all the powers of such Town Clerk, and no Town
Clerk shall be elected for the Town of the City of Bloomington.
C. Fees property of City - settlements - reports. All fees payable by law to
the City Clerk shall be the property of the City. He shall pay over daily to
the Director of Finance all moneys received by him, taking a receipt
therefor. On the first day of each month he shall make a detailed
account to the Director of Finance of all moneys received by him during
the preceding month, and on what account received, and shall file
therewith the receipt of the Director of Finance for all such moneys.
D. Other duties. The Clerk shall keep the Corporate Seal, to be provided
under the direction of the City Council, and with said seal shall attest all
instruments and documents required to be so attested.
E. He shall attend all meetings of the Council, and shall be Clerk of said
Council, and shall keep a full record of its proceedings in the journal.
F. He shall issue such notices as may be directed by the Council, and
notify all persons whose attendance may be required before the Council
or any committee thereof, and also shall issue notices of special
meetings.
§ 2-314 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 2-315
1:44
§ 2-316. [Ch. 2, Sec. 44] Same - ordinances to be filed in his office;
acceptance of certain ordinances, etc.
The originals of all ordinances passed by the City Council shall be filed in
the City Clerk's office. It shall be the duty of the Clerk to report to the
Council (such report to be made a part of the official record) all acceptances
of ordinances and bonds connected therewith, which have been filed in his
office since the preceding meeting.
§ 2-317. [Ch. 2, Sec. 45] Clerk to be appointed by City Manager.
[Ord. No. 2019-28]
The City Clerk shall be appointed by the City Manager with the advice and
consent of the City Council for an indefinite period. The City Manager's
power of appointment shall include the power to appoint a City Clerk on a
probationary or acting basis. The City Clerk may be removed in the same
manner as other appointed officials of the City.
§ 2-318. [Ch. 2, Sec. 45.1] City Clerk Department; functions. [Ord.
No. 2019-28]
The City Clerk Department shall consist of the City Clerk, which shall be
considered a department head for purposes of the City Personnel Manual,
and such other employees necessary to carry out the functions of the
office. The salary of the City Clerk shall be set by the City Manager in a
manner consistent with the City's budget. The functions of the City Clerk
Department shall include, but not be limited to those duties outlined in
G. He shall attest with the Corporate Seal all licenses granted under the
ordinances of the City.
H. He shall deliver without delay, to the Mayor or any Council members all
resolutions and communications referred to such officers, and he shall
deliver to the Mayor all ordinances and resolutions which may be
required to be approved or otherwise acted upon by the Mayor,
together with all papers upon which the same were founded. [Ord. No.
2019-34]
I. (Reserved) [Ord. No. 2008-82]
J. Shall be the head of the City Clerk Department and shall designate
deputies. In the absence of the Clerk in case of sickness or otherwise,
the Chief Deputy Clerk shall be empowered to perform all duties of the
Clerk. The Deputy Clerks when authorized and directed may affix the
seal of the municipality and attest documents in said capacity and those
documents will have the same effect as if they had been executed by the
Clerk. Such designation shall be effective upon approval by the City
Manager. [Ord. No. 2019-28]
K. He shall see to the publication of all notices, ordinances, or other
documents required by law to be published.
§ 2-315 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-318
1:45
§§ 2-315 and [55?] processing and issuing City licenses, records retention,
processing and responding to Freedom of Information Act requests, posting
meeting notices and agendas as directed, preparing the packet for City
Council meetings as directed, and processing and handling City contracts.
§ 2-319. [Ch. 2, Sec. 45.2] Custodian of official papers.
§ 2-320. [Ch. 2, Sec. 45.3] Disclosure of public records.
§ 2-321. [Ch. 2, Sec. 45.4] Other powers and duties. [Ord. No.
2019-28]
The City Clerk shall have all other powers and duties and shall be subject
to all applicable provisions of the Illinois Municipal Code and Bloomington
City Code.
§ 2-322. [Ch. 2, Sec. 46] The City Treasurer - duties.
A. The City Clerk is hereby named as custodian of all papers, files and
documents of every nature, including contracts and agreements of the
City authorized by the City Council.
B. The City Clerk shall keep all such papers, files and documents of every
nature, including all City contracts and agreements, and arrange the
same methodically and systematically. [Ord. No. 2019-28]
A. The City Clerk shall be designated as the Freedom of Information
Officer of the City and shall be responsible for the City's compliance
with the Freedom of Information Act. The City Clerk may designate one
or more individuals to respond to requests received by the City under
the Freedom of Information Act.
B. Fee schedule. The fees for copying and provisions of records under the
Freedom of Information Act shall be as set forth in the Schedule of
Fees. [Ord. No. 2019-28]
A. Bond - oath. Before entering upon the duties of his office, the City
Treasurer shall take the oath prescribed by law, and shall execute and
deliver a bond payable to the City of Bloomington in the penal sum of
$150,000 with sureties to be approved by the City Council, conditioned
upon the faithful performance of the duties of his office. [Ord. No.
1977-31]
B. He shall perform or cause to be performed all the duties imposed upon
him by law.
C. Shall receive corporate money. He shall receive all moneys belonging to
the corporation.
D. Register and cancel warrants. Said Treasurer shall keep or cause to be
kept an accurate register of all warrants redeemed and paid by him.
§ 2-318 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 2-322
1:46
E. Special assessment funds kept separate. All moneys received on any
special assessment shall be held by said Treasurer as a special fund, to
be applied to the payment of the improvement for which the assessment
was made, and said money shall be used for no other purpose whatever,
unless to reimburse the City for money expended for such improvement
out of its general fund.
F. Receipts. He shall give or cause to be given to every person paying
money into the Treasury a receipt therefor, specifying the date of
payment and upon what account paid.
G. Book of account. He shall cause to be kept books of account in such
manner that they show with entire accuracy all money received by him,
from whom received and on what account; and all moneys paid out by
him, and to whom and on what account they shall have been paid.
H. The Treasurer may keep all funds and money in his custody belonging
to the municipality in one or more banks and/or savings and loan
association or savings and loan associations and the Illinois Public
Treasurers' Investment Pool only as herein provided and as permitted
by Bloomington City Code Chapter 16 if municipal funds or money are
deposited in a bank or savings and loan association, the amount of such
deposits shall not exceed 75% of the bank's capital stock and surplus or
75% of the savings and loan association's net worth as defined by the
Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation, and the Treasurer
shall be responsible for funds or money deposited in the bank or savings
and loan association in excess of this limitation.
(1) No bank shall be qualified to receive municipal funds or money
until it has furnished the Treasurer with copies of the last two
sworn statements of resources and liabilities which the bank is
required to furnish to the Commissioner of Banks and Trust
Companies or to the comptroller of currency. Each bank utilized as
a depository for such funds or money shall, while acting as such
depository, furnish the Treasurer with a copy of all statements of
resources and liabilities which it is required to furnish to the
Commissioner of Banks and Trust Companies or the comptroller of
currency.
(2) No savings and loan association shall be qualified to receive
municipal funds or money until it has furnished the Treasurer with
copies of the last two sworn statements of resources and liabilities
which the savings and loan association is required to furnish the
Commissioner of Savings and Loan Associations or the Federal
Home Loan Bank. Each savings and loan association utilized as a
depository for such funds or money shall, while acting as such
depository, furnish the Treasurer with a copy of all statements of
resources and liabilities which it is required to furnish to the
Commissioner of Savings and Loan Associations or to the Federal
Home Loan Bank. [Ord. No. 1989-95]
§ 2-322 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-322
1:47
§ 2-323. [Ch. 2, Sec. 47] Same - Ex Officio Township Collector.
The City Treasurer shall ex officio be township collector of the Town of the
City of Bloomington. All commissions due him in the matter of collecting
taxes shall be paid into the Treasury of the City, and his only compensation
shall be the salary as fixed by the City Council.
§ 2-324. [Ch. 2, Sec. 47.5] Treasurer to be appointed. [Ord. No.
1977-31]
All persons holding the office of City Treasurer after April 30. 1977 shall
hold office by reason of appointment by the Mayor with the approval of the
City Council. The Treasurer's term of office shall be four years in length
beginning May 1. 1977. The Treasurer may be discharged for cause during
a term of office.
§ 2-325. [Ch. 2, Sec. 48] Legal Department - composition;
qualifications.
I. The City Treasurer shall be discharged from responsibility for all funds
and moneys which he may deposit in such banks or depositories so
designated, as provided by law.
J. All interest paid by any such bank upon such balances shall be
considered and treated as part of the appropriate general funds of the
City, subject to use for any legitimate municipal purpose.
K. Compensation. The City Treasurer shall receive no compensation.
[Ord. No. 1977-31]
A. Functions. Except as authorized by the City Council from time to time,
all of the legal activities of the City are assigned to the Legal
Department of said City. The Legal Department shall conduct all such
legal affairs of the City. [Ord. No. 1981-69]
B. Composition. The Legal Department shall consist of a Corporation
Counsel and such assistants as may be authorized by budget. The
Corporation Counsel shall be the responsible head of the Legal
Department with full authority to direct the activities of the
Department. [Ord. No. 1981-69]
C. Appointment by Manager. The Corporation Counsel shall be appointed
by the City Manager. [Ord. No. 1981-69]
D. In lieu of the Corporation Counsel being an employee of the City, upon
the recommendation of the City Manager, the City may contract with an
outside attorney and/or firm to perform the functions of the Corporation
Counsel and to supplement the legal functions and services to the City.
[Ord. No. 2014-60]
§ 2-322 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 2-326
1:48
§ 2-326. [Ch. 2, Sec. 49] Qualifications of attorneys; time to be
devoted to duties. [Ord. No. 2014-60]
The Corporation Counsel and any in-house staff attorneys shall be or
become practicing members of the Bar of McLean County, be of good
standing therein, and be otherwise qualified by law to serve as legal officers
of the City. They shall devote their time and energies as either full-time or
contractual employees to the discharge of their official duties to the extent
that such duties require.
§ 2-327. [Ch. 2, Sec. 50] Private practice. [Ord. No. 2014-60]
In-house staff attorneys of the Legal Department shall not engage in the
practice of law for clients other than the City without permission of the
City Manager. In determining whether to authorize such practice the City
Manager shall determine whether the practice would interfere with such
member's duties to the City and the appearance of any impropriety in such
practice.
§ 2-328. [Ch. 2, Sec. 51] Authority. [Ord. No. 1981-69]
All members of the Legal Department, which includes the Corporation
Counsel, his assistant, or any other person designated by the Corporation
Counsel with the consent of the Council to assist in the Legal Department
shall have the authority to represent the City before all courts, tribunals,
and commissions in all matters in which the City is a part or has an
interest. The Corporation Counsel shall be authorized to represent the City
in any and all matters in which the City is a party or has an interest. The
Corporation Counsel shall be authorized to represent the City in any and
all legal matters of every kind and character. The Corporation Counsel or
his designee is authorized to discontinue any suit or proceeding or actions
for violation of ordinances when on investigation; he shall be satisfied that
in his judgment the complaint then pending was instituted maliciously or
vexatiously and without sufficient cause or the evidence is insufficient to
warrant further prosecution.
§ 2-329. [Ch. 2, Sec. 52] Compensation.
A. The members of the Legal Department shall receive such salary as is
provided by ordinance or fees as provided by contract. [Ord. No.
2014-60]
B. Additional compensation. The officers of the Legal Department shall not
receive any additional compensation in addition to their salaries, or
fees, as may by ordinance be set forth. [Ord. No. 2014-60]
§ 2-326 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-330
1:49
§ 2-330. [Ch. 2, Sec. 53] Maintenance of records and delivery to
successors. [Ord. No. 1981-69]
The officers of the Legal Department shall be required upon conclusion
of their employment to turn over their official City files, dockets, papers,
correspondence, and records to their successors in office.
§ 2-331. [Ch. 2, Sec. 54] Same - duties generally.
§ 2-332. [Ch. 2, Sec. 54A] Settlement of litigation, claims and
collections.
A. The Corporation Counsel or his designee shall:
(1) Advise and assist in the drafting of City ordinances, orders, and
regulations, and contracts to which the City is expected to become
a party; he shall approve all ordinances as to form before the same
are submitted to the City Council and approve all contracts before
the same are signed by the proper official, including all proposed
forms of contracts made a part of any specifications for bids;
(2) Advise all administrative and legislative officers of the City as to the
legality of any proposed action and give formal written legal
opinions on questions and matters of concern to the City when
required;
(3) Be responsible for the handling of any and all legal affairs of the
City and all prosecution of ordinance violations by the City;
(4) Represent the City as attorney in all legal proceedings in which the
City is a party before any court or before any judicial,
administrative, or other body;
(5) He shall, if so authorized by the City Manager, settle or
compromise claims or suits at law or in equity to which the City
may be a party either by judgment entry or otherwise, for an
amount of not more than $10,000; and [Ord. No. 2010-37]
(6) Defend, appeal, try or settle any Worker's Compensation claim
against the City before the Workers' Compensation Commission of
the State of Illinois. [Ord. No. 2010-37]
A. In the event there is litigation or potential litigation, including
administrative hearing matters, involving the City of Bloomington or
workers' compensation claims, the City Manager shall be authorized
settlement authority on behalf of the City under the following
limitations: [Ord. No. 2019-18]
(1) General litigation or potential litigation settlements (exclusive of
workers' compensation claims) under $25,000; and workers'
compensation claim settlements that are under $100,000 -
Authorized by the City Manager. [Ord. No. 2019-18]
§ 2-330 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 2-332
1:50
§ 2-333. [Ch. 2, Sec. 56] Department of Public Service.
(2) General litigation or potential litigation settlements (exclusive of
workers' compensation claims) between 25,000 and $35,000 - City
Manager shall advise the City Council of the proposed settlement
and allow the City Council the opportunity to discuss the matter in
closed session at the first regularly scheduled Council Meeting
following such notice. Should no members of the City Council
request to discuss the matter and provide other direction, then the
Manager shall be authorized to settle. [Ord. No. 2019-18]
(3) General litigation or potential litigation settlements (exclusive of
workers' compensation claims) over $35,000; and workers'
compensation claim settlements that are $100,000 and over - City
Council discussion and action will be required. [Ord. No.
2019-18]
(4) For any judgment obtained by the City or for any other amount
owed to the City, the City Manager is authorized to enter into an
agreement with one or more collection agencies for the collection
of said debts. [Ord. No. 2015-06]
(5) The City Manager is authorized to enter into tax repayment
agreements with individuals, corporations or businesses that are
30 days or more behind in the payment of any City tax owed to the
City for the collection of said taxes. [Ord. No. 2015-06]
B. As it relates to workers compensation claims, the above-guidelines
would be for settlement purposes of payment to employees. Medical
related expenses and workers compensation wages are paid separately
and required under law. [Ord. No. 2011-49]
A. Establishment. There is hereby created the Department of Public Works
for the City. This department shall consist of the Director of Public
Works, the Divisions of Streets and Sewers, Refuse, and Equipment
Maintenance, the Water Division, Engineering Division and such other
officers and employees as may be provided by the Council. [Ord. No.
2018-93]
B. Director of public works. There is hereby created the Office of Director
of Public Works who shall be appointed by the City Manager as
provided by law. The Manager shall serve as ex officio Director of Public
Works until this office is filled by appointment. The Director shall have
control and supervision over all officers and employees assigned to this
department, subject to the control of the City Manager. [Ord. No.
2018-93]
C. Functions. The Director of Public Works shall have charge of and
supervision over all public property of the City including all streets,
sewers, inlets, parkways, sidewalks, parking lots, and all other property
of the City not specifically assigned to some other officer. He shall have
§ 2-332 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-333
1:51
§ 2-334. through § 2-335. (Reserved) [Repealed by Ord. No.
2014-04]
charge of and be responsible for the care, maintenance and operation of
the sewer system of the City, all streets and sidewalks, and the drainage
thereof, except insofar as the care, maintenance, and operation of any
of the foregoing may by law or valid ordinance be required to be
cared for, maintained or operated by an existing board created or a
separate municipal corporation. He shall have charge of the collection
and disposal of garbage and refuse. He shall have charge of the
Equipment Maintenance Division.
(1) The Water Division shall be responsible for the construction,
operation and maintenance of all facilities and programs necessary
to provide for the treatment and distribution of potable water to all
customers in conformance with all Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency (IEPA) rules, regulations and guidelines. The
Water Division shall also be responsible for the improvement and
maintenance of all public land located at Lake Bloomington and
Evergreen Lake.
(2) The Engineering Division shall perform the following functions:
(a) Design or approve the design and provide construction
supervision of all improvements located on the public right-ofway;
(b) Review all proposed plans for the subdivision of land for
conformance to the Subdivision Code and make
recommendations to the City Manager;
(c) Retain records concerning all public improvements;
(d) Provide engineering services to other City Departments;
(e) Issue excavation permits for all projects located on the public
right-of-way;
(f) Maintain the official record of the City limits;
(g) Assign all addresses; and
(h) Design and maintain all traffic control devices. [Ord. No.
2018-93]
D. Bond - oath. Before entering upon the duties of his office, he shall take
the oath prescribed by law for all City officers and shall execute and
deliver a bond payable to the City in the penal sum of $5,000 with
sureties to be approved by the Council conditioned upon the faithful
performance of the duties of his office.
§ 2-333 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 2-336
1:52
§ 2-336. [Ch. 2, Sec. 60] Adoption of Police Pension Fund.
The provisions of "An Act to Provide for the Setting Apart, Formation and
Disbursement of a Police Pension Fund in Cities, Villages and Incorporated
Towns Having a Population of Not More Than 200,000 Inhabitants,"
Sections 1 to 20 approved June 14, 1909, as amended, establishing a Police
Pension Fund, are hereby adopted by the City.5
§ 2-337. [Ch. 2, Sec. 61] Adoption of Firemen's Pension Fund.
The provisions of "An Act to Create a Firemen's Pension Fund in Cities,
Incorporated Towns, Villages, Townships and Fire Protection Districts
Having a Population of Not Less Than 5,000 Nor More Than 200,000
Inhabitants," Sections 1 to 14, filed July 11, 1919, as amended, establishing
a Firemen's Pension Fund, are hereby adopted by the City.6
§ 2-338. [Ch. 2, Sec. 62] Adoption of Illinois Municipal Retirement
Fund.
The "Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund" and provisions relative thereto
as contained in "An Act to Provide for the Creation and Operation of
a Retirement and Benefit Fund for the Benefit of Certain Officers and
Employees, and Their Beneficiaries, of Cities Having a Population of Not
More Than 200,000 Inhabitants, Villages, Incorporated Towns, Counties
Having a Population of Not More Than 500,000 Inhabitants and Certain
Other Local Governmental Districts in the State and to Supersede Certain
Other Pension and Benefit Funds," Sections 1-27 filed July 29, 1939, as
amended, are hereby adopted and made applicable in all respects to City
employees.
§ 2-339. [Ch. 2, Sec. 63] Board of Fire and Police Commissioners.
A. Establishment. There is hereby created a Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners ("Board"), consisting of three members. Effective May
1, 2014, a person appointed to the Board shall serve a term of three
years. This term may be extended after the three years for no more than
two additional three years terms. Members of the Board shall serve no
more than three consecutive three-year terms (a total of nine years).
[Ord. No. 2019-35]
B. Qualifications. The members of said Board shall possess the
qualifications required of other officers of the City, shall take oath or
affirmation of office, and give bond in the same manner as other
appointive officers of the City. They shall be subject to the removal from
office as such other officers.
C. Powers and duties. Except as set forth in this § 2-339, Division 2.1 of the
Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1, entitled Board of Fire and
5. Editor's Note: See 40 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.
6. Editor's Note: See 40 ILCS 5/4-101 et seq.
§ 2-336 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-339
1:53
Police Commissioners (hereinafter referred to as "Division 2.1") is
adopted by reference, provided that Section 2.1-4 of said Division 2.1
shall not be adopted (except for the mandatory provisions on the
maximum probationary employment period for firefighters), and further
provided that the provisions of this § 2-339 shall supersede the
provisions of Division 2.1 where in conflict, and Division 2.1 shall not
control where otherwise limited by any applicable collective bargaining
agreement. [Ord. No. 2019-35]
D. Original appointments. The recruitment for initial eligibility and the
hiring process for the original appointments of all offers of the Fire and
Police Departments of the City shall be delegated as the responsibility
of the City Manager or his/her designee(s) in accordance with the rules
and regulations promulgated by the City Manager for the recruitment,
selection and hiring of such original appointments which shall be
consistent with the general provisions on such appointments contained
within Division 2.1. Any provision with Division 2.1 in conflict with this
delegation of authority over original appointments shall be superseded
by this subsection. [Ord. No. 2019-35]
E. Rules. The Board of Commissioners shall make such rules to effectuate
the powers and duties conferred to it by and consistent with this
§ 2-339. [Ord. No. 2019-35]
F. Secretary. Such Board may employ a secretary or may designate one of
its own members to act as such. The secretary shall keep the Minutes of
the Board's proceedings, shall be custodian of all papers pertaining to
the business of the Board, shall keep a record of all examinations held,
and shall perform such other duties as the Board shall prescribe.
G. Removal, discharge or demotion - investigation of charges. Except as
hereinafter provided, no non-probationary police officer or firefighter
shall be removed, discharged, or demoted except for cause, upon
written charges, and after an opportunity to be heard in his own
defense. The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall conduct a
fair and impartial hearing of the charges, to be commenced within 30
days of the filing thereof, which hearing may be continued from time to
time. In case an officer or member is found guilty, the Board may
discharge him, may suspend him not exceeding 30 days without pay, or
demote him. The Board may suspend any officer or member pending the
hearing with or without pay but not to exceed 30 days. If the Board of
Fire and Police Commissioners determines that the charges are not
sustained, the officer or member shall be reimbursed for all wages
withheld, if any. In the conduct of this hearing, each member of the
Board shall have power to administer oaths and affirmations, and the
Board shall have power to secure by its subpoena both the attendance
and testimony of witnesses and the production of books and papers
relevant to the hearing. Except as amended by Ordinance, the Board of
Fire and Police Commissioners shall have all of the powers and duties
set forth in Division 2.1 in relation to removal, discharge and demotion,
§ 2-339 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 2-339
1:54
§ 2-340. through § 2-344. (Reserved) [Repealed by Ord. No.
2014-04]
§ 2-345. [Ch. 2, Sec. 69] Community Development.
except where in conflict with this § 2-339 or other applicable collective
bargaining agreement. [Ord. No. 2019-35]
H. Alternative method of hiring entry-level police officers and firefighters.
(1) When a vacancy exists in the Police or Fire Departments, the City
Manager, at his discretion, may authorize the Chief of Police or the
Fire Chief to appoint a person to the position of police officer or
firefighter, if the appointee meets the following qualifications:
[Ord. No. 2019-35]
(a) In the case of a firefighter, he or she has previous status as a
firefighter in the United States of America; in the case of a
police officer, he or she has previous post-probationary status
as a police officer in the United States of America; [Ord. No.
2006-140]
(b) He or she is currently in good standing in the Police or Fire
Department in which the person serves or left the Police or
Fire Department in good standing; and
(c) He or she has substantially equivalent skills and abilities as a
City of Bloomington post-probationary police officer or
firefighter, as determined by the Chief of Police or Fire Chief.
(2) The Chief of Police or Fire Chief may require applicants to submit
themselves to such examination as he or she deems necessary to
determine fitness for duties as a police officer or firefighter.
(3) The Chief of Police or Fire Chief shall present the qualifications of
any person selected for appointment for the approval of and for
appointment by the City Manager. [Ord. No. 2019-35]
(4) No person shall be entitled to appointment as a matter of right
under this subsection. [Ord. No. 2006-54]
A. Establishment. There is hereby created the Community Development
for the City. This Department shall consist of the Director of Community
Development and such other officers and employees as may be
authorized by the City Council. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
B. Director of Community Development. There is hereby created the
position of Director of Community Development who shall be appointed
by the City Manager as provided by law. When this position is vacant,
the City Manager, or a representative named by the City Manager, shall
serve as the Acting Director or the Department until this office is filled
by appointment. The Director shall have control over and shall
§ 2-339 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-345
1:55
§ 2-346. [Ch. 2, Sec. 71] Bloomington-Normal Sister Cities
Committee.
There is hereby created a Bloomington-Normal Sister Cities Committee
which shall function as outlined in this section.
supervise officers and employees assigned to the Department, subject
to the control of the City Manager. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
C. Functions.
(1) The Director of Community Development shall have charge over
the enforcement of all Codes related to the construction of new
buildings and the rehabilitation of existing buildings including, but
not limited to:
(a) The Building Code;
(b) The Plumbing Code;
(c) The Electrical Code;
(d) The HVAC Code;
(e) The Housing Code;
(f) The Property Maintenance Code; and
(g) The Fire Code.
(2) The Director shall also have charge over the administration of the
Community Development Block Grant program as approved by the
City Council, and shall be responsible for the supervision of the City
Planner. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
D. References in City Code to Department of Community Development and
Building Safety Department. Whenever the Bloomington City Code
refers to the Department of Community Development or the Building
Safety Department, such references will be deemed to refer to the
Community Development. Whenever the Bloomington City Code refers
to the Director of the Department of Community Development or the
Director of the Building Safety Department, such references will be
deemed to refer to the Director of Community Development. [Ord. No.
2017-96]
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Bloomington-Normal Sister Cities
Committee, also known as the Sister Cities Committee, shall be to
further international relations and good will between the Bloomington-
Normal community and Vladimir, Russia, Asahigawa, Hokkaido, Japan,
pursuant to the People to People Program instituted by the U.S. State
Department. [Ord. No. 2014-04]
B. Membership. The Sister Cities Committee shall consist of 20 members,
10 of which shall be nominated by the Mayor of the City of Bloomington
§ 2-345 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 2-346
1:56
with the advice and consent of the City Council; 10 of which are to
be nominated by the Mayor of the Town of Normal with the advice
and consent of the Normal Town Council. Effective May 1, 2014, a
person appointed to the Committee by the City of Bloomington shall
serve a term of three years. This term may be extended after the three
years for no more than two additional three-year terms. Members of the
Committee shall serve no more than three consecutive three-year terms
(a total of nine years). Terms of office shall expire on a staggered-basis
so that the terms of approximately 1/3 of the officers shall expire each
year. Members whose terms have expired shall remain in office until a
successor has been duly appointed by the appropriate body. [Ord. No.
2014-04]
C. Officers - powers and duties. The Sister Cities Committee shall have
such officers as may be provided for in its by-laws with such powers and
duties as may be prescribed in those by-laws provided that no such
powers and duties may be exercised in a manner inconsistent with the
laws of the United States or State of Illinois or the ordinances of the
City of Bloomington or the Town of Normal. [Ord. No. 1982-91]
D. Financing. The Sister Cities Committee shall be responsible for
preparing an annual budget for its operations to be submitted to the
City Council annually. Its operations shall be conducted with such funds
as are provided in the budget to otherwise appropriated annually plus
any funds received in the form of donations, reimbursements, or other
admission or other charges provided for by the Committee. In obtaining
approval of expenditures, the Committee shall follow procedures
prescribed by the Director of Finance. Otherwise its finances shall be as
prescribed in its by-laws. [Ord. No. 1982-91]
E. Meetings. The Committee shall meet in the manner prescribed in its bylaws
subject to the requirements of the Open Meetings law. [Ord. No.
1982-91]
F. Inurement of income. No part of the net earnings of the Committee
shall inure to the benefit of, or be distributable to, its members,
trustees, officers or other private persons except that the Committee
shall be authorized and empowered to pay reasonable compensation for
services rendered in the standard manner in which expenditures are
approved and paid. [Ord. No. 1984-71]
G. Legislative or political activities. No substantial part of the activities of
the organization shall be the carrying on of propaganda or otherwise
attempting to influence legislation and the organization shall not
participate in or intervene in (including the publishing or distribution of
statements) any political campaign on behalf of any candidate for public
office. [Ord. No. 1984-71]
H. Operational limitations. Notwithstanding any other provisions of these
articles, the Committee shall not carry on any other activities not
permitted to be carried on:
§ 2-346 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-346
1:57
§ 2-347. [Ch. 2, Sec. 72] Citizen's Beautification Committee.
(1) By an organization exempt from Federal Income Tax under Section
501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Act of 1954 (or the corresponding
provision of any future United States Internal Revenue Law); or
(2) By an organization, contributions to which are deductible under
Section 170(c)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 (or the
corresponding provision of any future a United States Internal
Revenue Law). [Ord. No. 1984-71]
I. Dissolution clause. Upon the dissolution of the Committee, the officers
shall, after paying or making provisions for the payment of all of the
liabilities of the organization, dispose of all the assets of the
organization exclusively for the purposes of the organization in such
manner, or to such organization or organizations organized and
operated exclusively for charitable, educational, religious or scientific
purposes, including the lessening of the burdens of government, as
shall at the time qualify as an exempt organization or organizations
under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 (or the
corresponding provision of any future United States Internal Revenue
Law), as the Committee shall determine. Any such assets not so
disposed of shall be disposed of by the Circuit Court of the County in
which the principal office of the Committee is then located, exclusively
for such purposes or to such organization or organizations, as said
Court shall determine, which are organized and operated exclusively
for such purposes. [Ord. No. 1984-71]
A. Membership. The Committee shall consist of 12 persons to be
appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the City Council. Effective
May 1, 2014, a person appointed to the Committee shall serve a term of
three years. This term may be extended after the three years for no
more than two additional three-year terms. Members of the Committee
shall serve no more than three consecutive three-year terms (a total of
nine years). Reappointment shall be at the discretion of the Mayor. The
members of the Committee shall elect the Chairman and Vice-Chairman
on an annual basis. All terms shall expire April 30th. [Ord. No.
2014-09]
B. Meetings. The Committee shall meet on a regular basis on a schedule to
be determined by the members but not less than once per month. A
regular place of meeting shall be established by the Committee
members. The Chairman shall provide all members with a written
agenda or notice of cancellation of these meetings not less than five
days in advance of the meeting. All meetings shall be open to the public.
C. Duties and functions. The Committee shall have as its duties and
functions:
(1) To recommend to the City Council all programs of any description
or variety calculated to enhance the appearance of the City of
§ 2-346 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 2-347
1:58
§ 2-348. [Ch. 2, Sec. 73] Handicapped Accessibility Advisory
Committee.
§ 2-349. [Ch. 2, Sec. 75] Technology Commission.
Bloomington, including but not limited to recommendations for
priorities of City action, and changes in both the Bloomington City
or other ordinances adopted by the City Council;
(2) To work with appropriate City personnel to establish means to elicit
volunteer participation in beautification projects;
(3) To elicit citizen cooperation in carrying out beautification projects
whether on a City wide or localized scale which involve landscaping
on public or private property;
(4) To serve as an advisory body to the City Council and the City
Manager and other City officials in developing plans for projects
involving City beautification;
(5) To request, receive and utilize staff assistance from the City
Administration to enable the Committee to carry out its
responsibilities;
(6) To request, receive and utilize City funds to carry out its
responsibilities if:
(a) Such requests are submitted in writing to the City Manager;
and
(b) Such requests are approved by the City Council; and
(c) Such requests are included in the City's annual budget and
appropriation ordinance, and supplement thereto;
(7) To receive gifts and donations of any variety from other public or
private groups or individuals, which gifts or donations would assist
the Committee in carrying out its duties and functions. [Ord. No.
1973-32]
A. There is hereby established a Handicapped Accessibility Advisory
Committee. Said Committee shall consist of five persons appointed by
the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council. The
Committee shall meet quarterly and may also meet at the call of the
City Manager or his representative.
B. The Committee shall provide the City, its officers and agents its advice
regarding ways to enhance the accessibility and availability of present
and future City services, facilities and improvements to persons
suffering from physical handicaps or impairment of functions. [Ord.
No. 1984-100]
§ 2-347 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-349
1:59
A. Purpose and creation. There is hereby established a Technology
Commission to assist, inform and advise the administrative and elected
officials of the City on technology matters, including: (1) the City's
internal use of technology; and (2) the use of and incorporation of
technology as it relates to the City as a whole.
B. Membership and meetings. The following shall apply regarding the
membership and meetings of the Commission:
(1) The Commission shall consist of seven members, appointed by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of City Council. The
appointments to the Commission should have a demonstrated
interest, knowledge, or experience in technology matters.
(2) The Commission shall establish an annual meeting schedule, which
shall include at least one meeting per month to be held at a regular
time and place. All meetings shall be open to the public and must
comply with the Illinois Open Meetings Act. All meetings shall
provide opportunity for public comment pursuant to local
ordinances. Meeting minutes shall be prepared and maintained in
accordance with local and state law.
(3) A Chairman and vice Chairman of the Commission shall be selected
to preside over meetings in accordance with the procedure set
forth for the City's boards and commissions.
(4) Items shall be placed on the Commission agenda by the Chairman
of the Commission, the City Manager or his/her designee,
Information Services Director, or the Mayor. City Council members
may also request items be referred to the Commission by utilizing
the agenda request process, which shall include formal approval of
referral by the City Council.
C. Preliminary reviews. The City Manager or City Council may require any
matter that significantly impacts the technological operations of the
City, whether internally or externally, to first go to the Technology
Commission for consideration and review. All such reviews and
recommendations shall be non-binding. After consideration by the
Technology Commission, the technology matter to either the City
Manager or City Council, whichever is applicable, for final
consideration, evaluation, and approval. If the matter involves another
City commission, it shall be forwarded to said commission prior to being
sent to the City Manager or City Council for final approval.
D. Powers and duties. In addition to the reviews set forth in Subsection C,
the Technology Commission shall also have the general authority to:
(1) Make recommendations to ensure the City remains a leader in
technology and innovation, including recommendations to improve
the use of technology internally within the City, for those doing
business with the City, and the citizens of the City;
§ 2-349 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 2-349
1:60
§ 2-350. [Ch. 2, Sec. 80] Citizen boards and commissions - recall of
officers.
(2) Review and make recommendations on the technological
component of master plans involving the City, including developing
a technology master plan for the City and keeping the plan current;
(3) Receive feedback having to do with technology matters and make
recommendations on same;
(4) Conduct public hearings on proposed policies and plans when
considered necessary by the Commission, the City Council, or as
required by City, State, or Federal law or regulation, except where
a hearing on the same subject is planned or required to be
conducted by another body and where the Board finds that said
hearing will be an unnecessary duplication; and
(5) To review, suggest, and coordinate policies, programs, outreach,
and strategies for technology.
E. Assistance and cooperation from City officers. City staff shall work with
and assist the Commission as follows:
(1) In the conduct of the work of the Technology Commission, it is
anticipated that certain City employees will be required to advise
and otherwise support the activities of the Commission in carrying
out the obligations as provided herein. To that end, the City
Manager may designate staff to provide technical support and
recommendations to the Commission. Based on the subject matter
of the issue before the Technology Commission, the City Manager
shall designate representatives from the appropriate City
departments. In addition, the City's Information Services Director,
or his/her designee, shall serve as the staff liaison to the
Commission and be responsible for OMA compliance.
(2) City staff, as designated by the City Manager, shall be entitled to
attend and participate in all Commission meetings. In addition,
designated City staff shall provide recommendations to the
Commission on the matters before it and shall be entitled to make
recommendations separate and apart from the Commission to the
City Manager and City Council on final action items.
(3) City staff designated by the City Manager shall assist and
cooperate with the Technology Commission and, upon request of
the Commission, shall furnish information and advice on subject
matters as the Commission may reasonably require in order to
fulfill its functions as set forth herein. The City shall provide
clerical services to the Commission where possible. [Ord. No.
2019-05]
A. Definition. Cause for recall or termination as provided for in this section
shall include but shall not be limited to the following:
§ 2-349 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-350
1:61
§ 2-351. [Ch. 2, Sec. 81] Cultural Commission.
(1) Unexcused absence from two consecutive regular meetings or from
three meetings in any twelve-month period, or excessive absences
from meetings;
(2) Frequent unexcused tardiness in attending regular meetings;
(3) Conduct unbecoming to a person holding a position of
responsibility for the City of Bloomington;
(4) Election or appointment to another similar political Board,
Commission or political office by any other municipal corporation
or governmental entity;
(5) A judicial finding of incompetency;
(6) Conviction of a felony. [Ord. No. 1977-10]
B. Recall. Unless law or ordinance specifically provides to the contrary, the
term of any appointed member of any Board, Commission or Committee
of the City of Bloomington may be terminated prior to the end of the
stated term for cause in the following manner:
Pursuant to the vote of not less than 2/3 of the City Council, after the
filing of a written complaint, and only after a hearing, either public or
private, has been held wherein said member was given an opportunity
to be heard individually or by counsel or both, said hearing to be
held only after notice of the time and place thereof and of the alleged
cause for said termination has been given to said member. [Ord. No.
1980-18]
A. Membership. The Cultural Commission shall consist of up to 11 persons
to be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the City Council.
Effective May 1, 2014, a person appointed to the Commission shall
serve a term of three years. This term may be extended after the three
years for no more than two additional three-year terms. Members of the
Commission shall serve no more than three consecutive three-year
terms (a total of nine years). All terms shall expire on April 30th.
Reappointment shall be by the Mayor with the consent of the City
Council. The members of the Commission shall elect a Chairman and a
Vice-Chairman on an annual basis. [Ord. No. 2018-42]
B. Meetings. The Commission shall meet on a regular basis on a schedule
to be established by the members, but not less than once per month. A
regular place of meeting shall be established by the Commission. All
meetings shall be open to the public, unless grounds exist for a closed
meeting pursuant to the Illinois Open Meetings Act. [Ord. No.
2018-42]
C. Duties and functions. The Commission shall have as its duties and
functions:
§ 2-350 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 2-351
1:62
§ 2-352. [Ch. 2, Sec. 82] Foreign Fire Insurance Board.
(1) To serve as an advisory body to the City Council, the City Manager
and other City officials in creating, developing plans for, and
supporting Cultural District(s).
(2) To recommend to the City Council, the City Manager and other City
officials cultural programs of any description or variety calculated
to enhance the viability of Cultural District(s) and the community.
(3) To work with appropriate City personnel to establish means to elicit
public participation in and support of Cultural District(s), other
cultural programs, and helping to fully integrate the arts, in all
their diversity, into the fabric of civic life.
(4) To request, receive and utilize, staff assistance from the City
administration to enable the Commission to carry out its
responsibilities. [Ord. No. 2018-42]
A. There is hereby established a Foreign Fire Insurance Board.
B. Definitions:
BOARD — The Foreign Fire Insurance Board.
DEPARTMENT — Bloomington Fire Department.
FUND — Foreign Fire Insurance Tax Fund.
MEMBERS OF THE DEPARTMENT — Any person currently employed
full-time in the Bloomington Fire Department who was initially hired as
a firefighter by the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners of the City
of Bloomington, or otherwise appointed as Chief of the Department by
the City Manager.[Ord. No. 2003-122]
C. Election of members:
(1) The Foreign Fire Insurance Board shall consist of five members.
(a) One member of the Board shall be the Chief of the Department.
[Ord. No. 2010-28]
(b) The other six members shall be elected by secret ballot from
members of the Department. [Ord. No. 2010-28]
(c) If there are an insufficient number of candidates to fill all of
these positions, the number of board members may be reduces
to no fewer than three members. [Ord. No. 2010-28]
(2) Members shall be elected annually by the members of the
Department the first week of December. [Ord. No. 2010-28]
D. The Foreign Fire Insurance Board may provide by-laws governing the
operation of the Board. [Ord. No. 2010-28]
§ 2-351 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-352
1:63
E. The Foreign Fire Insurance Board shall comply with the Illinois Open
Meetings Act (5 ILCS 120). [Ord. No. 2010-28]
F. The Foreign Fire Insurance Board shall comply with Article 11, Division
10 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/Art. 11, Division 10). [Ord.
No. 2010-28]
§ 2-352 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 2-352
1:64
ARTICLE IV
Remote Participation In Meetings
§ 2-401. [Ch. 2, Sec. 83] Definition of meeting. [Ord. No. 2008-4]
The term "meeting" as applied to any City of Bloomington public body as
defined in the Illinois Open Meetings Act shall be defined to mean "Any
gathering, whether in person or by video or audio conference, telephone
calls, electronic means (such as, without limitation, electronic mail,
electronic chat and instant messaging), or other means of contemporary
interactive communication, of a majority of a quorum of the members of
a public body held for the purpose of discussing public business" or such
other definition as shall be contained within the Illinois Open Meetings Act
as amended from time to time.
§ 2-402. [Ch. 2, Sec. 84] Remote participation policy.
Any member of a City of Bloomington public body may attend and
participate in any meeting of such public body as defined in the Open
Meetings Act from a remote location via telephone, video or internet
connection provided that such attendance and participation is in
compliance with the Remote Participation Policy set forth in this Division
and any applicable laws.
A. Policy statement. It is the policy of the City of Bloomington that a
member of any group associated with this unit of government which is
subject to the provisions of the Open Meetings Act (Covered Group)
may attend and participate in any open or closed meeting of that
Covered Group from a remote location via telephone, video or internet
connection, provided that such attendance and participation is in
compliance with this policy and any other applicable laws.
B. Prerequisites. A member of the Covered Group of the City of
Bloomington shall be provided the opportunity to attend an open and
closed meeting or only one of such meetings from a remote location if
the member meets the following conditions and a majority of the
members present of the Covered Body votes to approve the remote
attendance.
(1) The member must notify the recording secretary or Clerk of the
Covered Body at least 24 hours before the meeting unless advance
notice is impractical.
(2) The member must assert one of three reasons described herein
why he or she is unable to physically attend the meeting, including
either:
(a) That the member cannot attend because of personal illness or
disability;
(b) The member cannot attend because of employment purposes
or the business of the City of Bloomington; or
§ 2-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-402
1:65
(c) The member cannot attend because of a family or other
emergency; and
(3) A quorum of the Covered Body must be physically present.
C. Voting procedures. After roll call, a vote for the Covered Body shall be
taken, considering the prerequisites set forth in Subsection B(2) above,
on whether to allow an off-site board member to participate remotely.
All of the members physically present are permitted to vote on whether
remote participation will be allowed. A vote may be taken to permit
remote participation for a stated series of meetings if the same reason
applies to each case. Otherwise, a vote must be taken to allow each
remote participation.
D. Quorum and vote required. A quorum must be established by members
physically present at any meeting before it can be considered whether
to allow a member to participate in the meeting remotely. A vote of a
majority of the members present shall be necessary to decide the issue.
For the meeting to continue, there shall always need to be a quorum
physically present.
E. Minutes. The member participating remotely shall be considered an offsite
participant and counted as present by means of video or audio
conference for that meeting if the member is allowed to participate. The
meeting minutes of the City of Bloomington shall also reflect and state
specifically whether each member is physically present, present by
video, or present by audio means.
F. Rights of remote member. The member permitted to participate
remotely will be able to express his or her comments during the
meeting and participate in the same capacity as those members
physically present, subject to all general meeting guidelines and
procedures previously adopted and adhered to. The remote member
shall be heard, considered, and counted as to any vote taken.
Accordingly, the name of any remote member shall be called during any
vote taken, and his or her vote counted and recorded by the Secretary
and placed in the minutes for the corresponding meeting. A member
participating remotely may leave a meeting and return as in the case of
any member, provided the member attending electronically shall
announce his or her leaving and returning.
G. Closed meetings. A quorum of the City of Bloomington's members must
be physically present at any closed meeting. Members participating
remotely shall otherwise be entitled to participate in closed meetings
by video or audio conference as provided above.
H. Costs. A member participating remotely via telephone shall be
reimbursed for the cost of the telephone call upon a valid receipt
shown. Any other costs associated with remote participation, including
video conferencing and other audio and video equipment, must be
approved by the City of Bloomington. [Ord. No. 2008-4]
§ 2-402 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 2-402
1:66
ARTICLE V
Public Comments During Board and Commission Meetings
§ 2-501. [Ch. 2, Sec. 85] Public comment.
A. A public comment period not to exceed 30 minutes will be held during
each Board and Commission meeting, as well as all regularly scheduled
City Council meetings, Committee of the Whole meetings, meetings of
committees and/or task forces (hereinafter "committees") created by
the City Council, work sessions, and special meetings of the City
Council. Nothing herein shall prohibit the combination of meetings, at
which only one public comment period will be allowed. [Ord. No.
2015-46]
B. Anyone desiring to address the Board, Commission, Committee or City
Council, as applicable, must complete a public comment card at least
five minutes before the start time of the meeting. Public comment cards
shall be made available at the location of the meeting by City staff at
least 15 minutes prior to the start time of the meeting. The person must
include their name, and any other desired contact information,
although said person shall not be required to publicly state their
address information. If more than five individuals desire to make a
public comment, the order of speakers shall be by random draw. If an
individual is not able to speak due to the time limitation and said
individual still desires to address the individuals at a future meeting of
the same type, said individual shall be entitled to speak first at the next
meeting of the same type. [Ord. No. 2015-46]
C. The public comment portion of the meeting shall be placed on the
agenda for regular City Council meetings, as well as any rescheduled
meeting of the City Council, after roll call and prior to appointment
recognition and/or the consent agenda. For any other special City
Council meeting or meeting of any other Board, Committee or
Commission of the City, public comment shall be listed on the agenda
after Appointment Recognition and before approval of the Consent
Agenda. Nothing within this section shall limit the ability of the City
Council, by majority vote, to change the placement of public comment
during a meeting. [Ord. No. 2016-25]
D. Comments are limited to three minutes per speaker. A speaker can not
give his or her allotted minutes to another speaker to increase that
person's allotted time. Individuals providing public comment shall do so
from the designated podium and the use of City equipment, beyond the
podium and microphone, during public comment is prohibited. [Ord.
No. 2017-98]
E. Speakers will be acknowledged by the Chair and shall address the
Board, Commission, Committee or City Council, as applicable, from the
designated area in the meeting location and not approach the Board,
Commission, City Council or City staff. Speakers will begin their
§ 2-501 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-501
1:67
statement by first stating their name for the record. [Ord. No.
2015-46]
F. Public comment is not intended to require Board, Commission,
Committee or City Council members to provide any answer to the
speaker. Discussions between speakers and members of the audience
will not be allowed. [Ord. No. 2015-46]
G. Speakers will be well-mannered in their language and presentation.
Any person who engages in threatening or disorderly behavior when
addressing a Board, Commission or the City Council shall be deemed
out-of-order by the presiding officer and their time ceased to address
the Board, Commission, or City Council at said meeting. [Ord. No.
2014-82]
H. After the speaker has made his or her statement, he or she shall be
seated with no further debate, dialogue or comment.
I. In addition to speaking at a meeting of the City Council, written
comments may also be submitted to the City Council by filing same with
the City Clerk at least 24 hours prior to the start time of the meeting.
Said written comments shall be copied and distributed to each member
of the City Council by the City Clerk prior to the start of the meeting
and made part of the official record of the meeting. Outside of written
comments directed for a specific meeting, written comments may
otherwise be shared with the City Council at any time by sending e-mail
correspondence to the individual Council members at the email
addresses listed on the City's website. Those without e-mail capability
may submit written comments to the City Clerk's office which
comments will be provided to the City Council as a whole or individual
Council member, as directed. Any written comments provided to the
City Council as a whole will be made part of the public record. The City
Clerk may establish written rules to govern the written comment
process and recording of same, which may include the creation of a
special email address for the submission of said comments and a public
disclaimer that said comments shall be part of the official record.
Nothing herein shall require the City Clerk to copy documents or
records and provide them to City Council, only the written comments of
an individual. [Ord. No. 2017-98]
§ 2-501 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 2-501
1:68
ARTICLE VI
City Elected Officials Expenses and Reimbursements
§ 2-601. [Ch. 2, Sec. 86] City officials expense and reimbursement
procedures.
A. Purpose. The City Elected Official Expense and Reimbursement
Procedures, as outlined in this § 2-601, are hereby created to provide
guidelines for the appropriate use of, and accountability for, the
expenditure of City taxpayer dollars while conducting official business
on behalf of the City of Bloomington. These procedures encourage
effective administration and provide internal controls over
reimbursements of business expenses by City Elected Officials. It is the
policy of the City to reimburse City Elected Officials for reasonable and
necessary expenses incurred while engaging in authorized official City
business.
B. Applicability. These procedures are applicable to the City's Elected
Officials of the City of Bloomington.
C. Oversight. The City Manager and Finance Director are responsible for
enforcing the City Elected Official Expense and Reimbursement
Procedures, including:
(1) Requiring the establishment and maintenance of records
accounting for funds reimbursed;
(2) Establishing appropriate forms for expense reimbursement
requests, including the Elected Official Travel Pre-Approval Form,
Meal Reimbursement Request Form, and General Reimbursement
Request Form;
(3) Performing periodic audits of expense reimbursements; and
(4) Making final determinations as to whether an expense is subject to
reimbursement.
D. Allowable expenses subject to City reimbursement.
(1) An allowable expense is defined as "an activity that will serve as a
benefit to the City as a body, and at the same time is directly related
to the functions of government." Expenses must be for legitimate
City governance purposes. Expenses that are not approved or are
inadequately documented will not be reimbursed. If the expense
involves airline travel and/or a hotel stay, the City's Elected Official
Travel Pre-Approval Form must be completed and approved by the
City Manager prior to the event and such travel is subject to the
City's general Travel Policy.
(2) As long as the other requirements of this § 2-601 are met, all forms
as may be prescribed are completed, any necessary pre-approvals
are granted, and the City has budgeted for the expense, the
§ 2-601 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-601
1:69
following shall be allowable expenses subject to reimbursement by
the City:
(a) Hotel stays. Hotel stays, when attending, in the capacity of a
City elected official, a meeting, seminar or conference, at a
location no closer than 90 miles from City Hall. The City
Manager shall have the discretion to waive the 90 miles
restriction in cases of emergency or extenuating
circumstances related to the timing of the meeting and/or
travel conditions.
(b) Meals. The following meals may be reimbursed: (1) meals
associated with City business when the business meal is with
one or more representatives of another local, state or national
government agency, who is meeting in their official capacity for
that unit of government, to discuss a policy position of the City
that involves the other local, state or national government
agency; (2) meals associated with City business when the
business meal is with a developer, business owner, or
representative of a community organization where the primary
purpose is to discuss a City initiative or proposal involving the
City and the other party to the meal; and (3) meals while
attending, in the official capacity of a City elected official, a
conference, seminar or meeting located outside of
Bloomington-Normal. Gratuities are limited to a maximum of
20% of the total bill. Unless other criteria are met, meals with
other City Elected Officials to discuss City business shall not be
subject to reimbursement. The meals of those dining with the
elected official shall not be subject to reimbursement by the
City.
(c) Mileage. Mileage will be reimbursed for elected officials
attending, in their capacity of a City elected official, offsite
training, seminars, meetings, or other official City business as
authorized at the IRS mileage reimbursement rate. However,
no reimbursement shall be provided for attendance at City
meetings, including City Council, Committee-of-the-Whole,
Plan Commission/ZEA, and other official meetings of the City.
(d) Parking. Parking will be reimbursed for elected officials
attending offsite training, seminars, meetings or other official
City business as authorized, provided original receipts are
submitted. However, no reimbursement shall be provided for
attendance at City meetings, including City Council,
Committee-of-the-Whole, Plan Commission/ZEA, and other
official meetings of the City that are located at City Hall.
(e) General transportation costs. Transportation and tolls will be
reimbursed for elected officials attending offsite training,
seminars, meetings, or other official City business as
authorized, provided receipts, cancelled tickets, ticket stubs,
§ 2-601 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 2-601
1:70
or other proof of the incurred expense are submitted.
Transportation may include, but is not limited: public
transportation, ride sharing services and taxi cabs. However,
no reimbursement shall be provided for attendance at City
meetings, including City Council, Committee-of-the-Whole,
Plan Commission/ZEA, and other official meetings of the City.
(f) Materials. Educational materials, including books and training
materials, related to official capacity of the City elected official,
up to $100 per year.
(g) Seminar costs. Registration fees associated with attending
conferences and seminars related to the roles and functions of
the elected official and/or the City.
(h) Community luncheons. Registration and/or fees associated
with attending luncheons or dinners sponsored by community,
business and/or economic development groups, where the City
elected official attends as a representative of the City.
(3) The reimbursement of any expenditures of a type other than those
described above require approval of the City Council.
E. Prohibited expenditure reimbursements. The following shall be
considered expenditures that are prohibited from being reimbursed:
(1) Political contributions;
(2) Personal (non-City business) meals, travel or entertainment;
(3) Personal items or gifts unless given in an official capacity and as
approved by the City Manager;
(4) Alcoholic beverages (except for special events where that cost is
included in the ticket price);
(5) Home expenses, including home telephone or internet services;
(6) Traffic citations, parking fines or penalties;
(7) Refreshments/supplies for non-business related special events;
(8) Golf outings where the registration fee is designed to raise money
for a not-for-profit organization;
(9) Family expenses, including partner's expenses, when
accompanying the City elected official on City-related business,
unless said person is likewise acting in an official capacity on behalf
of the City at the request of the City and as approved by the City
Manager or City Council; and
(10) Unsubstantiated expenses.
§ 2-601 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-601
1:71
F. Expense reimbursement procedures. As soon as possible, but at all
times, no later than 45 days following the conclusion of the event, or the
incurring of the expense, the City Elected Official must submit to the
Finance Director, an Expense Report form detailing the expenses
incurred. The request shall be on a form prescribed by the Finance
Department and must include, at a minimum, the following information:
(1) Proof of payment.
(2) If the expense is for travel, including specifically for any hotel stay
and/or airfare, an approved travel expense report must accompany
the submission, along with the appropriate receipt information.
(3) For meals, a full receipt (including itemized details of what was
ordered), the names of those in attendance, including their title and
interest, and the business purpose of the meal.
(4) For all other expenses, receipts must be submitted, with a detailed
description of the business purpose for the expense.
(5) The City Manager and Finance Director must sign off on all
Expense Reimbursement requests prior to the reimbursement
being made.
G. City issued credit cards. No City Elected Official shall be given or have
access to a City issued credit card (a/k/a P-Card). However, nothing
herein shall prohibit an elected official from requesting that the City
Manager, or his or her designee, place a purchase on a City P-Card and
such may be done so long as it an allowable expense and any necessary
pre-approval forms have been completed and approved if the purchase
is for a hotel or airfare.
H. City catered meals. From time-to-time, the City will host a meal or
provide food as part of a City meeting with community leaders, business
leaders, developers or staff. Nothing herein shall prohibit a City elected
official from participating in such a meal or meeting. The City shall not,
however, provide food prior to or during City Council meetings without
a separately related purpose or limited situations where the food is
provided as part of the meeting.
I. Procedure and reimbursement questions. Any question from an elected
official, the City Manager or Finance Director related to the procedures
outlined in this § 2-601 or a reimbursement shall be submitted in
writing to the Corporation Counsel. Within seven days of submission of
the question, the Corporation Counsel shall submit a written response
to the question with a copy to the City Manager, Finance Director and
City Council. [Ord. No. 2017-97]
§ 2-601 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 2-601
1:72
Chapter 3
ADVERTISING SIGN CODE
§ 2-601 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-601
1:73

ARTICLE I
Purpose of Code
§ 3-101. [Ch. 3, Sec. 1.1] Title. [Ord. No. 1979-12]
This Code shall be known as the "Advertising Sign Code" of the City of
Bloomington, Illinois, and may be so cited and pleaded and shall be referred
to herein as the Code.
§ 3-102. [Ch. 3, Sec. 1.2] Findings and statement of purpose.
A. The Advertising Sign Code regulates all varieties of signs, as defined
within the City of Bloomington. The City Council in adopting this Code,
finds:
(1) That signs should be regulated in order to protect public
investment, to promote the recreational value of public travel, to
preserve natural beauty and to promote the reasonable orderly and
effective display of signs; that the use and display of signs in a
legitimate use of private property and is an integral part of the
business and marketing functions of local economy and serves to
promote and protect private investments in commerce and industry
and that the regulatory standards set forth in this Code are
consistent with customary use in this City and will properly carry
out the purposes of this Code, more severe restrictions being
inconsistent with customary use and ineffective to accomplish the
purposes of this Code;
(2) Signs visible from motor vehicles being driven upon streets in the
City have a visual impact upon the drivers of those vehicles;
(3) Easily read and well located signs can materially assist motorists
and others in getting to their desired destination safely and
efficiently;
(4) Signs which are unregulated as to size, location and appearance
can distract motorists, interfere with early identification of traffic
control devices, and hinder the smooth and safe movement of
traffic;
(5) Lack of regulation of size, location and appearance of signs can
cause escalation in the size of signs erected by competing
businesses.
B. This Code authorizes the use of signs visible from public right-of-way
provided the signs are:
(1) Compatible with permitted, special, or accessory uses allowed in
the district and surrounding land;
(2) Designed, constructed, installed and maintained in such a manner
that they do not endanger public safety or traffic safety;
§ 3-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-102
1:75
(3) Legible, readable and visible in the circumstances in which they
are used;
(4) Not violative of the reasonable rights of other advertisers whose
messages are displayed. [Ord. No. 1989-30]
§ 3-102 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 3-102
1:76
ARTICLE II
Rules and Definitions
§ 3-201. [Ch. 3, Sec. 2.1] Rules of construction.
The language set forth in the text of this Code shall be interpreted in
accordance with the following rules and definitions:
§ 3-202. [Ch. 3, Sec. 2.2] Definitions.
ABANDONED SIGNS — A sign which no longer correctly directs or exhorts
any person, advertises a bona fide existing business, lessor, owner, product
or activity product or product available.
ACCESSORY SIGN — (See "On-Premise Sign").
ADMINISTRATOR — The Director of Community Development or his
designated representative.[Ord. No. 2017-96]
ADVERTISING MESSAGE — That copy on a sign describing products or
services being offered to the public or to one or more limited segments
thereof.
ANIMATED SIGN — A sign employing actual motion or the illusion of
motion. For purposes of this Code, this term does not refer to flashing,
changing or indexing, all of which are separately defined.[Ord. No.
1998-95]
APPROVED COMBUSTIBLE PLASTIC — A plastic material more than 1/20
inches in thickness which burns at a rate of not more than 2 1/2 inches
A. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular;
B. The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future
tense includes the present;
C. The word "shall" is mandatory, while the word "may" is permissive;
D. Terms connoting a particular gender shall include each and every
gender;
E. Whenever a word or term defined hereinafter appears in the text of this
Code, its meaning shall be construed as set forth in the definition
hereof; and any word appearing in parenthesis between a word and its
definition shall be construed in the same sense as that word;
F. All measured distances shall be to the nearest integral foot; if a fraction
is 1/2 foot or more, the integral foot next above shall be taken;
G. All words and terms not defined herein shall be construed in their
generally accepted meanings; and
H. All provisions of this Code imposing duties upon the City, its officers or
agents are directory, unless the context clearly requires the provision to
be construed as mandatory. [Ord. No. 1988-33]
§ 3-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-202
1:77
per minute when subjected to the ASTM standard test for flammability of
plastics in sheets of 0.06 inch thickness.
ARCHITECTURAL BLADE — A roof, wall, fascia or projecting sign with no
visible legs or braces - designed to look as though it could have been part of
the building structure, rather than something suspended from or standing
on the building.
ARCHITECTURAL PROJECTIONS — Any projection from a building that
is not intended for occupancy and that extends beyond the face of an
exterior wall of a building but that does not include signs as defined herein.
Examples of architectural projections may include but not limited to:
Awning, back-lit awning, mansard, soffit and canopy, attached and
freestanding.[Ord. No. 1998-95]
AREA OF OFF-PREMISE SIGN — See Area of Sign.
AREA OF SIGN — Copy area including borders which for all intent are to be
made visible to the public.
AUTOMATIC CHANGING SIGN or ELECTRONIC MESSAGE SIGN or
CENTER — An electronically activated changeable sign whose variable
message capability can be electronically programmed.[Ord. No. 1998-95]
AWNING — An awning is a roof-like cover which projects from the wall of a
building and overhangs into a yard or a public or private street.
B.O.C.A. — Building Officials and Code Administrators International,
Incorporated.
BACKGROUND AREA — The entire area of a sign on which copy could be
placed, as opposed to the "copy area," when referred to in connection with
facia or wall signs.
BANNER SIGN — A temporary sign composed of light weight material
either enclosed or not enclosed in a rigid frame, secured or mounted so as
to allow movement of the sign caused by movement of the atmosphere.
BILLBOARD — See "Off-Premise Sign," "Off-Site Sign," or "Outdoor
Advertising (Posters and Bulletins)."
BUILDING FACE, FACADE OR WALL — All windows and wall area of a
building in one plane or elevation.[Ord. No. 1998-95]
BUILDING FRONTAGE — The linear length of a building facing the right-ofway
or public place.
BUILDING SIGN — A sign lettered to give the name of a building itself, as
opposed to the name of occupants or services.
BULLETIN — See "Off-Premise Signs," "Off-Site Signs," or "Outdoor
Advertising."
CANDIDATE — Candidate means any individual actively seeking elected
political office, regardless of whether his name appears on the ballot.
§ 3-202 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 3-202
1:78
CANOPY (MARQUEE) — A permanent roof-like shelter extending, from part
or all of a building face over a yard, public street or private street and
constructed of some durable material such as metal, glass, or plastic.
CANOPY OR MARQUEE SIGN — Any sign attached to or hung from a
marquee or canopy or other covered structure projecting from and
supported by a building and extending beyond the building wall, building
line or public right-of-way line.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN, MANUAL — A sign on which copy is changed
manually in the field, i.e. reader boards with changeable pictorial panels.
CHANGING SIGN, AUTOMATIC — A sign such as an electronically or
electrically controlled public service time, temperature, and date sign,
message center or reader board where different copy changes are shown on
the same lamp bank.
CITY — City of Bloomington, Illinois.
CITY CLERK — The City Clerk of the City of Bloomington, Illinois.
CITY ENGINEER — The City Engineer of the City of Bloomington, Illinois,
or his duly authorized representative.
CITY MANAGER — The City Manager of the City of Bloomington, Illinois.
CLOSED SIGN — A display sign in which the entire area is solid or tightly
enclosed or covered.
COMPATIBLE USE — A land use which is capable of direct association with
certain other uses because it is complementary, congruous, or otherwise not
detrimental. Permitted, special and accessory uses listed in the Zoning Code
for a specific district are considered compatible uses in said district.
COMPREHENSIVE DESIGN — Building design and signs integrated into
one architectural plan, the comprehensive design being complete in all
other building, structural and electrical requirements.
COPY AREA — The area in square feet of the smallest geometric figure
which describes the area enclosed by the actual copy of a sign. For facia or
wall signs, the copy area limits refer to the message, not to the illuminated
background, the entire area within a single continuous perimeter composed
of squares or rectangles which enclose the extreme limits of the advertising
message, announcement or decoration.
COPY, PERMANENT AND TEMPORARY — The wording of a sign surface
either in permanent or removal letter form.
COUNCIL — The City Council of the City of Bloomington, Illinois.
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS — The Department of Public Works for
the City of Bloomington, Illinois.[Ord. No. 2018-93]
DETACHED SIGN — See "Ground Sign."
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — Any sign which serves solely to designate the
location or direction of any place or area. It is of the general type provided
for in the Illinois Motor Vehicle Code.
§ 3-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-202
1:79
DIRECTLY ILLUMINATED SIGN — Any sign designed to provide artificial
light either through exposed lighting on the sign face or through
transparent or translucent material from a light source within the sign.
DOUBLE FACED SIGN — A sign with two faces, back to back.[Ord. No.
1998-95]
ELECTION — Election means the submission of all questions of public
policy, propositions, and all measures submitted to popular vote, and
includes primary elections.
ELECTION SIGN — Any sign indicating support of, or opposition to, any
issue or candidate in any regular, general or special election.
ELECTRICAL SIGN — Any sign containing electrical wiring which is
attached or intended to be attached to an electrical energy source.
EMBELLISHMENT —
ERECTED — This term shall mean attached, altered, built, constructed,
reconstructed, enlarged or moved, and shall include the painting of wall
signs, but does not include copy changes on any sign.
EXEMPT SIGNS — Sign exempted from normal permanent requirements.
FACE OF SIGN — The entire area of sign on which copy could be placed,
including borders.
FACELIFT — The remodeling of a building's frontage which is visible from
a public right-of-way so that the building material, door frames, window
frames, and signs are designed in harmony with each other.
FACIA SIGN (WALL SIGN) — A sign attached to, painted on, or erected
against a wall of a building with the face horizontally parallel to the building
wall and extending not more than 15 inches from the face of said building
wall.
FIELD FABRICATED SIGN — An electrical sign of such magnitude that it
cannot be completely constructed in the factory.
FLASHING SIGN — Any sign which contains an intermittent or flashing
light source, or which includes the illusion of intermittent or flashing light
by means of animation or an externally mounted intermittent light source.
Automatic changing signs such as public service time, temperature and date
signs or electronically controlled message centers are classed as "Changing
Signs" not "Flashing Signs."
FREESTANDING SIGNS — See "Ground Signs."
FREEWAY OR CONTROLLED ACCESS HIGHWAY — A highway in respect
to which the owners of abutting lands have no right or easement of access
Letters, figures, characters or representations in cutouts or irregular
forms, or similar ornaments attached to or superimposed upon the sign.
A.
Embellishment, decorative only. A purely decorative embellishment on
a freestanding sign.
B.
§ 3-202 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 3-202
1:80
to or from their abutting land, or in respect of which such owners have only
limited or restricted right or easement of access and which is declared to
be a freeway or controlled access highway as provided on the Major Streets
and Highway Plan for the City.
FREEWAY-ORIENTED SIGN (CONTROLLED ACCESS HIGHWAY SIGN) —
Any sign identifying premises where food, lodging, or places of business
are located that engage in supplying goods and services essential to normal
operation of motor vehicles, and where such businesses are directly
dependent upon the adjacent freeway for business.
FRONTAGE — The length of the property line of any one premise parallel to
and along each public right-of-way it borders.
GENERAL ELECTION — A regular election for the choice of a national,
state, judicial, district or county officer.
GROUND LEVEL — Street grade.
GROUND SIGN — A sign erected on a freestanding frame, mast or pole and
not attached to any building. A sign supported by uprights or braces in or
upon the ground surface.
HEIGHT OF SIGN — The vertical distance measured from the adjacent
street grade or upper surface of the nearest street curb other than an
elevated roadway which permits the greatest height to the highest point of
said sign.
HEREAFTER — After the time this Advertising Sign Code becomes effective.
HERETOFORE — Before the time this Advertising Sign Code becomes
effective.
IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A sign on the premises which is limited to
the name, address and number of a building, institution or person on the
premises, and to the activity carried on in the building or institution, or the
occupancy of the person provided that this type of sign is permitted only if
the use of the premises is legal both in substance and at that location.
ILLEGAL SIGN — See "Unlawful Sign" in this section.
ILLUMINATED SIGN — Any sign which emanates light either by means
of exposed tubing or lamps on its surface, or by means of illumination
transmitted through the sign faces.
INCIDENTAL SIGN — A sign pertaining to goods, products, services or
facilities which are available on the premises where the sign is located.
INDEXING — Turning and stopping action of the triangular vertical sections
of a multi-prism sign designed to show three messages in the same area.
INDIRECTLY ILLUMINATED SIGN — Any sign which reflects light from a
source intentionally directed upon it for example, by means of floodlights,
gooseneck reflectors or externally mounted fluorescent light fixtures.
§ 3-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-202
1:81
INDIVIDUAL LETTER SIGN — Any sign made of self-contained letters that
are mounted on the face of a building, top of parapet, roof edge of a building
or on top of or below a marquee.
INTERIOR PROPERTY LINE — Property lines other than those fronting on
a street, road or highway.
ISSUE — Any matter of public interest, question of public opinion,
proposition, or any other measure submitted to popular vote.
LINTEL — In this context, the line above the display windows and below
transom windows (if any) on a store (usually and approximately nine feet
from grade).
LOT — For the purpose of this Code, a lot is a parcel of land of at least
sufficient size to meet the minimum requirements for use, coverage, and
area, and to provide such yards and other open space as required by
Chapter 44 of the Bloomington City Code. Such lot shall have frontage on an
improved public street, or on an approved private street, and may consist
of:
MAINTAIN — To permit a sign, structure or any part or condition of any of
them to continue.
MARQUEE (CANOPY) — A permanent roof-like shelter extending from part
or all of the building face over a public right-of-way and constructed of some
durable material such as metal, glass or plastic.
MARQUEE SIGN (CANOPY SIGN) — Any sign attached to or hung from
a marquee or canopy or other covered structure projecting from and
supported by a building and extending beyond the building wall, building
line or public right-of-way line.
MESSAGE — The wording or copy on a sign.
MULTI-PRISM SIGN — Signs made with a series of triangular vertical
sections that turn and stop, or index, to show three pictures or messages in
the same area.
NAMEPLATE (OCCUPANT SIGN) — A non-electric sign identifying only
the name, location and home occupation or profession of the occupant of
the premises on which the sign is located, and it is permitted only if the
use of the premises is legal both in substance and at that location. If any
premises include more than one occupant, nameplate refers to all names
and occupations or professions as well as the name of the building and
directional information.
NEC — National Electrical Code.[Ord. No. 1998-95]
A. A single lot of record;
B. A portion of a lot of record;
C. A combination of complete lots of record, or of portions of lots of record;
D. A parcel of land described by metes and bounds.
§ 3-202 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 3-202
1:82
NEON — Electric discharge tubing manufactured into shapes that form
letters, parts of letter, skeleton tubing, outline lighting, other decorative
elements, or art forms and filled with various inert gases.[Ord. No.
1998-95]
NONCONFORMING SIGN, LEGAL — Any advertising structure or sign
which was lawfully erected and maintained prior to such time as it became
subject to this Code and any amendments thereto, and which at the time
it becomes subject to this Code and fails to conform to all applicable
regulations and restrictions of this Code, or a nonconforming sign for which
a special permit has been issued.
NONELECTRICAL SIGN — Any sign that does not contain electrical wiring
or is not attached or intended to be attached to an electrical energy source.
OFF-PREMISE SIGN (OFF-SITE SIGNS) — It is a sign that advertises goods,
products, services or facilities or directs persons to a different location from
where the sign is installed.
ON-PREMISE SIGN — Any sign identifying or advertising a business,
person, activity, goods, products or services located on the premises where
the sign is installed and maintained.
OPEN SIGN — A display sign in which at least 50% of the enclosed area is
uncovered, or open to the transmission of wind.
OWNER — A person recorded as such on official records and including
duly authorized agent or notary, a purchaser, devisee, judiciary; any person
having a vested or contingent interest in the property in question.
PARAPET OR PARAPET WALL — That portion of a building wall that rises
above the roof level.
PENTHOUSE — A structure on top of a building roof such as that which
houses an elevator shaft or similar form.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, association, firm, partnership or
other legal entity of any description, single or plural.
POLE SIGN — See "Ground Sign."
PORTABLE SIGN — Any sign (other than an election sign permitted by
§ 3-1105 of this Code, an exempt sign permitted by § 3-802 of this Code, a
banner permitted by § 3-605 of this Code, an "A" frame or sandwich board
sign or a swinging sign with a sign area of nine square feet or less, or a
sign displayed on or from an operational motor vehicle) not permanently
attached to the ground or a building. A portable electric sign does not cease
to be portable unless and until it is: (1) removed from any wheels, frames
or device which allow it to be transported; (2) anchored in the ground with
concrete footings; and (3) landscaped.
PREMISES — An area of land with its appurtenances and buildings which,
because of its unity of use, may be regarded as the smallest conveyable unit
of real estate.
§ 3-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-202
1:83
PROJECTING SIGN — A sign, other than a wall sign, which is attached to
the building wall and which extends more than 15 inches from the face of
the wall. The area of double-faced projecting signs are calculated on one
face of the sign only.
PUBLIC PLACE — Building frontage at least 30 feet wide which is
accessible unobstructed for the Fire Department.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY WIDTH — The perpendicular distance across a
public street measured from property line to property line. When property
lines on opposite sides of the public street are not parallel, the public rightof-
way width shall be determined by the City Engineer.
PUBLIC SERVICE INFORMATION SIGNS — Any sign intended primarily
to promote items of general interest to the community such as time,
temperature and date, atmospheric conditions, news or traffic control, etc.
REAL ESTATE OR PROPERTY FOR SALE, RENT OR LEASE SIGN — Any onpremise
sign pertaining to the sale, lease or rental of land or buildings.
REGULAR ELECTION — Regular election means an election, either general
or municipal, regularly occurring at fixed interval.
ROOF LINE — The top edge of the roof or the top of the parapet, whichever
forms the top line of the building silhouette.
ROOF SIGN — Any sign erected upon, against or directly above a roof or on
top of or above the parapet of a building.
ROTATING SIGN — Any sign or portion of a sign which moves in a revolving
or similar manner, but not including multi-prism indexing signs.
SEASONAL OR HOLIDAY SIGNS — Signs such as Christmas decorations,
those used for a historic holiday and installed for a limited period of time.
SIGN — Any identification, description, illustration or device illuminated
or non-illuminated and with or without printing or writing, which is visible
from any public place and which directs or is constructed to direct attention
to a business, product, service, place, activity, person, organization,
institution or solicitation, including any permanently installed or situated
merchandise, a symbol of merchandise, logo or display with the exception
of window displays; or any emblem, painting, banner, pennant, placard or
temporary sign designed to advertise, identify or convey information with
respect to any business, product, service, place, activity, person, institution
or solicitation, with the exception of national, state, county, municipal and
religious flags. The required removal of any sign shall be understood to
include all associated sign structures and sign support structures unless
exempted from the removal requirement.
SIGN AREA (AREA OF SIGN) — The area of the largest faces of the sign
with a perimeter which forms the outside shape including any frame, forms
an integral part of the display, but excluding the necessary supports or
uprights on which the sign may be placed. If the sign consists of more than
one section or module, all areas will be totaled and both faces of double
faced signs will be included in the sign area.[Ord. No. 1998-95]
§ 3-202 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 3-202
1:84
SIGN LEGEND — See "Copy."
SIGN STICKER — A sticker affixed either to the face or the channel of
a sign visible from the street denoting the name of the manufacturer or
designating the sign servicing company for purpose of identification by City
officials.
SIGN STRUCTURE — Any structure which supports, has supported or is
capable of supporting a sign including decorative cover.
SIGNABLE AREA — An area of the facade of the building up to the roof
line which is free of windows and doors or major architectural detail. It
is calculated by selecting a continuous facade, then drawing an imaginary
rectangle within specified height limitations and computing the square foot
area of this rectangle.
SPECIAL ELECTION — Special election means an election, either general
or municipal, not regularly recurring at fixed intervals, irrespective of
whether it is held at the same time and place and by the same election
officers as a regular election.
SPECIAL PURPOSE SIGN — Any sign other than a business, non-accessory
identification sign, including but not limited to traffic signs.
STREET, PRIVATE — A privately owned lane, road or street which affords
the means of access to adjacent lots.
STREET, PUBLIC — A public highway, road or thoroughfare which affords
the principal means of access to adjacent lots, measured from property line
to property line.
SWINGING SIGN — A sign installed on an arm or spar that is not, in
addition, permanently fastened to an adjacent wall or upright pole.
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign which is not permanently affixed and includes
all devices such as banners, pennants, flags (not including national, state,
county, municipal or religious flags), searchlights, twirling or sandwich type
signs, sidewalk or curb signs and balloons or other air or gas filled figures.
TEMPORARY WINDOW OR BUILDING SIGN — A sign painted on the
interior of a window or constructed of paper, cloth, or other like material
and attached to the interior side of a window or displayed on the exterior of
a building wall in order to direct attention of persons outside the building
to a sale of merchandise or a change in the status of the business.
TREASURER — The City Treasurer of the City of Bloomington, Illinois.
UNDER CANOPY OR MARQUEE SIGN — A sign suspended below the
ceiling or roof of a canopy or marquee.
UNDERWRITER'S LABORATORIES — A nonprofit organization which
establishes standards for electrical and mechanical equipment and
materials and is commonly referred to as "UL." Its electrical section is
known as "Underwriter's Laboratory 48."[Ord. No. 1989-30]
UNLAWFUL SIGN — A sign which contravenes this Code or any other law
or which the Administrator declares to be unlawful because it becomes
§ 3-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-202
1:85
dangerous to public safety by reason of inadequate maintenance,
dilapidation or abandonment or a nonconforming sign for which a permit
required under a previous Code was not obtained. The terms "unlawful" and
"illegal" shall have the same meaning at all times in all situations.
USE — The purpose for which a building, lot, sign or other structure is
arranged, intended, designed, occupied or maintained.
WALL SIGN (FACIA SIGN) — A sign attached to, painted on, or erected
against a wall of a building with the face horizontally parallel to the building
wall and extending not more than 15 inches from the face of said building
wall.
WINDOW SIGN — A sign installed inside a window for purposes of
reviewing from outside the premises. This term does not include
merchandise located in a window.
§ 3-202 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 3-202
1:86
ARTICLE III
Permit, Fee, Inspection and Indemnification
§ 3-301. [Ch. 3, Sec. 3.1] Permits required.
§ 3-302. [Ch. 3, Sec. 3.2] Sign contractor's registration.
A. Application of permit requirement. Except as otherwise provided in this
Code, it shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge,
move or convert any sign in the City, or cause the same to be done,
without first obtaining a sign permit for each such sign from the
Administrator as required by this Code. This section shall not be
construed to require any permit for:
(1) A change of copy on any sign exempted in Article VIII;
(2) The repainting, cleaning and other normal maintenance or repair of
a sign or sign structure for which a permit has previously been
issued, so long as the sign or sign structure is not modified in any
way; or
(3) Signs which have permits and which conform with the
requirements of this Code on the date of its adoption unless and
until the sign is altered or relocated, at which time a permit is
required. [Ord. No. 1988-33]
B. Duration of permit. Every sign permit issued by the Administrator shall
become null and void if work installation is not commenced within 120
days from the date of such permit. If work authorized by such permit is
suspended or abandoned for 120 days any time after the work is
commenced, a new permit shall be first obtained to do so and the fee
will be 1/2 the amount required for a new permit for such work
provided that no changes have been made in the original plans. Such
permit may not be unreasonably withheld, providing that proper
application and payment of permit fees is complied with. [Ord. No.
1988-33]
A. Sign contractors to be registered. No person shall perform any work or
service for any person or for any government entity for compensation,
in or in connection with the erection, construction, enlargement,
alteration, repair, moving, improvement, maintenance, conversion or
manufacture of any sign in the City or any work or service in connection
with causing any such work to be done unless such person shall first
have registered as a sign contractor with the City Clerk and paid the
registration fees provided for by the City, or shall be represented by a
subcontractor registered herein as a contractor. [Ord. No. 1972-12]
B. Sign contractor registration fee. Before any person, firm, or corporation
shall engage in the business of sign contracting in the City or continue
in said business, such person, firm or corporation shall be required to
pay a registration fee as set forth in the Schedule of Fees. The City
§ 3-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-302
1:87
§ 3-303. [Ch. 3, Sec. 3.3] Sign contractor bond. [Ord. No. 1988-33]
As a condition to the registration of a sign contractor as required herein,
all persons engaged in the business of painting, installing or maintaining
signs which involves, in whole or part, the erection, alteration, relocation,
maintenance of a sign or other sign work shall file with the City Clerk
a continuing bond in the penal sum of $5,000, executed by the applicant
and a corporate surety authorized to do business in the State of Illinois,
which shall indemnify and hold harmless the City, its officers, agents, and
employees, from any and all claims of negligence resulting from erection,
alteration, relocation, or maintenance work.
§ 3-304. [Ch. 3, Sec. 3.4] Insurance. [Ord. No. 1988-33]
Every applicant for such registration shall, before such registration, file
with the City a satisfactory certificate of insurance against any form of
liability to a minimum of $25,000 for property damage and $300,000 for
personal injury, or shall be responsible through an agent or subcontractor
covered by insurance in said amounts. The insurance shall be maintained in
full force and effect during the term of the registration and said insurance
policy or certificate shall provide that the City be notified of any cancellation
of the insurance 10 days prior to the date of cancellation.
§ 3-305. [Ch. 3, Sec. 3.5] Federal or state licenses. [Ord. No.
1979-12]
Federal or state licenses as applicable. Any sign company seeking to erect,
construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, maintain, convert or
manufacture any sign shall demonstrate and register with the City a
statement that they have all of the necessary licenses from all other
governmental agencies applicable, or shall be represented by a duly
licensed agent or subcontractor having such licenses.
§ 3-306. [Ch. 3, Sec. 3.6] Permission from property owner to install
any sign. [Ord. No. 1987-12]
No person shall erect, construct or maintain any sign upon any property or
building without the consent of the owner or person entitled to possession
of the property or building, if any, or their authorized representatives.
§ 3-307. [Ch. 3, Sec. 3.7] Application for permit to install a sign.
Application for a permit shall be made to the Administrator upon a form
provided by the Administrator and shall be accompanied by such
information as may be required to assure compliance with all appropriate
laws and regulations of the City including:
Clerk shall keep a suitable record of all such registrations of sign
contractors in the City. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
A. Name and address of owner of the sign;
§ 3-302 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 3-307
1:88
§ 3-308. [Ch. 3, Sec. 3.8] Permit issuance. [Ord. No. 1988-33]
The Administrator shall issue a permit for the erection, alteration, or
relocation of a sign within the City when an application therefor has been
properly made and the sign described therein complies with all appropriate
laws and regulations of the City. The Administrator may, in writing, suspend
or revoke a permit issued under provisions of this article whenever the
permit is issued by mistake or on the basis of a misstatement of fact or
fraud.
§ 3-309. [Ch. 3, Sec. 3.9] Effect of issuance. [Ord. No. 1979-12]
No permit for a sign issued hereunder shall be deemed to constitute
permission or authorization to maintain an unlawful sign nor shall any
permit issued hereunder constitute a defense in an action to abate all
unlawful signs.
§ 3-310. [Ch. 3, Sec. 3.10] Permit fees.
B. Name and address of owner or the person in possession of the premises
where the sign is located or to be located;
C. Clear and legible drawings with description definitely showing location
of the sign which is the subject of the permit and all other existing signs
whose construction requires permits, when such signs are on the same
premises;
D. Drawings showing the dimensions, construction supports, sizes,
electrical wiring and components, materials of the sign and method of
attachment and character of structural members to which attachment
is to be made. The design, quality, materials and loading shall conform
to the BOCA National Building Code in effect and Chapter 10 of the
Bloomington City Code. When required by the Administrator,
engineering data shall be supplied on plans submitted certified by a
duly registered architect or structural engineer. [Ord. No. 1998-95]
A. Application for permits shall be filed with the Sign Code Administrator,
together with a permit fee which shall be based on the reasonable cost
of the sign and supporting structure which includes cost of material and
labor in accordance with the City's Schedule of Fees. If the
Administrator determines that the applicant's estimate of cost is
unreasonable, the Administrator may estimate the cost for purposes of
establishing the fee. Permit for Neon outline lighting or skeleton
lighting will be based on estimated value of job.
B. If any sign is hereafter erected, placed, installed or otherwise
established on any property prior to obtaining a permit as required by
this section, the fees specified in City's Schedule of Fees shall be
doubled. Payment of such fee shall not relieve any person from
complying with other provisions of the Advertising Code or from
penalties prescribed therein. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
§ 3-307 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-310
1:89
§ 3-311. [Ch. 3, Sec. 3.11] Sign permit appeals. [Ord. No. 1988-33]
An appeal may be taken to the Sign Code Board of Review from the
Administrator's denial or revocation of a sign permit.
§ 3-312. [Ch. 3, Sec. 3.13] Inspection.
C. All portable temporary signs not exempted in the Code shall be charged
a permit fee as set forth in the Schedule of Fees for each permitted time
on a location. The fee for such signs may be waived by the
Administrator when placement on a lot is for 48 hours or less. [Ord.
No. 2018-89]
A. Inspections. All sign work requiring a permit shall be subject to
inspection by the Administrator. [Ord. No. 1988-33]
B. Sign maintenance. Every sign in the City, including but not limited to
those signs for which permits or for which no permits or permit fees are
required, shall be maintained in good structural condition at all times.
All signs, including those exempted, shall be kept neatly painted,
including all metal parts and supports. The Administrator may inspect
signs at reasonable intervals to determine whether signs are properly
maintained.
C. Signs declared unlawful. The Administrator may declare any sign
unlawful if it violates this Code or any other law or if it endangers public
safety by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation or
abandonment. Any such declaration shall state in writing the reasons of
the Administrator for stating that the sign is unlawful. [Ord. No.
1984-53]
D. It shall be unlawful to own, keep, display or maintain a sign which is
declared to be unlawful pursuant to the provisions of § 3-311C of this
Code. The Administrator may declare any such sign to be unlawful and
such declaration shall state in writing the reason or reasons why such
sign and the keeping, owning, maintenance, construction, and display
or operation thereof, is unlawful under the terms of this Code. [Ord.
No. 1979-12]
§ 3-310 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 3-312
1:90
ARTICLE IV
Signs Permitted in the Zoning Districts of the City
The following sign regulations provide for the listing of signs permitted
in the Zoning Districts of the City as provided by Chapter 44 of the
Bloomington City Code.
§ 3-401. [Ch. 3, Sec. 4.1] Agriculture District.
In addition to the exemptions authorized by Article VIII in this Code, the
following signs shall be permitted in the A-Agriculture District subject to
the other articles in this Code:
§ 3-402. [Ch. 3, Sec. 4.2] Residence Districts.
In addition to the exemptions authorized by Article VIII of this Code, the
following signs shall be permitted in the R-1A, R-1B, R-1C, R-2, R-3A, R-3B
and R-4 Residence Districts subject to the other articles of this Code:
A. One identification sign having a total sign area not exceeding 16 square
feet for each lot occupied by multiple-family dwellings or other
residential uses (not including single-family dwellings, two-family
dwellings and mobile homes).
B. One identification sign having a total sign area not exceeding 32 square
feet for each lot occupied by nonresidential uses except for lots
occupied by legal nonconforming uses which shall be permitted to have
a total sign area not exceeding the total sign area of all identification
signs presently located on the lot occupied by such nonconforming use.
C. All identification signs authorized by Subsections A and B of this section
shall be facia signs, except that such identification signs may be
freestanding if they do not exceed height of 16 feet above grade nor
project closer than 10 feet to a public right-of-way line or property line.
[Ord. No. 1979-12]
A. One identification sign having a total sign area not exceeding 16 square
feet for each lot occupied by multiple-family dwellings or other
residential uses but not on vacant lots or on lots having single-family
dwellings, two-family dwellings or mobile homes where they shall be
illegal except that on such premises a nameplate sign is permitted, if
appropriate. [Ord. No. 1981-53]
B. One identification sign having a total sign area not exceeding 32 square
feet for each lot occupied by nonresidential uses except for lots
occupied by legal nonconforming uses which shall be permitted to have
a total sign area not exceeding the total sign area of all identification
signs presently located on the lot occupied by such nonconforming
uses.
§ 3-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-402
1:91
§ 3-403. [Ch. 3, Sec. 4.3] S-1 University District.
In addition to the exemptions authorized by Article VIII of this Code, the
following signs shall be permitted in the S-1 University District subject to
the other articles of this Code:
§ 3-404. [Ch. 3, Sec. 4.4] S-2 Public Lands and Institutions District.
In addition to the exemptions authorized by Article VIII of this Code, the
following signs shall be permitted in the S-2 Public Lands and Institutions
District subject to the other articles of this Code:
§ 3-405. [Ch. 3, Sec. 4.5] S-3 Flood Plain (District). [Ord. No.
1988-33]
All ground signs in the Flood Plain (District) shall require approval of the
City Engineer prior to permit issuance.
§ 3-406. [Ch. 3, Sec. 4.6] S-4 Historic and Cultural District. [Ord.
No. 1988-33]
Except for the exemptions authorized by Article VIII of this Code, no sign
shall be erected, moved, demolished, or altered in the S-4 Historic and
Cultural District without approval of the Council, after public hearing and
recommendation by the Historic Preservation Commission. The Council may
grant such approval upon making a determination that such sign erection,
movement, demolition or alteration would not adversely affect the character
of the S-4 District in which such sign is located or is proposed to be located.
After such approval, such sign erection, movement, demolition or alteration
shall be in compliance with the other articles of this Code.
C. One identification sign authorized by Subsections A and B of this
section shall be facia signs, except that such identification signs may be
freestanding if they do not exceed a height of 16 feet above grade nor
project closer than 10 feet to a public right-of-way line or property line.
[Ord. No. 1979-12]
A. Two identification signs per building or landmark not exceeding a total
sign area of 50 square feet per sign shall be permitted at appropriate
locations on the campus to adequately identify buildings or landmarks
located on the campus.
B. Identification signs authorized by Subsection A of this section may be
freestanding signs or facia signs. [Ord. No. 1979-12]
A. Identification signs not exceeding a total sign area of 100 square feet
per sign shall be permitted at appropriate locations on the lot to identify
uses thereon.
B. Identification signs authorized by Subsection A of this section may be
freestanding signs or facia signs. [Ord. No. 1979-12]
§ 3-402 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 3-407
1:92
§ 3-407. [Ch. 3, Sec. 4.7] S-5 Airport District.
In addition to the exemptions authorized by Article VIII of this Code, the
following signs shall be permitted in the S-5 Airport District subject to the
other articles of this Code:
§ 3-408. [Ch. 3, Sec. 4.8] C-1 Office District.
In addition to the exemptions authorized by Article VIII of this Code, the
following signs shall be permitted in the C-1 Office District subject to the
other articles of this Code:
§ 3-409. [Ch. 3, Sec. 4.9] C-2, C-3, B-1 and B-2 Districts.
A. On-premise signs may be of any type provided that the total sign area of
all such signs in each lot shall not exceed two square feet for each lineal
foot of frontage on a public street, or private street meeting City
standards, or public place, or 300 square feet, whichever is greater. The
maximum area of each sign shall not exceed 300 square feet unless
otherwise restricted by this Code.
The maximum area of a double faced sign shall be the area of the
largest face only for the purpose of sign area calculations to comply
with this section. [Ord. No. 1988-33]
B. Off-premise signs (off-site signs) shall be permitted in accordance with
the restrictions in Article V of this Code that are specifically applicable
to off-premise signs. [Ord. No. 1981-8]
A. One identification sign having a total sign area not exceeding two
square feet for each lineal foot of frontage on a public street or private
street or 200 square feet whichever is less.
B. Identification signs permitted by this section may be freestanding signs,
facia signs, canopy signs, projecting signs, roof signs, signs on awnings,
manual or automatic changeable copy signs, changing signs, or rotating
signs subject to the regulations in Article V of this Code for these signs.
[Ord. No. 1979-12]
A. On-premise signs may be of any type provided that the total sign area of
all such signs in each premise shall not exceed three square feet for
each lineal foot of frontage on a public street, or approved private
street meeting City standards, or public place, or 300 square feet,
whichever is greater. The maximum area of each sign shall not exceed
300 square feet unless otherwise restricted by this Code. The maximum
area of a double faced sign shall be the area of the largest face only for
the purpose of sign area calculations to comply with this section. [Ord.
No. 1988-33]
B. Off-premise signs (off-site signs) shall be permitted in accordance with
the restrictions in Article V of this Code that are specifically applicable
to off-premise signs. [Ord. No. 1981-8]
§ 3-407 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-410
1:93
§ 3-410. [Ch. 3, Sec. 4.10] B-3 Central Business District.
§ 3-411. [Ch. 3, Sec. 4.11] M-1 Restricted Manufacturing District
and M-2 General Manufacturing District.
In addition to the exemptions authorized by Article VIII of this Code, the
following signs shall be permitted in the M-1 Restricted Manufacturing
District and M-2 General Manufacturing District subject to the other
articles of this Code.
§ 3-412. [Ch. 3, Sec. 4.12] (Reserved) [Repealed by Ord. No.
1988-33]
A. On-premise signs may be of any type provided that the total sign area of
all such signs in each lot shall not exceed three square feet for each
lineal foot of frontage on a public street, or approved private street
meeting City standards, or public place, or 200 square feet, whichever
is greater. The maximum area of each sign shall not exceed 300 square
feet unless otherwise restricted by this Code. The maximum area of a
double faced sign shall be the area of the largest face only for the
purpose of sign area calculations to comply with this section. [Ord. No.
1988-33]
B. Off-premise signs (off-street signs) shall be permitted in accordance
with the restrictions in Article V in this Code that are specifically
applicable to off-premise signs. [Ord. No. 1979-8]
A. On-premise signs may be of any type provided that the total sign area of
all such signs in each premise shall not exceed four square feet for each
lineal foot of frontage on a public street, or approved private street
meeting City standards, or public place, or 300 square feet, whichever
is greater. The maximum area of each sign shall not exceed 300 square
feet unless otherwise restricted by this Code. The maximum area of a
double faced sign shall be the area of the largest face only for the
purpose of sign area calculations to comply with this section. [Ord. No.
1988-33]
B. Off-premise signs (off-street signs) shall be permitted in accordance
with the restrictions in Article V in this Code that are specifically
applicable to off-premise signs. [Ord. No. 1979-8]
§ 3-410 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 3-412
1:94
ARTICLE V
Regulations and Limitations of Permitted Signs
The language of this article shall apply to both on-premise and off-premise
signs unless specifically limited to either on-premise signs or off-premise
signs.
Materials and method of construction shall comply with the BOCA Basic
Building Code currently adopted and referenced in Chapter 10 of the
Bloomington City Code and other applicable Codes of the City.
§ 3-501. [Ch. 3, Sec. 5.1] Freestanding or ground signs.
A. Minimum horizontal separation:
(1) On-premise freestanding signs. More than one on-premise
freestanding or ground sign may be permitted on each premise
having frontage on a public street or an approved private street,
provided that the minimum horizontal separation between such onpremise
freestanding signs shall be 100 feet. The required
separation in this section does not apply to on-premise signs on
separate premises.
(2) Off-premise freestanding signs. After February 8, 1981, it shall be
unlawful for any person to erect any off-premise freestanding sign
that violates the provisions of § 3-507 of this Code. [Ord. No.
1998-95]
B. Obstructions to traffic. No freestanding or ground sign shall be erected
so as to obstruct free access to or egress from any building. [Ord. No.
1998-95]
C. Setback. No freestanding or ground sign shall be erected in such a
manner as to impede visibility between a height of 2 1/2 feet and 10 feet
above the top curbline grades (grade at edge of pavement when no curb
is present) of intersecting streets or of street and driveway
intersections in the area defined by the visibility triangles illustrated in
Figure 1 and Table 1 and Figure 2 and Table 2 in Appendix A of this
Code. [Ord. No. 1998-95]
D. Minimum clearance. Where a freestanding or ground sign projects over
a vehicular traffic area, such as a private street, driveway or parking
lot, the minimum clearance between the bottom of the sign and the
ground shall be 14 feet. [Ord. No. 1998-95]
E. Projection over public or private streets. Freestanding or ground signs
shall be allowed to project over a public or private street only to the
same extent permitted for projecting signs. [Ord. No. 1998-95]
F. The maximum height of any portion of any freestanding or ground sign
shall be accordance with Table 1. In joint or adjacent rights-of-way, the
height of the sign will be regulated by the width and speed limit of the
§ 3-501 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-501
1:95
§ 3-502. [Ch. 3, Sec. 5.2] Wall or facia signs.
right-of-way immediately closest to the location of said sign. [Ord. No.
1998-95]
Table 1
Maximum Permitted Heights of Freestanding or Ground Signs
Highway or Street Closest to the Location of the Sign
Public Right-ofway
Width
Official Speed Limits
(miles per hour)
Maximum Height
From Grade
(linear feet)
60 feet or less 15 - 20 20*
25 - 30 25
35 - 50 30
More than 60 feet 15 - 20 30*
25 - 30 40*
35 - 50 50
NOTES:
* Freestanding signs may have a maximum height of 100 feet above
grade when located within 1,320 feet of the right-of-way line of a
Federal Aid Interstate Highway interchange. [Ord. No. 1998-95]
G. Freestanding signs which are to be viewed from expressways or
interstate highways shall conform with the "Highway Advertising
Control Act of 1971," 225 ILCS 440/1 et seq., as hereafter amended.
[Ord. No. 1998-95]
H. On freestanding or ground signs, the sign structure may extend above
the maximum allowable height of such signs for embellishment
purposes. Such extension shall not exceed 20% of the maximum
allowable height for the sign. Such embellishment shall not include
thereon any symbol, representation, logo gram, insignia, illustration or
other form of advertising message. [Ord. No. 1998-95]
A. Maximum sign area buildings. The maximum sign area on a building
shall not exceed the allowed Zoning District square footage per lineal
foot of lot frontage in Article IV multiplied by the building frontage.
[Ord. No. 1988-33]
B. Materials. Wall or facia signs which have an area exceeding 40 square
feet shall be constructed of metal or other approved noncombustible
materials except for nailing rails and as provided in Chapter 10 of the
Bloomington City Code. [Ord. No. 1988-33]
§ 3-501 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 3-502
1:96
§ 3-503. [Ch. 3, Sec. 5.3] Roof signs.
C. Reflectors. Lighting reflectors may project eight feet beyond the face of
the wall provided such reflectors are at least 12 feet above the sidewalk
level, but in no case shall such reflectors project beyond a vertical plane
two feet inside the curbline. [Ord. No. 1988-33]
D. Extension. Wall or facia signs shall not be erected to extend above the
parapet, nor extend beyond the ends of the wall to which they are
attached unless such signs meet all the requirements for roof signs,
projecting signs, or ground or freestanding signs as the case may be.
[Ord. No. 1988-33]
E. Premises fronting on more than one public right-of-way may combine
permissible signs for one frontage with another frontage for the
purpose of placing the combined area of signs on one frontage if the
combined frontage is 100 feet or less. [Ord. No. 1988-33]
F. Maximum height:
(1) A wall or facia sign shall not extend above the parapet of the wall to
which it is attached unless it appears as an architectural blade.
(2) The height of copy placed in the space between windows may not
exceed 2/3 the distance between the top of the lower window and
the sill of the upper window.
(3) No vertical stacking allowed. [Ord. No. 1998-95]
G. Any identification wall or facia signs with non-illuminated letters up to
but not exceeding six inches in height nor eight square feet in area are
not restricted and may be permitted in addition to regulated signage.
[Ord. No. 1988-33]
A. Materials. All signs shall be constructed entirely of metal or other
approved noncombustible materials except as provided in Chapter 10 of
the Bloomington City Code. Provisions shall be made for electrical
ground of all metallic parts and where combustible materials are
permitted in letters or other ornamental features, all wiring and tubing
shall be kept free and insulated therefrom. [Ord. No. 1988-33]
B. Bottom clearance. There shall be a clear space of not less than six feet
between the lowest part of the sign and the roof level except for
necessary structural supports. The six feet clearance shall not be
required where signs are readily accessible on all sides, the sign face is
not more than four feet in height, and proper drainage, access, and air
circulation are maintained. [Ord. No. 1983-31]
C. Closed roof signs. A closed roof sign shall not be erected to a height
greater than 50 feet above fireproof and noncombustible buildings nor
more than 35 feet above the roof of non-fireproof buildings. [Ord. No.
1979-12]
§ 3-502 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-503
1:97
D. Open roof signs. An open roof sign shall not exceed a height of 100 feet
above the roof of buildings of fireproof and noncombustible
construction and not more than 60 feet above the roof of buildings of
non-fireproof construction. [Ord. No. 1979-12]
E. Combustible supports. Within the Fire District, no roof sign which
exceeds 40 feet in height shall be supported on or braced to wooden
beams or other combustible construction of a building or structure
unless otherwise approved by the Administrator.
F. Roof signs on buildings which do not exceed three stories or 40 feet in
height shall be subject to the height limitations in Table 2 of this
section: [Ord. No. 1979-12]
Table 2
Maximum Height for Roof Signs on Buildings Which Do Not
Exceed 40 Feet in Height
Building Height
Maximum Roof Sign Height
(from top of parapet)
0 to 15 feet 15 feet
16 to 20 feet 20 feet
21 to 30 feet 25 feet
31 to 40 feet 30 feet
G. Roof signs on buildings which exceed 40 feet in height shall be subject
to the following regulations:
(1) All roof signs shall be manufactured in such a way that they appear
as an architectural blade or penthouse and are finished in such a
manner that the visual appearance from all sides is such that they
are attached.
(2) All roof signs shall be installed or erected in such a manner that
there shall be no angle iron support structure visible from street
level or grade level.
(3) All roof signs shall be set back a distance at least three feet from all
the outside walls of the building on or over which they are located
in order to provide a clear passageway around said signs.
(4) No guy wires, braces or secondary supports shall be visible from
the street or grade level. [Ord. No. 1979-12]
H. Sloping roof signs. A sign may be attached to the facia of or located on
the sloping roof of a structure but shall not be located so as to extend
higher than the roof top. [Ord. No. 1979-12]
I. Maximum sign area. The area of a roof sign is a part of the building
signage and hence, must comply with § 3-502A. [Ord. No. 1988-33]
§ 3-503 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 3-504
1:98
§ 3-504. [Ch. 3, Sec. 5.4] Projecting signs.
§ 3-505. [Ch. 3, Sec. 5.5] Canopy (marquee) signs.
A. Materials. Projecting signs shall be constructed entirely of metal or
other approved noncombustible materials except as provided in
Chapter 10 of the Bloomington City Code. [Ord. No. 1988-33]
B. Maximum projection. No such signs shall project over a street or other
public space more than 10 feet from the face of the building or
structure, nor in any case beyond a vertical plane two feet inside the
curb face. Subject to these maximum projection limits, projection over
the public right-of-way in a C-3 Business District shall be limited to 12
inches for each one linear foot of building frontage measured from the
sign's location to the nearest side wall of the occupant's premises.
[Ord. No. 1979-12]
C. Clearances. A clear space of not less than 10 feet shall be provided
below all parts of such signs. [Ord. No. 1979-12]
D. Projecting signs shall project at a 90° angle from the building face
except at a building corner fronting on two intersecting streets where
projecting signs may project from such building corner at 45° angles to
the building facades fronting on such intersecting streets. [Ord. No.
1979-12]
E. Installation. All projecting signs shall be installed or erected in such a
manner that support structures visible above a roof or building facade
shall appear as architectural blades. [Ord. No. 1979-12]
F. No projecting sign may extend more than 12 inches above the top of a
parapet, unless it appears as an architectural blade. [Ord. No.
1979-12]
G. Illumination. Any sign projecting over a public right-of-way may be
illuminated, except for awnings. [Ord. No. 1979-12]
H. Maximum, sign area. The area of a projecting sign from and on a
building is a part of the building signage and hence, must comply with
§ 3-502A. [Ord. No. 1988-33]
A. Materials. Canopy (marquee) signs shall be constructed entirely of
metal or other approved noncombustible materials except as provided
in Chapter 10 of the Bloomington City Code. [Ord. No. 1988-33]
B. Height. Canopy (marquee) signs shall not exceed seven feet in height
nor shall they project below the facia of the marquee (canopy) nor lower
than 10 feet above the sidewalk. [Ord. No. 1979-12]
C. Length. Canopy (marquee) signs may extend the full length of the
canopy (marquee) but in no case shall they project beyond the ends of
the canopy (marquee). [Ord. No. 1979-12]
§ 3-504 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-505
1:99
§ 3-506. [Ch. 3, Sec. 5.6] Signs on awnings. [Ord. No. 1979-12]
Signs consisting of one line of letters not exceeding nine inches in height
may be painted, placed or installed only upon the hanging border of any
awning erected and maintained in accordance with this Code. An
identification emblem, insignia, initial or other similar feature not exceeding
an area of four square feet, may be painted, placed or installed elsewhere
on any awning provided that any sign emblem, insignia or other such similar
item shall comply with all other provisions of this Code.
§ 3-507. [Ch. 3, Sec. 5.7] Off-premise signs.
D. Area. Area of copy may be three square feet per lineal foot of canopy
front and sides. Copy area or any part of copy area allowed for one facia
of the canopy (marquee) shall not be added to that allowed for other
facia of the canopy (marquee). On places of public entertainment such
as theaters, arenas, meeting halls, etc., where one or more changeable
copy signs are allowed, the copy area allowance may not exceed five
square feet per linear foot of canopy (marquee) front and sides with a
maximum total height of no more than five feet at any point. [Ord. No.
1979-12]
E. A freestanding (ground) sign may project above and over a canopy
(marquee) provided that such sign is in compliance with § 3-501 of this
Code. [Ord. No. 1979-12]
F. Under canopy signs. Signs attached to the underside of a canopy
(marquee) shall have a copy area not greater than eight square feet,
with a maximum, letter height of nine inches, subject to a minimum
clearance of nine feet from the sidewalk. All such under canopy signs
shall be mounted at a 90° angle to the building face. [Ord. No.
1979-12]
A. After February 8, 1981, it shall be unlawful for any person to erect any
off-premise sign having a sign area in excess of 300 square feet unless
and until a variance for such off-premise sign exceeding 300 square feet
in sign area has been granted by the Sign Code Board of Review in
accordance with Article XII of this Code. [Ord. No. 1981-8]
B. After February 8, 1981, it shall be unlawful for any person to erect any
off-premise sign closer than 200 feet to any other off-premise sign
located on the same side of a public street as such off-premise sign
being erected. [Ord. No. 1981-8]
C. After February 8, 1981, it shall be unlawful for any person to erect any
off-premise sign on one side of a public street in such a manner that
results in more than three off-premise signs being located on the same
side of such street along any given 1/2 mile measured parallel to such
street. [Ord. No. 1981-8]
§ 3-505 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 3-507
1:100
§ 3-508. [Ch. 3, Sec. 5.8] Other signs.
D. Off-premise signs may be double faced and each side shall be
considered as facing traffic flowing in the opposite direction. There will
be no vertical stacking of these types of signs. [Ord. No. 1998-95]
E. Any off-premise sign may be a freestanding sign, a facia or wall sign, a
roof sign, a projecting sign, a canopy sign, a sign on an awning, an
incidental sign, a directional sign, a manual or automatic changeable
copy sign, a changing sign, a rotating sign, or a special sign subject to
the provisions of this Code for each of these aforementioned signs
unless such provisions are restricted to on-premise signs. [Ord. No.
1981-8]
F. At the intersection of any two public streets, after February 8, 1981, it
shall be unlawful for any person to erect a double or single faced offpremise
sign at right angles to and, therefore, facing traffic on one
street any closer than 200 feet to a similarly positioned double or single
faced off-premise sign at right angles to and, therefore, facing traffic on
the other street, if one sign is visible from the other. [Ord. No. 1981-8]
G. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect a structure for any
freestanding or ground off-premise sign that is not of vertical or
cantilever construction, and where the back of such sign is visible it
shall be unlawful for the owner of such sign to not keep such sign
suitably painted or otherwise covered to present a neat and clean
appearance. [Ord. No. 1981-8]
H. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any off-premise sign to not keep the
area around such off premise sign structure clean and clear of all scrub
brush and tall grass to a distance of at least five feet to the rear and
sides of such structure as well as to the front property line, and if on a
corner site, to both front property lines. [Ord. No. 1981-8]
I. Subject to the provisions in Subsections A through H of this § 3-507
which establish customary use of off-premise signs within the City, it
shall be unlawful for any person to erect any off-premise sign which is in
violation of the "Highway Advertising Control Act of 1971," Ch. 121,
Sec. 501 et seq., Ill. Rev. Stat., 1979, as amended. [Ord. No. 1981-8]
J. The area of an off-premise sign shall not be included in the calculation
of maximum allowed signage in a lot only if it is a ground or
freestanding sign. [Ord. No. 1988-33]
K. The horizontal separation between ground/freestanding on-premise
and off-premise signs shall be 100 feet. [Ord. No. 1998-95]
L. No off-premise sign shall be closer than 15 feet from a side lot line.
[Ord. No. 1988-33]
M. No off-premise sign shall be closer than 100 feet to a residential zoning
district boundary line. [Ord. No. 1998-95]
§ 3-507 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-508
1:101
§ 3-509. [Ch. 3, Sec. 5.9] Skeletal and outline lighting: permitted by
value of job.
A. Incidental signs. Up to two incidental signs may be attached to a
freestanding sign structure or to a building wall as a wall or facia sign.
Such signs are restricted to incidental signs as defined in § 3-202
including official notices of services required by law, or trade
affiliations. Area of each sign shall not exceed five square feet. [Ord.
No. 1988-33]
B. Directional signs. Directional signs shall not exceed four square feet
per face in area nor exceed 12 feet in height. Directional signs shall
conform to all the applicable requirements of § 3-507 of this Code for
off-premise signs. No directional signs shall be permitted in the public
right-of-way, except as required by Article VIII, § 3-802D, N and T of this
Code. [Ord. No. 1979-12]
C. Manual or automatic changeable copy signs and changing signs. Any
sign permitted in this Code (except nameplates) may be a manual or
automatic changeable copy sign or an automatic changing sign unless
otherwise restricted by this Code. Such sign must be declared as a
changeable sign during the permit issuance process and will require
approval by the Administrator. [Ord. No. 1988-33]
D. Rotating signs. Any sign permitted in this Code (except nameplates)
may be a rotating sign provided that such rotating sign does not violate
Article VI or VII of this Code or is otherwise restricted by this Code.
[Ord. No. 1979-12]
A. Neon signs, skeletal or outline lighting, exterior or interior, must have
UL listed electrode connectors and covers with at least 1 1/2 inches
tube supports.
B. Channel letters must be in a listed sign body, i.e., backs, sides and faces
with suitable spacing for tube and connections per NEC. 600-32.
C. Only accepted and listed wiring methods and materials per NEC Article
600 and other referenced NEC articles. [Ord. No. 1998-95]
§ 3-508 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 3-509
1:102
ARTICLE VI
Prohibited Signs
Except as otherwise provided in this Code, the following types of signs are
expressly prohibited in all districts:
§ 3-601. [Ch. 3, Sec. 6.1] Animated and intensely lighted signs.
§ 3-602. [Ch. 3, Sec. 6.2] Miscellaneous signs and posters. [Ord. No.
1979-12]
The tacking, pasting or otherwise affixing of signs of a miscellaneous
character, visible from a public way, located on the walls of buildings, barns,
sheds, on trees, poles, posts, fences or other structure is prohibited unless
otherwise permitted by this Code.
§ 3-603. [Ch. 3, Sec. 6.3] Abandoned signs. [Ord. No. 1979-12]
Abandoned signs, as defined in § 3-202 of this Code, shall be prohibited.
(See § 3-902 of this Code).
§ 3-604. [Ch. 3, Sec. 6.4] Signs on public property. [Ord. No.
1979-12]
No sign shall be permitted which is placed on any curb, sidewalk, post, pole,
electrolier, hydrant, bridge, tree or other surface located on public property
or over or across any street or public thoroughfare except as may otherwise
expressly be authorized by this Code or by written agreement approved
by the City Council, after determining that said sign is consistent with the
intent of this Code.
§ 3-605. [Ch. 3, Sec. 6.5] Banners.
A. No sign shall be permitted which:
(1) Displays exposed incandescent lamps with ratings in excess of 40
watts;
(2) Displays exposed incandescent lamps with internal or external
metallic reflectors;
(3) Displays revolving beacon lights;
(4) Displays any continuous or sequential flashing operation in which
more than 2/3 of the lights are turned on or off at one time.
(5) All message centers will have a functional automatic dimming
device, set to dim message centers at dusk equivalent of 20 watt
lamp automatic operation. [Ord. No. 1998-95]
§ 3-601 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-605
1:103
§ 3-606. [Ch. 3, Sec. 6.6] Flags. [Ord. No. 1979-12]
Flags other than those of any nation, state or political subdivision, religious
flag, and corporate flags are prohibited except as set forth in § 3-605B of
this Code.
§ 3-607. [Ch. 3, Sec. 6.7] "A" Frame signs. [Ord. No. 1988-33]
"A" frame or similar signs without approved support or anchorage are
prohibited. They may be considered as temporary signs and subject to the
applicable provisions of this Code.
§ 3-608. [Ch. 3, Sec. 6.8] Unclassified signs.
The following signs are also prohibited which:
A. Banners, pennants, search lights, twirling signs, sandwich board signs,
balloons or other gas filled figures shall not be used except as provided
in Subsection B below. [Ord. No. 1988-33]
B. Signs described in Subsection A above will be permitted at the opening
of a new business in a commercial or industrial district for a total period
not to exceed 60 days and will be allowed in residential districts in
conjunction with an open house or model home demonstration
conducted by a Realtor for two days before the opening of such a
demonstration to two days after and not to exceed a total period of 30
days. Such signs shall conform to Chapter 10 of the Bloomington City
Code. [Ord. No. 1988-33]
C. Banners used other than what is described and allowed in Subsection B
may be used in a commercial or industrial district as a temporary sign
subject to a permit for no more than 30 days. Placement and installation
must comply with applicable provisions of this Code. Maximum area
allowed is 30 square feet. [Ord. No. 1988-33]
A. Bear or contain statements, words or pictures of an obscene,
pornographic, immoral character, or which contain advertising matter
which is untruthful;
B. Are painted on or attached to any fence or any wall which is not
structurally a part of a building, except to identify a residence or
residence structure by means of posting the name of the occupant or
structure, and the street address;
C. Operate or employ any stereopticon or motion picture projection or
media in conjunction with any advertisements, or have visible moving
parts or any portion of which moves, or give the illusion of motion
except at licensed drive-in theaters;
D. Emit audible sound, odor or visible matter;
§ 3-605 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 3-608
1:104
§ 3-609. [Ch. 3, Sec. 6.9] Electrical portable signs. [Ord. No.
2017-61]
Use and display of electrical signs is prohibited, except for permanent LED
signs no larger than eight square feet on publicly funded, not-for-profit
transit vehicles.
E. Signs which purport to be or are an imitation of or resemble an official
traffic sign or signal, or which bear the words "Stop," "Go Slow,"
"Caution," "Danger," "Warning," or similar words;
F. Signs which by reason of their size, location, movement, content,
coloring or manner of illumination, may be confused with or
constructed as a traffic control sign, signal or device, or the light of an
emergency or road equipment vehicle, or which obstruct a motorist's or
pedestrian's view of any traffic or street sign or signal or device;
G. Signs which are declared to be unsafe and unlawful signs under the
provisions of Chapter 10 of the Bloomington City Code. [Ord. No.
1988-33]
§ 3-608 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-609
1:105

ARTICLE VII
Construction Specifications
§ 3-701. [Ch. 3, Sec. 7.1] Compliance with Building Code. [Ord. No.
1998-95]
All signs shall comply with the appropriate detailed provisions of BOCA
National Building Code in effect and Chapter 10 of the Bloomington City
Code relating to design, construction, alteration, repair and maintenance.
Signs shall also comply with the provisions of the Bloomington Electrical
Code and the additional construction standards hereinafter set forth in the
specified Article 600 and references.
§ 3-702. [Ch. 3, Sec. 7.2] Construction of signs, auxiliary
specifications.
§ 3-703. [Ch. 3, Sec. 7.3] Freestanding signs - materials. [Ord. No.
1998-95]
All freestanding sign structures or poles shall be self-supporting structures
erected on and permanently attached to concrete foundations. Such
structures or poles shall be fabricated only from painted steel or such other
materials as may be approved by BOCA National Building Code in effect
A. Identification and marking. Each sign hereafter erected or remodeled
shall bear in a permanent position thereon a clearly legible
identification plate stating the name and address of the owner of the
sign, and the person, firm or corporation responsible for its
construction, erection and the date of erection. Electrical signs shall be
marked with input amperages at the full load input similar to UL (48).
[Ord. No. 1979-12]
B. Obstruction to exits. No sign shall be erected, constructed or
maintained so as to obstruct any fire escape, required exit, window or
door opening used as a means of egress. [Ord. No. 1979-12]
C. Obstruction to ventilation. No sign shall be attached in any form., shape
or manner which will interfere with any opening required for
ventilation, except that such signs may be erected in front of and may
cover transom windows when not in violation of the provision of the
Building or Fire Prevention Codes for the City. [Ord. No. 1979-12]
D. Clearance from high voltage power lines. Signs shall be located in such
a way that they maintain horizontal and vertical clearance of all
overhead electrical conductors in accordance with National Electrical
Code Specifications, depending on voltages concerned. Reference to
100 which requires ten-foot separation from any conductor. [Ord. No.
1998-95]
E. Drainage. The roofs of all marquees exceeding 40 square feet shall be
properly guttered. [Ord. No. 1979-12]
§ 3-701 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-703
1:107
and Chapter 10 of the Bloomington City Code. Detail drawings of all pole or
pylon sign foundations will accompany sign permit applications.
§ 3-704. [Ch. 3, Sec. 7.4] Electric signs. [Ord. No. 1979-12]
All electric signs have a disconnecting switch located in accordance with
the provisions of the National Electrical Code. The full number of
illuminating elements thereof shall be kept in satisfactory working condition
or immediately repaired or replaced. Signs that are only partially
illuminated shall meet all electrical requirements for that portion directly
illuminated. All electrical wiring used in connecting illuminated signs to
power source shall be installed by a properly licensed electrical contractor
in accordance with the National Electrical Code, except that licensed sign
contractors shall be permitted to make electrical connections from
illuminated signs to approved electrical wiring located within six feet of
signs or sign structures provided that such connections are made in
accordance with the National Electrical Code.
§ 3-705. [Ch. 3, Sec. 7.5] Glass. [Ord. No. 1979-12]
When glass is used for sign letters or transparent panels, it shall be at least
double strength thickness for sign areas up to and including 300 square
inches. When glass is used for sign letters or transparent panels for sign
areas in excess of 300 square inches at least 1/4 inch wire glass shall be
used and the maximum span between supports shall be four feet.
§ 3-706. [Ch. 3, Sec. 7.6] Strength of parapet wall. [Ord. No.
1979-12]
A parapet wall must have sufficient strength to support any sign which is
attached thereto.
§ 3-707. [Ch. 3, Sec. 7.7] Supports and braces. [Ord. No. 1979-12]
Metal supports or braces shall be adequate for wind loading; see § 3-708.
Wire or cable supports shall have a safety factor of four. All metal, wire
cable supports and braces and all bolts used to attach signs to brackets and
signs to the supporting building or structure shall be galvanized or of an
equivalent material.
§ 3-708. [Ch. 3, Sec. 7.8] Wind loads. [Ord. No. 1988-33]
All signs shall be designed and constructed in conformity to the provisions
for materials, loads and stresses of Articles VII and VIII and the
requirements of Chapter 10 of the Bloomington City Code. The effect of
special local wind pressures shall be thoroughly considered in the design,
but in no case shall the wind load be assumed less than 30 pounds per
square foot of net exposed area for roof signs or ground signs.
§ 3-703 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 3-709
1:108
§ 3-709. [Ch. 3, Sec. 7.9] Sign anchoring. [Ord. No. 1979-12]
Signs shall be anchored to prevent any lateral movement that would cause
wear on supporting members or connectors.
§ 3-710. [Ch. 3, Sec. 7.10] Use of combustibles. [Ord. No. 1988-33]
All signs shall conform with the provisions of Chapter 10 of the Bloomington
City Code, regarding the use of combustible materials. All signs hereafter
located on or at any lot or premises containing a gasoline service station
shall be constructed of noncombustible materials as required by Chapter
17, Article III, § 17-306, of the Bloomington City Code.
§ 3-709 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-710
1:109

ARTICLE VIII
Exemptions
§ 3-801. [Ch. 3, Sec. 8.1] Exemptions.
The following activities are exempt from the requirements of this Code:
§ 3-802. [Ch. 3, Sec. 8.2] Exempt signs.
The following operations shall not be considered as requiring the issuance
of a sign permit, but any sign thus created must be in conformance with all
other building, structural and electrical laws and regulations of the City:
A. Changing of the advertising copy or message on an existing approved
painting or printed sign, marquee, changeable copy sign or a similar
approved sign whether electrical, illuminated, electronic changing
message center or non-illuminated painted message which are all
specifically designed for the use of replaceable copy.
B. Painting, repainting, cleaning or other normal maintenance and repair
of a sign not involving structural changes. Replacement of the plastic
face will be included as an exempt operation provided that it is due to a
change caused by breakage and/or deterioration of the face, but not for
the substitution of a new or different advertiser.
C. Changes in the consent of show window displays and permitted
temporary signs. [Ord. No. 1979-12]
A. Construction signs. One construction sign per construction project not
exceeding 32 square feet in sign area in residential districts or 64
square feet in commercial or industrial districts, provided that such
signs shall be erected no more than 30 days prior to the beginning of
construction for which a valid building permit has been issued, shall be
confined to the site of construction and shall be removed 30 days after
completion of construction and prior to occupancy.
B. Direction or instructional signs. Signs which provide direction or
instruction and are located entirely on the property to which they
pertain and do not in any way advertise the sale of merchandise or
services or any business and do not exceed four square feet in area,
such as signs identifying rest rooms, public telephones, walkways, or
signs providing direction such as parking lot entrance and exit signs
and those of similar nature. Such signs may identify the establishment
to which the directions or instructions thereon are pertinent. [Ord. No.
1984-53]
C. Flags. The flags, emblems or insignia of any nation or political
subdivision or corporate flag.
D. Governmental signs. Governmental signs for control of traffic and other
regulatory purposes, street signs, danger signs, railroad crossing sign
and signs of public service companies indicating danger and aids to
§ 3-801 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-802
1:111
service safety which are erected by or on the order of a public officer in
the performance of his public duty.
E. Holiday decorations. Signs of a primarily decorative nature, clearly
incidental and customary and commonly associated with any national,
local or religious holiday, provided that such signs shall be displayed for
a period of not more than 60 consecutive days nor more than 60 days in
any one year. Such signs may be of any type, number, area, height,
illumination or animation, and shall be set back 10 feet from all
boundary lines of the lot provided that a clear area be maintained to a
height of 72 inches within 55 feet of the intersection of two streets, a
railroad and a street, or a street and driveway.
F. House numbers. House numbers not exceeding two square feet in area
for each dwelling unit or mobile home.
G. Non-electrical interior signs. Non-electrical signs located within the
interior of any building or stadium, or within an enclosed lobby or court
of any building, and non-electrical signs for and located within the inner
or outer lobby, court or entrance of any theater, that are not visible from
the public right-of-way. This does not, however, exempt such nonelectrical
signs from the structural or material specifications as set out
in this Code. [Ord. No. 1994-27]
H. Memorial signs. Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and date
of erection when cut into any masonry surface or inlaid so as to be part
of the building or when constructed of bronze or other incombustible
material.
I. Notice bulletin boards. Notice bulletin boards not over 32 square feet in
area for medical, public, charitable or religious institutions where the
same are located on the premises of said institution.
J. No trespassing or no dumping signs. No trespassing or no dumping
signs not to exceed 1 1/2 square feet in the area per sign and not
exceeding four in number per lot, except that special permission may be
obtained from the Administrator for additional signs under proven
special circumstances.
K. Occupant signs, nameplates. One nameplate for each dwelling unit or
mobile home not to exceed two square feet in area indicating the name
of the occupant, location or identification of a home professional office,
provided the use of the premises is legal both in substance and at that
location. [Ord. No. 1984-53]
L. Wall signs, fence signs. In business and manufacturing zones, a sign
painted on the surface of a fence or approved building wall or any nonilluminated
wall sign on a building or structure which is not more than
10 square feet in sign area. [Ord. No. 1979-16]
M. Public notices. Official notices posted by public officers or employees in
the performance of their duties.
§ 3-802 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 3-802
1:112
N. Public signs. Signs required or specifically authorized for a public
purpose by any law, statute or ordinance, which may be of any type,
number, area, height above grade, location, illumination, or animation
required by the law, statute or ordinance under which the signs are
erected.
O. Real estate signs. One real estate sign per residential lot, provided such
sign is located entirely within the property to which the sign applies, is
not directly illuminated, does not exceed nine square feet in area, and is
removed within 10 days after the closing date of a sales contract or the
effective date of a lease. One real estate sign per commercial or
industrial lot, provided that such signs are not over 25 square feet in
sign area.
P. Permanent window signs. Except in residential zones, for each ground
floor occupancy of a building, permanent signs may be painted on or
otherwise displayed from the inside surface of any window, showcase or
other similar facility. Said signs may be in addition to those signs
permitted under the other provisions of this Code. The total copy area
of such signs, however, shall not exceed a maximum of 25% of the total
window area or one square foot per lineal front foot of the premises
occupied, whichever is the lesser.
Q. Signs in the display window. Signs in the display window of a business
use which are incorporated with a display of merchandise or a display
relating to services offered which comply with Subsection P herein.
R. Symbols of insignia. Religious symbols, commemorative plaques of
recognized historical agencies, or identification emblems of religious
orders or historical agencies, provided that no such symbol, plaque or
identification emblem, shall exceed four square feet in area, and
provided further that all such symbols, plaques and identification
emblems shall be placed flat against a building.
S. Temporary signs. Temporary signs not exceeding four square feet in
area pertaining to drives or events of civic, philanthropic, educational
or religious organizations, provided that said signs are posted only
during said drive or no more than 30 days before said event and are
removed no more than 15 days after an event.
T. Warning signs. Signs warning the public of the existence of danger, but
containing no advertising material, of a size as may be necessary to be
removed upon subsidence of danger.
U. Neighborhood identification signs. In any zone, a sign, masonry wall,
landscaping and other similar materials or features may be combined to
form a display for neighborhood or tract identification, provided that
the legend of such sign or display shall consist only of the neighborhood
or tract name. [Ord. No. 1979-12]
§ 3-802 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-802
1:113

ARTICLE IX
Removal and Disposition of Signs
§ 3-901. [Ch. 3, Sec. 9.1] Maintenance and repair. [Ord. No.
1984-53]
Every sign including but not limited to those signs for which permits or for
which no permits or permit fees are required, shall be maintained in a safe,
presentable and good structural material condition at all times, including
the replacement of defective parts, painting, repainting, cleaning, and other
acts required for the maintenance of said sign. The Administrator shall
require compliance with all standards of this Code and any other applicable
laws. If the sign is not made to comply with adequate safety standards, the
Administrator shall require its removal in accordance with this article.
§ 3-902. [Ch. 3, Sec. 9.2] Abandoned signs. [Ord. No. 1979-12]
Except as otherwise provided in this Code, any sign which is located on
property which becomes vacant and unoccupied for a period of three
months or more, or any sign which pertains to a time, event, or purpose
which no longer applies, shall be deemed to have been abandoned.
Permanent signs applicable to a business temporarily suspended because of
a change of ownership or management of such business shall not be deemed
abandoned unless the property remains vacant for a period of six months or
more. An abandoned sign is prohibited and shall be removed by the owner
of the sign or the premises.
§ 3-903. [Ch. 3, Sec. 9.3] Dangerous or defective signs. [Ord. No.
1979-12]
No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained on any premises owned
or controlled by him any sign which is in a dangerous or defective condition.
Any such sign shall be removed or repaired by the owner of the sign or
owner of the premises.
§ 3-904. [Ch. 3, Sec. 9.4] Unlawful signs. [Ord. No. 1984-53]
It shall be illegal for any person to erect, create, paint, own, keep, display
or maintain any sign which does not comply with the provisions of this Code
or any other applicable laws.
§ 3-905. [Ch. 3, Sec. 9.5] Removal of signs by the Administrator.
A. The Administrator shall cause to be removed any sign known by him to
be unlawfully placed on any public right-of-way or on any utility
easement within the City. Any such unlawfully placed signs may be
removed by the Administrator without notice to the owner thereof. The
Administrator may notice the owner, if known, that their sign has been
removed and they may redeem it from the Administrator within seven
days and/or as provided in § 3-906 of this code. [Ord. No. 2010-55]
§ 3-901 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-905
1:115
§ 3-906. [Ch. 3, Sec. 9.6] Disposal of signs - fees.
Any sign removed pursuant to the provisions of this article may be disposed
of in any manner deemed appropriate by the City. The cost to the City for
removal of the sign shall be considered a debt owed to the City by the owner
B. The Administrator shall cause to be removed any sign believed by him
to endanger the public safety. Such signs may be removed by the
Administrator without notice to the owner thereof, if known, in an
emergency and shall be removed by the Administrator in any case
within 24 hours after the owner thereof, if known, has been notified by
the Administrator.
C. The Administrator shall cause to be removed an abandoned sign, a sign
which is materially, electrically or structurally defective, a sign for
which no permit has been issued, a sign which is not permitted by
Article IV or VIII hereof, or a sign which otherwise has been declared to
be unlawful. The Administrator shall prepare a notice to the owner, if
known, which shall describe the sign and specify the violation or lack of
compliance involved and which shall state that if the sign is not
removed or the violation is not corrected within 14 days, the sign shall
be removed in accordance with the provisions of this article. During the
time of removal, other new signs placed on the premises which are
similarly in violation may be removed without advance notice.
D. The owner of any unlawfully placed or otherwise unlawful sign that has
been removed by the Administrator may redeem such sign from the
Administrator upon payment of the cost to the City of causing such sign
to be removed. Such costs of removal for all such signs shall not be less
than $25. Costs of any sign removal shall be recovered by the City as
provided by § 3-906 of this Code.
E. All notices mailed by the Administrator shall be sent by certified mail
except those written notices which confirm oral notices and these may
be sent by regular mail as may other notices so specified. Any time
periods provided in this article shall be deemed to commence on the
date of the receipt of notice, whether written or oral.
F. In the direction of the Administrator and except as otherwise provided
herein notices may also be orally provided to, mailed to or delivered to
the owner of the property on which the sign is located as shown on the
last equalized general real estate tax assessment roll and/or the
occupant of the property, if known.
G. Any person having an interest in a sign or property associated
therewith may appeal the determination of the Administrator ordering
removal of the sign or compliance by filing a written notice of appeal
with a written statement of the reasons in support of his/her position
with the Sign Code Board of Review within 14 days after the date of
receipt of a notice, whether written or oral, for removal of the sign.
[Ord. No. 1988-33]
§ 3-905 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 3-906
1:116
of the sign and/or the owner of the property, and may be recovered in an
appropriate court action by the City or by placement of a lien upon the
property as hereinafter provided. The cost of removal shall include any and
all incidental expenses incurred by the City in connection with the sign's
removal; costs may be recovered by the City in the manner provided.
A. The notice given by the Administrator shall state the remedial action
required to be taken; if such action is not taken within the time limits
set forth in this Code, the cost of correcting the unlawful statute of the
sign may be charged against the property on which the sign is located,
together with an additional 5% for inspection and incidental costs and
an additional 10% penalty for the cost of collection, and collected in the
same manner as real estate taxes against the property.
B. In the event that the owner of the premises, or person entitled to
possession thereof, or the owner of the sign, shall fail, neglect or refuse
to comply with the notice to remove, repair, rehabilitate or demolish the
sign declared to be unlawful, as appropriate, the owner of the sign, the
owner of the premise upon which the sign is located, and the permit
entitled to possession thereof (if other than the owner of the premises),
or all or any of them, may be prosecuted for violation(s) of this Code.
The Administrator may remove the sign declared to be unlawful. [Ord.
No. 1984-53]
C. If it shall be necessary for the Administrator to remove a sign pursuant
to the provisions hereof, bids shall be taken when the estimated costs of
removal or demolition exceed $1,500. When completed, the
Administrator shall certify to the Director of Finance the legal
description of the property upon which the work was done, together
with the name of the owner thereof, as shown by the tax rolls of the City
of Bloomington, together with a statement of work performed, the date
of performance and the cost thereof.
D. Upon receipt of such statement, the Director of Finance shall mail a
notice to the owner of said premises as shown by the tax rolls at the
address shown upon the tax rolls by certified mail, postage prepaid,
notifying such of the costs thereof (as certified by the Administrator),
together with 5% for the inspection and the other incidental costs in
connection therewith. Such notice shall state that if said amount is not
paid within 30 days following the mailing of such notice, the Director of
Finance will place a lien upon said owner.
E. If the Finance Department shall not receive payment within a period of
30 days following the mailing of such notice, the Director of Finance
will place a lien upon said property.
F. Each such lien against each lot or tract of land assessed, until paid, and
shall have priority over all other subsequent liens except general and
special taxes.
§ 3-906 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-906
1:117
G. For purposes of this article, the owner of property upon which a sign is
located shall be presumed to be the owner of all signs thereon, unless
the contrary shall appear from facts brought to the attention of the
Administrator.
H. Notwithstanding the provisions cited above in this article, in cases of
emergency, the Administrator may cause to be repaired or removed
summarily and without notice any unlawful sign which creates an
immediate hazard to the public through improper construction, or
which creates a hazard by obstructing view at intersections of either
motorist or pedestrian or any sign which has become an immediate
hazard to the public. Summary removal or repair provided for herein
shall not relieve the owner of the sign or the property on which it is
located from liability to the City for the costs provided for in this
§ 3-906. [Ord. No. 1979-12]
§ 3-906 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 3-906
1:118
ARTICLE X
Legal Nonconforming Signs
§ 3-1001. [Ch. 3, Sec. 10.1] Legal nonconforming signs.
A. Notification of nonconformity. After the enactment of this Code, the
Administrator shall, as soon as practicable, survey the City for signs
which do not conform to the requirements of this Code.
(1) Upon determination that a sign is nonconforming, the
Administrator shall use reasonable effort to so notify either
personally or in writing the user or owner of the property on which
the sign is located of the following:
(a) The sign's nonconformity; and
(b) Whether the sign is eligible for characterization either as Legal
Nonconforming" or "Unlawful."
(2) Failing determination of the sign owner, user, or owner of the
property on which the sign is located, the notice may be affixed in a
conspicuous place to the sign or to the business premises with
which the sign is associated. [Ord. No. 1979-12]
B. Signs Eligible for Characterization as "Legal Nonconforming." Any sign
located within the City limits on the date of adoption of this Code or
located in an area annexed to the City thereafter, which does not
conform with the provisions of this Code, is eligible for characterization
as a "legal nonconforming" sign and is permitted to continue as
provided in this article, provided it also meets the following
requirements:
(1) The sign was covered by a sign permit or variance on the date of
adoption of this Code if one was required under applicable law or
ordinance;
(2) If no sign permit was required under applicable law for the sign in
question, the sign was in all respects in compliance with applicable
law or ordinance on the date of adoption of this Code. [Ord. No.
1979-12]
C. Loss of legal nonconforming status. A legal nonconforming sign shall
immediately lose its legal nonconforming designation if:
(1) The sign is altered in any way in structure or copy (except for
changeable copy signs and normal maintenance), which tends to or
increases nonconformity to the sign with the requirements of this
Code; or
(2) The sign is relocated to a position making it less in compliance with
the requirements of this Code; or
§ 3-1001 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-1001
1:119
§ 3-1002. [Ch. 3, Sec. 10.2] Legal nonconforming sign maintenance
and repair. [Ord. No. 1979-12]
Nothing in this article shall relieve the owner or user of a legal
nonconforming sign or owner of the property on which the legal
nonconforming sign is located from the provisions of this Code provided,
however, that any repainting, cleaning and other normal maintenance or
repair of the sign or sign structure shall not modify the sign structure or
copy in any way which makes it more nonconforming.
(3) The sign is replaced, so as to increase its nonconformity. [Ord. No.
1979-12]
D. On the happening of any one of Subsection C(1), (2) or (3) of § 3-1001 of
this Code, the sign shall be immediately brought into compliance with
this Code with a new permit secured therefor or shall be removed.
[Ord. No. 1979-12]
§ 3-1001 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 3-1002
1:120
ARTICLE XI
Special Meetings
§ 3-1101. [Ch. 3, Sec. 11.1] Subdivision development signs.
The Administrator may issue a special permit for a temporary sign in any
zone in connection with the marketing of lots or structures in a subdivision
subject to the following conditions:
§ 3-1102. [Ch. 3, Sec. 11.2] Signs for special events. [Ord. No.
1979-12]
Temporary signs, not in excess of four square feet in area, may be erected
as participation in a public parade, public event or public celebration for a
period not to exceed 10 days provided, however, the erection of such sign
shall be approved by the Administrator.
§ 3-1103. [Ch. 3, Sec. 11.3] Nonexempt signs for direction or
instruction. [Ord. No. 1986-155]
Signs not in excess of eight square feet in area which provide traffic
direction or instruction to the public shall be allowed in any zone, provided
such signs are located entirely on the property to which they pertain
and do not contain any advertising message other than the name of the
establishment to which the directions or instructions thereon are pertinent.
In addition, the Administration, with the approval of the City Engineer, may
authorize the placing of directional signs at appropriate street intersections
or other locations for the convenience of the motoring public; such signs
A. Time Limit: Such permits may be issued for a period not to exceed one
year. The Administrator may renew such permits for additional periods
of up to one year for each permit upon written application at least 30
days prior to its expiration.
B. Type of Sign: Signs as used in this section refer to all types of signs
except signs exempted under Article VIII of this Code and those
prohibited under Article VI of this Code.
C. Legend: The off-site sign may contain advertising in connection with the
name of the subdivision, development firm, building contractor, real
estate sales firm, and may refer to materials, appliances, supplies and
building trades used in construction of the dwelling units, or services
provided by the developer.
D. Location: Any subdivision development sign shall comply with all
applicable setback requirements for the zoning district in which the
property is located. No such sign shall be permitted to remain in one
subdivision or in one lot of a subdivision for the purpose of advertising
the sale of lots or structures in another subdivision, or another lot
within the same subdivision, without the express permission of the
Administrator. [Ord. No. 1979-12]
§ 3-1101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-1103
1:121
shall pertain to places of general interest such as schools, hospitals, public
buildings, airports, fair grounds and other similar public service facilities.
§ 3-1104. [Ch. 3, Sec. 11.4] Non-electrical portable signs; permits
required.
§ 3-1105. [Ch. 3, Sec. 11.5] Election signs.
A. Permit. It shall be unlawful for a non-electrical portable sign to be
placed or displaced at any outdoor location unless a permit has been
secured from the Administrator. The permit fee as set forth in the
Schedule of Fees per location and permits and allowed thirty-day
duration. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
B. Time limit. It shall be unlawful for any non-electrical portable sign to be
displayed for more than 30 days at a time at any one premise or location
nor more frequently than 90 days between each such period of display
at any one premise or location. [Ord. No. 1986-155]
C. Portable signs prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any non-electrical
portable sign to be displayed which violates Article VI or VII of this
Code. [Ord. No. 1986-155]
D. Setback. It shall be unlawful for any non-electrical portable sign to be
set within the public right-of-way or nearer to the street right-of-way
line than the minimum distance required by § 3-501D of this Code for
adequate sight distance along said street. [Ord. No. 1986-155]
A. Notwithstanding any prohibition or restriction in this Code, persons are
authorized to erect and maintain election signs as provided in this
§ 3-1105. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any
election sign on any property other than as permitted herein.
B. Registration required:
(1) All candidates or their representative shall be required to register
with the Administrator (Director of Department of Building Safety
or his designated representative) before erecting any election sign
permitted under this § 3-1105.
(2) Registration forms shall be supplied by the Administrator. The
registration shall include a statement that the applicant shall to the
best of his ability, insure that all signs shall be erected in
conformity with this § 3-1105. There shall be no charge for this
registration which shall be issued promptly to all applicants. A
registration issued under this § 3-1105 shall be accompanied by a
copy of all regulations which may pertain to election signs.
C. Location of signs; consent of property owner.
(1) Signs authorized under this § 3-1105 may be placed in the yard of
any building or building lot in the City. It shall be unlawful,
§ 3-1103 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 3-1105
1:122
however, to place such signs in any part of the public right-of-way
or in any place in front of said building which diminish visibility or
constitute or create any danger of a traffic accident.
(2) It shall be unlawful to erect an election sign upon any property
without the consent of the owner thereof. [Ord. No. 1982-70]
(3) It shall be unlawful for any political sign to be affixed to any
benches, telephone booths, waiting areas for buses, fire hydrant,
traffic control sign or device, street sign, or utility pole of any kind.
Any signs so affixed may be summarily removed by the
Administrator. [Ord. No. 1982-70]
D. Types of signs: [Ord. No. 2003-56]
(1) Signs on residential building lots shall be single or double faced,
nonilluminated, shall not exceed six square feet in area, and shall
not exceed three feet in height. [Ord. No. 1982-70]
(2) Signs on commercial building lots shall be single or double faced,
nonilluminated, shall not exceed 16 square feet in area, and shall
not exceed six feet in height. Signs on commercial lots may be
either facia or ground signs. [Ord. No. 1982-70]
E. Time of display. Any sign authorized under this § 3-1105 shall not be
displayed more than 90 days prior to any Primary, Regular, General or
Special election. Any signs authorized under this § 3-1105 shall be
removed by midnight of the Saturday following said election, including
primary election. [Ord. No. 2003-56]
§ 3-1105 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-1105
1:123

ARTICLE XII
Review of Decisions
§ 3-1201. [Ch. 3, Sec. 12.1] Review, variances and
recommendations. [Ord. No. 2012-71]
Review of decisions of the Administrator relating to the issuance of permits,
removal of illegal signs and the granting of variances from the requirements
of this Code shall be done by the Zoning Board of Appeals pursuant to
Chapter 44, Section 44.12-1, unless said appeal is brought pursuant to
Article VII of this chapter, in which case said appeal shall be heard by the
Construction Board of Appeals pursuant to Chapter 10 of this Code. The
Zoning Board of Appeals shall also review and advise the Administrator
regarding proposed changes to this chapter.
§ 3-1201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-1201
1:125

ARTICLE XIII
Administration and Enforcement
§ 3-1301. [Ch. 3, Sec. 13.1] Code Administrator. [Ord. No. 1970-12]
The Administrator shall be chosen and shall serve at the pleasure of the City
Manager. The Administrator is hereby authorized and directed to enforce
and carry out all provisions of this Code, both in letter and spirit, with
vigilance and with all due speed. The Administrator is authorized to
promulgate regulations and procedures consistent with the purpose of this
Code toward that end. The Administrator is further empowered to delegate
the duties and powers granted to and imposed upon him under this Code.
As used in this Code, "Administrator" shall include his authorized
representative.
§ 3-1302. [Ch. 3, Sec. 13.2] Inspection by Administrator. [Ord. No.
1979-12]
The Administrator is hereby empowered to enter or inspect any building,
structure or premises in the City upon which or in connection with which
a sign, as defined by this Code, is located for the purpose of inspection of
the sign, its structural and electrical connections, and to insure compliance
with the provisions of this Code. Such inspections shall be carried out
during business hours, unless an emergency exists.
§ 3-1303. [Ch. 3, Sec. 13.3] Code violations and enforcement.
§ 3-1304. [Ch. 3, Sec. 13.4] Civil remedies. [Ord. No. 1979-12]
The violation of or failure to comply with any of the provisions of this Code
or the erection, use or display of any sign not in compliance with all of the
provisions of this Code shall be and hereby is declared to be unlawful.
§ 3-1305. [Ch. 3, Sec. 13.5] Criminal penalty. [Ord. No. 1984-53]
The violation of or failure to comply with any of the provisions of this Code
or the erection, use or display of any sign not in compliance with all of the
provisions of this Code shall be and the same are hereby declared to be a
quasi-criminal violation of the law. Upon conviction, any person in violation
of or failure to comply with any of the provisions of this Code or the owner
or user of any unlawful sign or the owner of the property upon which an
A. The remedies provided in this section for violations of or failure to
comply with provisions of this Code, whether civil, criminal or for sign
removal, shall be cumulative and shall be in addition to any other
remedy provided by law.
B. Except as otherwise provided in this Code, any sign which is not in
compliance with all of the applicable provisions of this Code or any
other law shall be referred to herein as an "unlawful" sign. [Ord. No.
1984-53]
§ 3-1301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-1305
1:127
unlawful sign is located, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $200
for each week or portion thereof, that the violation or noncompliance or
use or display of the unlawful sign occurs or has continued. Every person
involved in the violation of or failure to comply with the Code, whether he
directly commits the act or aids or abets the same, and whether present
or absent, shall be proceeded against and held as a principal, provided
however, that the owner of property on which an unlawful sign is located
who is not also the owner or user of the unlawful sign shall be subject to the
said quasi-criminal penalties only if demand for removal or alteration of the
unlawful sign shall have been personally served upon or mailed by certified
mail, return receipt requested, to said owner and the demand has remained
uncomplied with for a period of time specified herein,
§ 3-1306. [Ch. 3, Sec. 13.6] Assurance of discontinuance. [Ord. No.
1979-12]
As an additional means of enforcing this Code, the Administrator may
accept an assurance of discontinuance of any act or practice deemed in
violation of this Code or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant hereto
from any person engaging in or who has engaged in such act or practice.
Any such assurance shall specify a time limit during which such
discontinuance is to be accomplished. Failure to perform the forms of any
such assurance shall constitute prima facia proof of a violation of this Code
or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant hereto or order issued pursuant
thereto which make the alleged act or practice unlawful for the purpose of
securing any injunctive relief from a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 3-1305 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 3-1306
1:128
ARTICLE XIV
Conflict, Severability and Effective Date
§ 3-1401. [] Conflict; severability; effective date.
A. Conflict. If any portion of this Code is found to be in conflict with any
other provision of any Zoning, Building, Fire, Safety or other Ordinance
of the Code of the City of Bloomington, the provision which establishes
the higher standard shall prevail. [Ord. No. 1979-12]
B. Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of
this Code or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid
by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of
this Code or the application of the provision to other persons or
circumstances in effect and shall remain in full force and effect. [Ord.
No. 1979-12]
C. Effective date. This Code shall take effect and be in force on February
23, 1979. Approved by the City Council this 12th day of February, 1979
and signed in authentication of its passage this 12th day of February,
1979. [Ord. No. 1979-12]
§ 3-1401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-1401
1:129

ARTICLE XV
Handbills, Etc.
§ 3-1501. [Ch. 3, Sec. 20] Definitions.
COMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any circular, pamphlet, dodger,
advertisement, sheet, placard, poster, sticker, or other written or printed
matter designed to promote the sale of any article for profit or designed
to promote any profit making venture. The words "commercial handbill"
shall not include any regularly published newspaper or magazine.[Ord. No.
1979-12]
HANDBILL — Any circular, pamphlet, dodger, advertisement, sheet,
placard, poster, sticker or other written or printed matter except regularly
published newspapers or magazines.[Ord. No. 1979-12]
§ 3-1502. [Ch. 3, Sec. 21] Distributing handbills, etc. - license -
penalty. [Ord. No. 1979-12]
No person, firm or corporation shall carry on the business of distributing
handbills, samples, or advertisements of any kind within the limits of the
City of Bloomington without first having obtained a license therefor from
the City Manager.
§ 3-1503. [Ch. 3, Sec. 22] Application for license. [Ord. No.
1979-12]
Application for the license required by the preceding sections shall be made
to the City Manager upon forms provided by the City Clerk and shall be
accompanied by a license fee, payable to the City in the amount specified in
§ 3-1505 of this article.
§ 3-1504. [Ch. 3, Sec. 23] Employee of unlicensed person - penalty.
[Ord. No. 1979-12]
Any person distributing handbills, samples, or advertisements of any kind
for any person, firm, or corporation engaged in the business described in
the above section of this article, and which person, firm, or corporation has
not been licensed as herein required, shall be fined not less than $50 nor
more than $100.
§ 3-1505. [Ch. 3, See. 24] License fee. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
Every person, firm, or corporation carrying on the business of distributing
handbills, samples, or advertisements of any kind within the City of
Bloomington shall pay an annual license fee as set forth in the Schedule of
Fees.
§ 3-1501 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-1506
1:131
§ 3-1506. [Ch. 3, Sec. 25] Immoral bills prohibited - penalty. [Ord.
No. 1979-12]
No person, firm, or corporation shall distribute or cause to be distributed
within the limits of the City any bills or advertisements containing pictures,
illustrations, or written or printed accounts of an obscene or unmoral
character, under a penalty of not less than $15 nor more than $100 for each
offense.
§ 3-1507. [Ch. 3, Sec. 26] Posting in certain places prohibited -
penalty. [Ord. No. 1998-95]
No person, firm, or corporation shall paste, paint, print, nail, or attach or
be pasted, painted, printed, nailed, or attached any handbill, advertisement,
placard or instrument of any kind on any curb stone, flag stone, or any
portion of any part of any sidewalk or upon any tree, lamppost, telegraph,
telephone, or electric light pole, hydrant, or police patrol box, or upon any
private wall, door, gate, or fence without the consent in writing of the owner
thereof. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be
fined not less than $25 nor more than $100 for each offense.
§ 3-1508. [Ch. 3, Sec. 27] Bills advertising medicine or medical skill
- samples - penalty. [Ord. No. 1998-95]
No person, firm, or corporation shall place, distribute or cause to be
distributed in the City any handbill, advertisement, or other instrument
giving notice of any person having or professing to have skill in the
treatment or cure of any disorder or disease, or giving notice of any sale,
or exposure for sale of any nostrum or medicine. No person, firm, or
corporation shall distribute or cause to be distributed any sample of
medicine or herbs of any kind within the limits of said City. Any person, firm,
or corporation violating any of the provisions of this section shall be fined
not less than $25 nor more than $100 for each offense, and every single
placing, posting, or distributing shall be considered a separate offense.
§ 3-1509. [Ch. 3, Sec. 28] Advertising medicines or remedies. [Ord.
No. 1979-12]
No person shall post or cause to be posted upon or in any place within
the City where same can be seen from the streets, alleys, or other public
places of the City, any handbill or notice of any character whatsoever,
giving or purporting to give information from whom or where medicine or
remedies of any kind may be obtained for the cure, prevention, or treatment
of uterine disease or diseases peculiar to females, venereal diseases or
diseases of the genital organs; or nervous debility, impotence, sterility, or
barrenness, gonorrhea, gleet, stricture, syphilis, infection of the prostate
gland, abortion or miscarriage, or articles or means of preventing
conception.
§ 3-1506 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 3-1510
1:132
§ 3-1510. [Ch. 3, Sec. 29] Distribution near school, etc. - penalty.
[Ord. No. 1979-12]
No person, firm, or corporation shall distribute or cause to be distributed
any handbills, tickets, samples, or advertisements of any kind whatever to
any child or children within a radius of 1,000 feet of any public or private
school house or place used for school purposes, or any public or private
building in which children may assemble or meet, nor shall any such matter
be so placed that the same may be accessible to any child or children within
such distance. All violations of this section shall be punished by a fine of not
less than $5 nor more than $25.
§ 3-1511. [Ch. 3, Sec. 30] Placing handbills in or upon motor
vehicles. [Ord. No. 1984-85]
It shall be illegal for any person to place any handbill in or upon any
automobile or other motor vehicle while such automobile or other motor
vehicle is parked on any street, in any public parking lot, or on any other
public property in the City, or is being driven upon the streets of the City
without having first obtained the consent of the owner or person in charge
of such automobile or other motor vehicle.
§ 3-1512. [Ch. 3, Sec. 31] Commercial handbills.
§ 3-1513. [Ch. 3, Sec. 32] Untrue or misleading advertisements.
[Ord. No. 1979-12]
If any person in a newspaper, circular, form letter, or other publication
published, distributed, or circulated in the City, or on any billboard, sign,
card, label, or other advertising medium, displayed on, in, or near a
showcase, store, or other place in the City makes or disseminates or causes
to be made or disseminated any statement or assertion of fact concerning
the quantity, the quality, the method of production or manufacture, the cost
of production, the cost to the advertiser, tile present or former price or
the reason for the price of the merchandise or such person or concerning
the manner or source of purchase of such merchandise or the possession
of rewards, prizes, or distinctions conferred on the appearance of an offer,
advantageous to the purchaser and is untrue or calculated to mislead the
person causing such statement or assertion to be made or disseminated
shall upon conviction be punished as provided in § 1-106 of this Code.
A. No person shall distribute commercial handbills as herein defined upon
the streets, alleys, or sidewalks of the City. [Ord. No. 1979-12]
B. All of the prohibitions as to use of handbills set forth in the preceding
Sections of this chapter shall only apply to the use of commercial
handbills. [Ord. No. 1979-12]
§ 3-1510 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-1514
1:133
§ 3-1514. [Ch. 3, Sec. 33] Throwing or scattering handbills on
streets, etc. [Ord. No. 1979-12]
No person shall throw or scatter handbills or other paper upon the streets,
alleys, or sidewalks of the City.
§ 3-1515. [Ch. 3, Sec. 34] Article not applicable to legal notices.
[Ord. No. 1979-12]
The provisions of this article shall not have any application to notices
required by law.
§ 3-1516. [Ch. 3, Sec. 35] Penalty. [Ord. No. 1979-12]
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
article shall upon conviction be punished as provided in § 1-106 of this
Code.
§ 3-1514 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 3-1516
1:134
Chapter 4
AIR POLLUTION CONTROL
§ 3-1516 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-1516
1:135

ARTICLE I
Generally
§ 4-101. [Ch. 4, Sec. 1] Division - established; composition.
There is hereby established in the Building Department a division of the
municipal government of the City which shall be known as the Division of
Air Pollution Control and an Air Pollution Control Inspector.
§ 4-102. [Ch. 4, Sec. 2] Same - supervision, direction, and duties of
officers and employees.
All officers and employees of the Division of Air Pollution Control shall be
under the direction and supervision of the Director of Air Pollution Control
and shall perform such duties as may be required by them by such Director
of Air Pollution Control or by the provisions of this article.
§ 4-103. [Ch. 4, Sec. 3] Same - Ex Officio Director.
The Director of Buildings shall be ex-officio Director of Air Pollution Control
and shall be the Director of the Division of Air Pollution Control.
§ 4-104. through § 4-108. (Reserved) [Repealed by Ord. No.
1981-98]
§ 4-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-104
1:137

ARTICLE II
Fuel Burning Plants - Refuse Burning Equipment
§ 4-201. [Ch. 4, Sec. 9] Definition of "alteration."
The term, "alteration" as used in this article shall mean any work which
requires the heating or power equipment to be wholly or partially
dismantled and which results in the restoration of the heating or power
equipment to any other than its original state.
§ 4-202. [Ch. 4, Sec. 10] Installation, erection, etc., of fuel burning
plants, etc. - plans and specifications; permit required; inspection
of premises.
No fuel burning plant nor alteration of any existing fuel burning plant for
producing power and heat, or either of them, nor refuse burning equipment,
nor any chimney or furnace connected with such fuel or refuse burning
equipment, nor any brickwork on or about a high pressure boiler or dust
or grit or fume producing equipment or process shall be installed, erected,
or altered in the City until plans and specifications of the same have been
filed by the owner, contractor, installer, or other person in the office of and
approved by the Director of Air Pollution Control as being so designed that
the same can be managed and operated to conform to the provisions of this
article and to prevent air pollution nor until a permit has been issued by him
for such installation, erection, or alteration. Plans and specifications so filed
with the Division of Air Pollution Control shall show the type of installation,
the amount of work and the amount of heating to be done by any fuel or
refuse burning plant, and all appurtenances thereto, including all provisions
made for the purpose of securing complete combustion of the fuel or refuse
to be used and the manner in which it is to be burned for the purpose of
preventing air pollution. Such plans and specifications shall also contain a
statement of the rate of burning and kind of fuel or refuse proposed to be
used and the manner in which it is to be burned. Such plans shall show the
dust or grit or fume producing equipment, its method of collection, indicate
the efficiency of collection equipment, describe the toxicity of dust, grit
or fumes and indicate that the final release to atmosphere will not cause
objectionable dirt, odors, and toxicity. Such plans and specifications shall
show that the room or premises in which fuel or refuse burning apparatus
or dust or grit or fume producing equipment shall be located is provided
with doors, windows, air shafts, fans, or other means of ventilation sufficient
to prevent the temperature of such room, basement, or other portion of
building wherein such fuel or refuse burning apparatus or dirt or grit or
fume producing process is to be used from rising to a point higher than
120° F., and sufficient also to provide that the atmosphere of any such
room, basement, or other portion of the building wherein such fuel or
refuse burning apparatus may be located may be changed at least every 10
minutes or as prescribed as good practice for the manufacturing process.
Such plans shall further show the dimensions of the room in which fuel or
refuse burning apparatus is to be located and the location and dimensions of
all chimneys and smokestacks and exhaust fans, louvers, or ventilators used
§ 4-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-202
1:139
in connection with or as a part of the fuel or refuse burning plant or dirt
or grit or fume producing process. Upon the inspection and approval of the
plans and specifications by the Director of Air Pollution Control, and if such
plans and specifications shall show that adequate and approved provisions
for the purpose of securing complete combustion of the fuel or refuse to
be used and for the purpose of preventing and eliminating smoke, soot, fly
ash, noxious acids, fumes, dirt, grit, or gases have been made, a permit for
the installation or for the construction, erection, or alteration of such fuel
or refuse burning plant or dirt or grit or fume producing process shall be
issued. As soon as the Director of Air Pollution Control has issued the permit
as above provided, it shall be the duty of the various departments having
charge of the inspection of the premises wherein the fuel or refuse burning
apparatus is located to cooperate with the Director to see that the execution
of the work so authorized by the permit shall be done in conformity with the
plans and specifications submitted and approved, and that the standards,
rules and regulations fixed by the Division of Air Pollution Control are
complied with. If such plans and specifications as described above are not
submitted to the Department of Air Pollution Control for approval previous
to the installation of any new fuel burning plant, or the alteration of any
existing fuel burning plant, for producing power, heat, or either of them, or
refuse burning plant, or any chimney connected with such fuel or refusing
burning plant or dirt or grit of fume producing process, the Director shall be
authorized to seal immediately such equipment until the owner, contractor,
installer, or other person has complied with the provisions of this section.
§ 4-203. [Ch. 4, Sec. 11] Same - penalty for violation of preceding
section; exception.
Any person who shall violate any provision of the preceding section shall
be subject to the penalties provided in § 1-106 of this Code; provided, that
nothing in this section shall be construed so as to prohibit the making of
emergency alterations to the chimney, furnace, or device or process when
the necessity for such alteration arises outside of the business hours of
the Department of Air Pollution Control; provided further that the owner,
contractor, installer, or other person permitting or making such alterations
shall report the same to the department on the first business day after such
emergency alterations are commenced and apply for a permit therefor.
§ 4-204. [Ch. 4, Sec. 12] When permit for erection of building or
structure refused.
No permit shall be issued under the provisions of the Building Code of the
City for the erection or construction of any building or structure wherein
the plans for such building or structure show any chimney or smokestack
or dirt or grit or fume producing process in connection with such building
or structure, unless such chimney will accommodate the products of
combustion from either solid, liquid, or gaseous fuel and indicate adequate
provisions for the elimination of dust, grit, or fumes and until such plans
have been submitted to the Director of Air Pollution Control and the
dimensions, location, and manner of connection to the boiler of such
§ 4-202 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 4-204
1:140
chimney are approved by him. The Director shall not approve or issue
permits for commercial or industrial installations of any fuel burning device
of the surface burning type in sizes larger than those having capacity to
supply steam of 25 horsepower, or equivalent load, or for central heating
plants in single or multiple dwellings requiring 1,200 square feet of direct
steam radiation or equivalent load. The term "surface burning type," as
used in this section, is meant to include any fuel burning device in which
the fresh fuel is normally thrown directly by hand on the hot fuel bed.
§ 4-205. [Ch. 4, Sec. 13] Certificate of Director of Air Pollution
Control required before operation of plant for generation and
production of heat, power, etc.
§ 4-206. [Ch. 4, Sec. 14] Inspection and permit fees.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to use any new or altered plant, or
any plant duly sealed under the provisions of this chapter, or any plant
that has been idle for a period of more than 12 months, for the
production and generation of heat and power, or either of them, or for
the burning of refuse or dirt or grit or fume producing process until he
shall have first procured a certificate, and paid any applicable fee as set
forth in the Schedule of Fees, from the Director of Air Pollution Control
certifying that the plant is so constructed that it will do the work
required with the type of fuel and equipment used; and that in the
opinion of the Director it can consistently be so managed by a person
who ordinarily attends such plant that in burning the type of fuel in the
manner specified in the permit, no dense smoke, soot, fly ash, noxious
acids, fumes, or gases shall be emitted from the chimney connected
with the furnace or firebox or discharged to the atmosphere in violation
of the provisions of this chapter, and that a notice of the size, type, kind,
and the manner of burning the fuel as specified in the permit has been
prominently displayed and permanently attached to the plant. [Ord.
No. 2018-89]
B. The issuance and delivery by the Director of Air Pollution Control of any
permit or certificate for the construction of alteration of any plant or
chimney connected with a plant shall not be held to exempt any person
to whom any such permit or certificate has been issued and delivered,
or who is in possession of any such permit or certificate, from
prosecution on account of the emission of dense smoke, fly ash, soot,
cinders, noxious acids, fumes, or gases or dust or grit caused or
permitted by any such person.
C. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be punished as
provided in § 1-106 of this Code.
A. No fees for the inspection of plans and the issuing of permits for the
inspection of furnaces or other fuel burning apparatus or devices and
the issuing of certificates under this article shall be charged.
§ 4-204 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-206
1:141
§ 4-207. [Ch. 4, Sec. 15] When boilers or other heating apparatus to
be sealed; appeal of findings of Director of Air Pollution Control to
Appeal Board; breaking seal.
§ 4-208. [Ch. 4, Sec. 16] Emission of dense smoke declared
nuisance and prohibited; adoption of Ringlemann Chart; abatement
of nuisance.
B. If, at the time of any inspection, it is found that equipment is in such
condition that it cannot be operated in compliance with the provisions
of this chapter, the Director shall cause written notice to be given to the
owner, agent, occupant, manager, or lessee of any such premises or
equipment, setting forth wherein this chapter is being violated and also
setting forth the recommendations for correcting such violation. Such
notice shall provide that the person so notified shall have 30 days in
which to remedy the violation. If such violation is not remedied within
such period of 30 days, the Director is hereby authorized to seal the
equipment, and any person owning, operating, or in charge or control
of any such fuel burning equipment shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined as provided in § 1-106 of this Code for
each offense. Each day of failure to comply with the notice of the
Director, after the period within which the person responsible should
have corrected the violation, shall constitute a separate offense.
A. After any owner, agent, occupant, manager, or lessee of any premises
has been previously notified of one or more violations of this article
within any thirty-day period in respect to the emission of dense smoke,
soot, cinders, fly ash, or noxious acids, fumes, dust, grit, or gases, the
owner or agent of such premises shall be notified to show cause before
the Director of Air Pollution Control on a day certain not less than 10
days from the date of such notice why the equipment causing such
violations should not be sealed. The notice herein provided for may be
given by mail directed to the last known address of the party to be
notified or if such party or his whereabouts is unknown, then by posting
a notice on or near the premises at which the violations shall have
occurred. Upon such date the owner or agent may appear and be heard.
Upon such hearing, if the Director finds that adequate corrective means
and methods have not been employed to correct the cause of such
condition, then it shall be his duty to seal the equipment until such time
as a permit and certificate as provided in this article have been applied
for and issued for the plant. The owner or agent may, within 10 days of
the decision, appeal the finding to the Appeal Board, and such appeal
shall stay the sealing pending such appeal.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to break a seal of any boiler or
heating apparatus that has been duly sealed by the Director of Air
Pollution Control unless authorized by the Director in writing.
A. The emission from any fuel burning equipment, internal combustion
engine, premises or open fire, except railroad locomotives or vehicles,
§ 4-206 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 4-208
1:142
of smoke the shade or appearance of which is equal to or greater than
No. 3 of the Ringlemann Chart, for a period aggregating four minutes
or more in any 30 minutes, or of smoke the shade or density of which
is equal to or greater than No. 4 of the Ringlemann Chart, except for
periods aggregating three minutes in any 15 minutes when building a
new fire, or when a breakdown of equipment occurs is prohibited and
is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
B. The emission from any locomotive, vehicle, roller, derrick, pile driver,
kettle, or other similar machine or contrivance, while such equipment is
in cold condition, as hereinafter defined, of smoke within the City from
the smokestack or chimney of any such locomotive, vehicle, roller,
derrick, pile driver, tar kettle, or other similar machine or contrivance,
round house, or premises, except for a period not exceeding in the
aggregate three minutes in any one hour, of a density greater than No.
3 smoke, as defined by the Ringlemann Chart, of the emission from any
locomotive, vehicle, derrick, pile drive, tar kettle, or other similar
machine or contrivance, after any such equipment is in or ready for
service, for a period in excess of one continuous minute in any 15
minute period, of smoke of a density equal to or greater than No. 2 of
the Ringlemann Chart is prohibited and is hereby declared to be a
nuisance.
C. All railroad round houses or stations where steam is raised in
locomotives shall be so equipped that fires may be built and steam
raised in cold locomotives without the production of smoke of a density
greater than No. 3 of the Ringlemann Chart for a period of more than
three minutes in one hour. All locomotives stationed at such locations or
any roller, derrick, pile driver, tar kettle, or other similar machine or
contrivance shall be equipped with approved devices by means of which
fires may be cleaned or built and steam raised from cold conditions
without the production of smoke of a density greater than No. 3 of the
Ringlemann Chart for a period of more than three minutes in one hour.
The term "cold condition" shall be construed to mean fuel burning
devices in which the fire has been withdrawn or extinguished.
D. For the purpose of grading the density of smoke, the Ringlemann Chart
is now published and used by the United States Bureau of Mines
Circular 6888, and on which are illustrated graduated shades of grey or
black for use in estimating the light obscuring capacity of smoke which
is hereby made a part of this chapter by reference and shall be the
standard.
E. Whenever any condition hereby declared to be a nuisance shall be
found on any premises within the City or within one mile from the City,
the Director of Air Pollution Control or anyone whom he may duly
authorize for such purpose is empowered and directed to cause the
same to be summarily abated. Such abatement may be in addition to the
fine provided in § 1-106 of this Code.
§ 4-208 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-208
1:143
§ 4-209. [Ch. 4, Sec. 17] Escape of soot, cinders, noxious acids, etc.
from smokestacks, etc.; abatement of nuisance.
F. Any person owning, operating, or in charge of control of any
locomotive, vehicle, roller, derrick, pile driver, tar kettle, or other
similar machine or contrivance, which shall cause or permit the
emission of dense smoke within the City in violation of this section, or
which such equipment shall not contain the improved devices herein
provided for, shall be fined as provided in § 1-106 of this Code, for each
offense and each emission of dense smoke in violation of the provisions
of this section shall constitute a separate offense for each and every day
on which such violation shall continue. All persons participating in any
such violations, either as owners, proprietors, lessees, agents, tenants,
managers, superintendents, captains, engineers, firemen, janitors, or
otherwise, shall severally be liable therefor and subject to the penalties
fixed by § 1-106 of this Code.
A. It shall be unlawful within the City for any person owning or in charge
of any fuel burning, combustion, or process equipment or device, or any
portable boiler to cause, suffer or allow the emission from any such
source of any particulate matter except in conformity with the limits set
forth as follows:
(1) The basic limitation on the average emission into the atmosphere of
particulate matter from any single such source of emission shall be
0.35 grains per cubic foot of gas measured at a temperature of 60°
F. and a pressure of 30 inches of mercury under steady conditions,
provided that for emissions at levels 100 feet or more above grade,
the basic limitation shall be increased by the amount of particulate
matter of less than 10 microns in size, if any, up to a maximum
increase of 0.03 (H/100) grains per scf, where H is the height of
discharge in feet above grade.
(2) The limitation on the emission of that portion of the particulate
matter which is 44 microns in size or larger from any single such
source shall be 0.21 grains per scf.
The foregoing requirements shall be measured by the methods
for dust reporting apparatus as in current use as outlined in the
tentative Code for dust separating apparatus of the American
Society of Mechanical Engineers which is hereby made a part
of this chapter by reference, or in accordance with modified
procedures mutually agreed upon by the Director and such person.
A copy of said tentative Code shall be kept on file in the office of
the department subject to examination by interested persons.
(3) All existing coal burning combustion equipment shall meet the
limitations set forth in Subsection A(1) and (2) of this section within
10 years from the effective date of this chapter.
§ 4-208 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 4-209
1:144
(4) Until such time as more definitive standards are established and/or
are applicable, emissions of particulate matter from all fuel
burning, combustion or process equipment or devices shall not
exceed emissions which would result from operations in
accordance with existing normal good operating practice.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, permit, or allow the escape
of such quantities of soot, cinders, noxious acids, dust, grit, fumes, or
gases from any smokestack or chimney, duct, or vent, in the open air or
in any other manner in such place as to be detrimental to any person or
to the public or to endanger the health, comfort, and safety of any such
person or of the public or in such place or manner as to cause or have a
tendency to cause injury or damage to property or business. The escape
of such matter is prohibited and is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
C. No person shall operate or cause to be operated or maintain or cause to
be maintained, any furnace or combustion device for the burning of coal
or other fuels or dirt or grit or fume producing process, wholly or partly
in suspense, without maintaining and operating, while using such
furnace or combustion device or process, recognized and approved
equipment, means, methods, devices, or contrivances to reduce the
quantity of fly ash, dust, grit, or noxious fumes or gases emitted into the
open air, which are operated in conjunction with such furnace or
combustion device so that the quantity of fly ash shall not exceed 400
grains per 1,000 cubic feet of flue gas at 500° F. and not to exceed 50%
excess air in the stack at such temperature. The foregoing
requirements shall be measured by the methods outlined in the
Tentative Test Code for dust separating apparatus of the American
Society of Mechanical Engineers, which is hereby made a part of this
section by reference, a copy of which is and shall remain on file in the
office of the Director of Air Pollution Control.
§ 4-209 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-209
1:145

ARTICLE III
Ventilation
§ 4-301. [Ch. 4, Sec. 18] Installation, erection, etc. of commercial
and industrial ventilating and exhaust equipment and systems -
plans and specifications; permit required; inspection of premises.
A. No commercial or industrial ventilating and exhaust equipment and
systems nor the alterations thereof shall be installed, erected, or
altered in the City until plans and specifications of the same have been
filed by the owner, contractor, installer, or other persons in the office of
and approved by the Director of Air Pollution Control as being so
designed that the same can be managed and operated to conform to the
provisions of this article and to prevent air pollution nor until a permit,
along with a payment of any applicable fees as set forth in the Schedule
of Fees, has been issued by him for such installation, erection, or
alteration. Plans and specifications so filed with the Division of Air
Pollution Control shall show the type of installation and all
appurtenances thereto, including all provisions made for the purpose of
preventing air pollution. Such plans shall further show the dimension of
the room or rooms in which the ventilating and exhaust equipment and
system is to be located and the location and dimension of all chimneys,
outside ducts or vents, used in connection with or as a part of the
system. Upon the inspection and approval of the plans and
specifications by the Director of Air Pollution, if such plans and
specifications shall show that adequate and approved provisions for the
purpose of eliminating poisonous, deleterious material, dust, vapors,
gases, dust, grit, and fumes have been made, a permit for the
installation or for the construction, erection, or alteration of such
system shall be issued. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
B. As soon as the Director of Air Pollution Control has issued the permit as
above provided, it shall be the duty of the various departments having
charge of the inspection of the premises wherein the ventilating and
exhaust equipment and system is located to cooperate with the Director
to see that the execution of the work so authorized by the permit shall
be done in conformity with the plans and specifications submitted and
approved and that the provisions of this article and the Code of the City
are complied with. If any such plans and specifications as described
above are not submitted to the Division of Air Pollution Control for
approval previous to the installation of any new commercial or
industrial ventilating and exhaust equipment and system, or the
alteration of any such existing system or any chimney, outside duct, or
vent connected with such system, the Director shall be authorized to
seal immediately such equipment until the owner, contractor, installer,
or other person has complied with the provisions of this article.
§ 4-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-302
1:147
§ 4-302. [Ch. 4, Sec. 19] Same - penalties for violation of preceding
section; exception.
Any person who shall violate any provisions of the preceding Section shall
be subject to the penalties provided in § 1-106 of this Code; provided that
nothing in this section shall be construed as to prohibit the making of
emergency alterations to any such system, chimney, or outside duct or vent
when necessity for such alterations arise outside of the business hours of
the Division of Air Pollution Control, provided that the owner, contractor,
installer, or other person permitting or making such alterations shall report
the same to the department on the first business day after such emergency
alterations are commenced and apply for a permit therefor.
§ 4-303. [Ch. 4, Sec. 20] When permit for erection of building or
structure refused.
No permit shall be issued under the provisions of the Building Code of the
of the City for the erection or construction of any commercial or industrial
building or structure wherein the plans for such building or structure show
any chimney or outside duct or vent in connection with a ventilating and
exhaust equipment and system to be installed in such building or structure
until such plans have been submitted to the Director of Air Pollution Control
and the dimensions, location, and manner of installing and venting such
system are approved by him.
§ 4-304. [Ch. 4, Sec. 21] Report of sales or refuse burning and fuel
burning devices of any commercial or industrial ventilating and
exhaust equipment and systems - restrictions on installer.
A. Any person installing, erecting, altering, or repairing commercial or
industrial ventilating, blower, and exhaust equipment or systems shall
be licensed under 11-116 of this Code and shall comply with the
requirements of the provisions of the National Building Code and
Appendix I thereof; the National Fire Prevention Code; the Mechanical
Refrigeration Code; and the Code of the City insofar as the same are
applicable.
B. It shall be the duty of all persons engaged in the business of selling
refuse burning or fuel burning devices for producing heat or power, or
both, or any commercial or industrial ventilating and exhaust
equipment and systems, which are required to be connected to a vent
or chimney, to report to the Director of Air Pollution Control the sale of
every such article to be installed or used anywhere within the City. It
shall also be the duty of every person purchasing any of such articles at
the time of making such purchase to give to the seller a statement in
writing signed by such purchaser, or his duly authorized agent, setting
forth the correct address of the building in which such articles are to be
installed and used.
C. The report herein provided for shall be in writing and shall be delivered
or mailed to the Director of Air Pollution Control within seven days after
§ 4-302 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 4-304
1:148
§ 4-305. [Ch. 4, Sec. 22] A certificate of the Director of Air Pollution
Control required before operation of any commercial or industrial
plant.
§ 4-306. [Ch. 4, Sec. 23] Inspection and permit fees.
such sale and shall contain the name and address of the purchaser and
the location of the building in which each article is to be installed or
used.
D. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section or making any
false statement or report in connection with the sale of any such articles
mentioned in this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject
to the penalty provided in § 1-106 of this Code.
E. The provisions of this section shall not apply to wholesale transactions
made for the purpose of resale.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person operating a commercial or industrial
plant to use any new or altered plant or any plant duly sealed under the
provisions of this chapter or any plant equipped with a ventilating and
exhaust equipment and system that has been idle for a period of more
than 12 months until he shall have first procured a certificate from the
Director of Air Pollution Control certifying that in ventilating the plant
in the manner specified in the permit no poisonous, deleterious
material, dust, vapors, gases, dirt, grit, or fumes shall be emitted which
will cause air pollution in violation of the provisions of this article.
B. The issuance and delivery by the Director of Air Pollution Control of any
permit or certificate for the construction or erection of any ventilating
and exhaust equipment and system in any commercial industrial plant
shall not be held to exempt any person to whom any such permit or
certificate has been issued and delivered or who is in possession of any
such permit or certificate from prosecution on account of pollution of
the air by the emission of poisonous, deleterious material, dust, vapors,
gases, dirt, grit, or fumes caused or permitted by any such person.
C. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be punished as
provided in § 1-106 of this Code.
A. No fee for the inspection of plans and the issuing of permits and for the
inspection of commercial and industrial ventilating and exhaust
equipment and systems and the issuing of certificates under this article
shall be charged.
B. If, at the time of any inspection, it is found that the equipment is in such
condition that it cannot be operated in compliance with the provisions
of this article, the Director shall cause written notice to be given to the
owner, agent, occupant, manager or lessee of any such premises or
equipment, setting forth wherein this article is being violated and also
setting forth the recommendations for correcting such violation. Such
§ 4-304 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-306
1:149
§ 4-307. [Ch. 4, Sec. 24] When commercial or industrial ventilating
and exhaust equipment and systems to be sealed; appeal of findings
of Director of Air Pollution Control to Appeal Board, breaking seal.
§ 4-308. [Ch. 4, Sec. 25] Emission of poisonous, deleterious
material, dust, vapors, gases and fumes declared nuisance and
prohibited.
notice shall provide that the person so notified shall have 30 days in
which to remedy the violation. If such violation is not remedied within
such period of 30 days, the Director is hereby authorized to seal the
equipment and any person owning, operating or in charge or control
of any such ventilating and exhaust equipment and system shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined as provided in
§ 1-106 of this Code for each offense. Each day of failure to comply
with the notice of the Director after the period within which the person
responsible should have corrected the violation shall constitute a
separate offense.
A. After any owner, agent, occupant, manager or lessee of any premises
has been previously notified of one or more violations of this article
within any thirty-day period in respect to pollution of the air from the
emission of poisonous, deleterious material, dust, vapors, fumes, dirt,
grit or gases, the owner or agent of such premises shall be notified to
show cause before the Director of Air Pollution Control on a day certain,
not less than 10 days from the date of such notice why the equipment
causing such violations should not be sealed. The notice herein
provided for may be given by mail directed to the last known address of
the party to be notified, or if such party or his whereabouts is unknown,
then by posting a notice on or near the premises at which the violations
shall have occurred. Upon such date the owner or agent may appear
and be heard. Upon such hearing, if the Director finds that adequate
corrective means and methods have not been employed to correct the
cause of such condition, then it shall be his duty to seal the equipment
until such time as a permit and certificate as provided in this article
have been applied for and issued for the plant. The owner or agent may
within 10 days of the decision appeal the finding to the Appeal Board
and such appeal shall stay the sealing pending such appeal.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to break a seal of any ventilating and
exhaust equipment and system that has been duly sealed by the
Director of Air Pollution Control, unless authorized by the Director in
writing.
A. The emission from any commercial or industrial ventilating and exhaust
equipment and system of poisonous, deleterious material, dust, grit,
vapors, gases and fumes is prohibited, and is hereby declared to be a
nuisance.
§ 4-306 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 4-308
1:150
B. Whenever any conditions hereby declared to be a nuisance shall be
found on any premises within the City, or within one mile from the City,
the Director of Air Pollution Control or anyone whom he may duly
authorize for such purpose is empowered and directed to cause the
same to be summarily abated. Such abatement may be in addition to the
fine provided in § 1-106 of this Code.
C. Any person owning, operating or in charge or control of any commercial
or industrial ventilating and exhaust equipment and system, which shall
cause or permit the emission of poisonous, deleterious material, dust,
grit, vapors, gases and fumes within the City in violation of this section
shall be fined as provided in § 1-106 of this Code for each offense; and
every emission of poisonous, deleterious material, dust, grit, vapors,
gases and fumes in violation of the provisions of this section shall
constitute a separate offense for each and every day on which such
violations shall continue. All persons participating in any such violation,
either as owners, proprietors, lessees, agents, tenants, managers,
superintendents, engineers, janitors or otherwise, shall severally be
liable therefor and subject to the penalties fixed by § 1-106 of this Code.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, permit or allow the escape
of such quantities of poisonous, deleterious material, dust, grit, vapors,
gases and fumes from any ventilating or exhaust equipment and
systems in the open air or in any manner and in such place as to be
detrimental to any person or to the public or so as to impair the health
and safety of such persons or the public. The escape of such matter is
prohibited and is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
E. No person shall operate or cause to be operated or maintained any
ventilating exhaust equipment and system in commercial or industrial
plants for the expulsion of poisonous, deleterious material, dust, grit,
vapors, gases and furies, except with recognized and approved means,
methods, which shall reduce the quantity of such poisonous, deleterious
material, dust, grit, vapors, gases and fumes emitted into the open air
at a place lower than the 10 feet above any building within 50 feet
thereof.
§ 4-308 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-308
1:151

ARTICLE IV
Open Fires - Vehicles - Windborne Materials
§ 4-401. [Ch. 4, Sec. 26] Open fire regulations.
A. Within the City limits of Bloomington, no person shall burn any
garbage, solid waste, commercial solid waste, yard waste, household
waste, junk, refuse, rubbish, construction waste, hazardous waste,
buildings, or structures.
B. The use of outdoor grills and barbecues for cooking is permitted.
C. Recreational fires shall be allowed in approved containers or fire pits.
D. Recreational fire shall be defined as an outdoor fire whose purpose is
for pleasure, religious, ceremonial, cooking, warmth or similar
purposes.
(1) For the purpose of this section, approved container shall be defined
as a device specifically designed for the use of burning wooed or
charcoal, including but not limited to portable fireplaces, fire pits
or chimineas. All portable devices shall be equipped with a spark
arrestor (i.e. screen or chimney). The approved container made of
stone, metal, or ceramic construction designed for the purpose of
containing a fire shall also be permitted provided the total fuel area
does not exceed three feet in diameter and two feet in height. Wood
contained in permissible fires shall be no more than three feet in
length.
(2) No approved container shall be located within eight feet of a
structure or public way. No approved fire pit shall be located within
25 feet of a structure or public way.
(3) Only clean, dry firewood or charcoal may be used for recreational
fires. Construction materials or yard waste are strictly prohibited.
The use of flammable or combustible liquids, other than
commercially produced charcoal lighter fluid, to start the fire is
strictly prohibited.
(4) All recreational fires shall be constantly attended by a responsible
adult until the fire is extinguished. A minimum of one portable fire
extinguisher with a 4-A rating or a functional hose attached to a
functional water source shall be available for immediate use.
(5) All recreational fires have maximum time limit of four hours and
shall be properly extinguished at the end of activities or time limit.
Regardless of when the fire was initiated it is not allowed to extend
later than 11:00 p.m. and may begin no earlier than 7:00 a.m.
(6) The fire shall be immediately extinguished any time wind
conditions become strong (at or above 15 MPH or greater) or if
there are sustained wind gusts in excess of 20 MPH, or if the wind
§ 4-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-401
1:153
begins to carry brands or embers creating a potential for fire
extension.
E. Bonfires may be allowed only for officially sponsored activities of civic,
educational and religious organizations. Bonfires are not approved for
the general public. Allowed bonfires are subject to the following
conditions:
(1) The organization requesting the bonfires must submit a map of the
burn site to the Bloomington Fire Department for review a
minimum of seven business days prior to the event. The site map
must show emergency access points to the site (i.e. roads, parking
lots, alleys, etc.) burn sites proximity to buildings/structures,
location of hydrants, and approximate number of location of
participants.
(2) The organization requesting the bonfire must obtain a burn permit
from the Bloomington Fire Department at least 48 hours prior to
the lighting of the bonfire. A Fire Department official will need to
inspect the site the date of the burn. [Ord. No. 2014-101]
(3) The location of the bonfire shall be no closer than 50 feet to any
structure, tree, shrub or combustible material and provisions shall
be made to prevent the fire from spreading to within 50 feet of any
structure or combustible material.
(4) The organization requesting the bonfire will appoint a minimum of
two adults to act as bonfire supervisors throughout the entire
event. These supervisors shall each have a means of
communication (cell phone, etc.) to alert the Fire Department in
the event of any issues.
(5) The fuel for the bonfire shall consist only of clean, dry non-treated
lumber or firewood stacked no more than 10 feet in height and with
a diameter of not to exceed 10 feet at the base of the pile.
(6) The use of flammable or combustible liquids, other than
commercially produced charcoal lighter fluid, to start the fire is
strictly prohibited. Small amounts of paper and kindling should be
used. Only dedicated bonfire supervisors will initiate the fire.
(7) No one, except the bonfire supervisors and/or emergency
personnel shall be allowed within 10 feet of the bonfire throughout
the duration of the event. Adequate security measures must be in
place to prevent the audience from encroaching on the pile.
(8) The bonfire shall be properly extinguished at the end of activities,
but in any case will not be allowed after 11:00 p.m.
(9) The bonfire can be suspended or cancelled at any time during the
event if wind conditions become strong (15 MPH or greater) or if
there are sustained gusts in excess of 20 MPH, or if the wind begins
§ 4-401 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 4-401
1:154
§ 4-402. [Ch. 4, Sec. 27] Emission of smoke and gases from internal
combustion engines of vehicles.
to carry brands or embers creating a potential for fire extension.
Bonfires identified as offensive or objectionable due to excessive
smoke or odor emissions may be extinguished by Fire Department
officials.
F. The Fire Chief/Police Chief or their designee may prohibit any type of
burning that becomes a nuisance based on complaints of irritation of
eyes or breathing of others, when the atmospheric conditions or local
conditions make such fire hazardous and may order the extinguishment
of any fire which creates or adds to a hazardous or objectionable
situation.
G. Definitions.
BONFIRE — A large outdoor utilized for ceremonial purposes, as an
expression of public joy and exultation, or for amusement.
FIRE PIT — A pit dug into the ground or made from stones, masonry,
etc, that rests on the ground, for keeping a fire used for recreation or
cooking.
PUBLIC WAY — A public street, sidewalk, alley or bike trail.
RECREATIONAL FIRE — A small outdoor fire whose purpose is for
pleasure, viewing, religious, ceremonial, cooking, warmth or similar
purposes using only seasoned dry firewood or commercially available
charcoal briquettes.
RUBBISH — Items such as paper, plastic, rubber, food products, metal,
glass and combustible liquids.
STRUCTURE — A building, garage, house or shed attached to the
ground that consists of a roof and may have walls.
YARD WASTE — Vegetative matter resulting from landscaping and yard
maintenance operations and includes materials such a tree and shrub
trimmings, vegetables, flowers, leaves, grass clippings, trees and tree
stumps.
H. Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this
section shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $500 for each
offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
during which a violation occurs or continues. [Ord. No. 2010-46]
A. It shall be illegal for any person to operate or cause to be operated upon
any street, highway, public place, or private premises within the City
any internal combustion engine of any motor vehicle or other vehicle
while stationary or moving, which emits from any source any
unreasonable and excessive smoke, obnoxious or noxious gases, fumes
or vapor. [Ord. No. 1989-110]
§ 4-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-402
1:155
§ 4-403. [Ch. 4, Sec. 28] Handling of materials susceptible to
becoming windborne.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit the handling, loading,
unloading, reloading, storing, transferring, transporting, placing,
depositing, throwing, discarding or scattering of any ashes, fly ash, cinders,
slag or dust collected from any combustion process, any dust, dirt, chaff,
wastepaper, trash, rubbish, waste or refuse matter of any kind, or any other
substance or material whatever which is likely to be scattered by the wind
or is susceptible to being windborne, without taking reasonable precautions
or measures so as to minimize atmospheric pollution.
§ 4-404. [Ch. 4, Sec. 29] Storage of materials susceptible to
becoming windborne.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain or cause to be
operated or maintained any building, structure or premises, open area,
right-of-way, storage pile of materials, yard, vessel, or vehicle, or
construction, alteration, building, demolition or wrecking operation, or any
other enterprise which has or involves any matter, material or substance
likely to be scattered by the wind, or susceptible to being windborne,
without taking reasonable precautions or measures so as to minimize
atmospheric pollution.
§ 4-405. [Ch. 4, Sec. 30] Director to have jurisdiction of windborne
violations.
The Director shall have jurisdiction and authority over the sources of any
matter, material or substance likely to be scattered by the wind, or
susceptible to becoming airborne or a contributing factor to atmospheric
pollution and shall have authority to abate windborne nuisances and to
instigate prosecutions for violations of this chapter or any other Chapter
of the Code of the City relating to the eradication or control of matter
susceptible to being airborne. For the purpose of minimizing atmospheric
pollution he shall, with the advice and consent of the Appeal Board,
prescribe reasonable, specific operating and maintenance practices for
buildings, structures, premises, open areas, automobiles, and/or truck
parking and sales lots, private roadways, rights-of-way storage piles of
materials, yards, vessels, vehicles, construction, alteration, building,
demolition or wrecking operations, and any other enterprise which has or
involves any matter, material or substance susceptible to being windborne,
and for the handling, transportation, disposition, or other operation with
respect to any such material subject to being windborne, which practices
shall be embodied in the Code of the Recommended Practices of the City.
B. Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this
section hereof shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $500 for
each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during which a violation occurs or continues. [Ord. No.
1989-110]
§ 4-402 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 4-406
1:156
§ 4-406. [Ch. 4, Sec. 31] Notices of violation - use of, to notify
violators.
The Director is hereby authorized to issue notices of violation for the
purpose of giving notice to persons allegedly violating any of the provisions
of this chapter or other ordinances relating to atmospheric pollution. Such
notice relay be given by any inspector or other properly trained authorized
agent of said Director by delivering such notice to the alleged violator. Such
notice shall direct the alleged violator to appear and to present such notice
at the designated office of the department in the City Hall at the date and
hour specified thereon for the purpose of conferring with respect to the
alleged violation and the corrective measures, if any, which should be taken.
§ 4-407. [Ch. 4, Sec. 32] Automobiles and/or truck parking and
sales lots or private roadways - surfacing of.
No person shall maintain or conduct or cause to be maintained or conducted
any parking lot and/or truck parking lot or use any real estate for a private
roadway unless such real property is covered or treated with a surface
or substance or otherwise maintained in such manner as to minimize
atmospheric pollution.
§ 4-408. [Ch. 4, Sec. 33] Interference with Director of Air Pollution
Control in enforcement of article.
Any person who shall refuse to comply with or shall assist in the violation of
any of the provisions of this article or who in any manner hinders, obstructs,
delays, resists, prevents or in any way interferes or attempts to interfere
with the Director of Air Pollution Control or Air Pollution Control Inspectors,
Police Officers, or Fire Inspectors in the performance of any duty enjoined
in this article or who shall refuse to permit the inspection or examination of
any building, establishment, premises or enclosures for the purpose of the
enforcement of this article shall be fined as provided in § 1-106 of this Code.
§ 4-409. [Ch. 4, Sec. 34] Prosecutions for violations of article.
Prosecutions for all violations of this article shall be instituted by the
Director of Air Pollution Control and shall be prosecuted in the name of the
City. The issuance and delivery by the Director of Air Pollution Control of
any permit or certificate for the construction or the alteration of any plant
or chimney connected with a plant shall not be held to exempt any person to
whom any such permit has been issued or delivered or who is in possession
of any such permit from prosecution on account of emission or issuance of
any matters or things forbidden by this article caused or permitted by any
such person.
§ 4-410. [Ch. 4, Sec. 35] Defense and exemptions to charges for
violations of article.
In any proceeding under this article, it shall be a good defense if the
person charged with the unlawful emission of smoke, fly ash, soot, cinders,
§ 4-406 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-410
1:157
noxious acids, poisonous, deleterious materials, dust, grit, vapors, fumes or
gases shall show to the satisfaction of the Court or Jury trying the same
that there is no known practicable device, appliance, means or method
by application of which to his building, establishment, premises, motor
vehicle, or equipment the emission or discharge of the dense smoke, fly ash,
soot, cinders, noxious acids, poisonous, deleterious materials, dust, grit,
vapors, fumes or gases complained of in such proceedings could have been
prevented in the general performance of their duties, or for the purpose of
obtaining the facts with respect to any defense, the Director of Air Pollution
Control and the Air Pollution Control Inspector are hereby authorized to
enter at all reasonable hours upon and into all buildings, establishments,
premises and enclosures in or from which they have reason to believe
that the provisions of this article are being violated, and to inspect or
examine such buildings, establishments, premises or enclosures and the
Director of Air Pollution Control and the Air Pollution Control Inspector
shall collect and preserve evidence of all facts as to any violations of this
article. Upon written complaint to the Director of Air Pollution Control by
the owner or operator of any fuel burning plant or any ventilating exhaust
equipment or system or dust, grit or fume producing process or motor
vehicle described in this article against any decision, ruling or order of
the Director setting forth that it is impossible in the operation of such
apparatus, either by alterations, repairs or addition thereto, to operate the
same in complete compliance with the requirements of this article and upon
filing and depositing the sum of $5 with the Director, the Director shall
thereupon and in any event not later than 10 days from the receipt of
such written complaint cause the same to be filed and the deposit of $5
to be made with the Appeal Board, which shall thereafter set a time and
hearing for such complaint and give notice thereof by mail to the parties
interested, and after such hearing the Appeal Board may vary or modify the
application of any of the regulations or provisions of this article relating to
such fuel burning plant or any ventilating exhaust equipment or system, or
dust, grit or fume producing process or motor vehicle so that the spirit of
this article shall be observed, the public health, welfare, and safety secured,
and substantial justice done. In exercising the above-mentioned powers, the
Appeal Board may in conformity with the provisions of this article reverse or
affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the order, requirements, decisions
or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirements,
decision or determination as ought to be made and to that end shall have all
the powers of the Director of Air Pollution Control.
§ 4-411. [Ch. 4, Sec. 36] Definitions.
OPEN BURNING — The combustion of any matter in the open or in an open
dump.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, firm, company, corporation, joint
stock company, trust, estate, political subdivision, state agency, or any other
legal entity, or their legal representative, agent or assign.
§ 4-410 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 4-411
1:158
Chapter 5
(RESERVED)
Chapter 6
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
§ 6-101. [Ch. 6, Sec. 1] Definitions.
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms as used in this
article shall be construed according to the definition given below.
ALCOHOL — The product of distillation of any fermented liquor, whether
rectified or diluted, whatever may be the origin thereof, and includes
synthetic ethyl alcohol. It does not include denatured alcohol or wood
alcohol.[Ord. No. 2004-2]
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR — Any spirits, wine, beer, ale or other liquid
containing more than 1/2 of 1% of alcohol by volume, which is fit for
beverage purposes.[Ord. No. 2004-2]
BEER — A beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion
or concoction of barley or other grain, malt and hops in water, and includes
among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter and the like.[Ord.
No. 2004-2]
CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP —
CLUB —
A change in the form of ownership, e.g. from an individual or
partnership or to a corporation or from a partnership to an individual;
A.
A change from an individual to a partnership or a change in a
partnership such as the addition or deletion of any partner; or
B.
In a corporation, the transfer of over 5% of the stock thereof except
for corporations listed on a national stock exchange in which event the
transfer of a controlling interest or over 50% of the stock thereof. [Ord.
No. 2004-2]
C.
A patriotic or veterans' society organized under the laws of the United
States or the State of Illinois; and
A.
A corporation organized under the laws of the United States or the
State of Illinois but not pecuniary profit, solely for the promotion of
some common object other than the sale or consumption of alcoholic
liquors kept, used and maintained by its members through the payment
of annual dues and owning, hiring or leasing a building or space in a
building of such extent and character as may be suitable and adequate
for the reasonable and comfortable use and accommodation of its
members and their guests and provided with suitable and adequate
B.
§ 4-411 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-101
1:159
FORTIFIED WINE — Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation
of the natural contents of fruits or vegetables, containing sugar, when
fortified by the addition of alcohol or spirits, as above defined.[Ord. No.
2004-2]
HOTEL — Every building or other structure kept, used, maintained,
advertised and held out to the public to be a place where food is actually
served and consumed and sleeping accommodations are offered for
adequate pay to travelers and guests, whether transient, permanent or
residential, in which 25 or more rooms are used for sleeping
accommodations of such guests and having one or more public dining rooms
where meals are served to such guests, such sleeping accommodations
and dining rooms being conducted in the same building or buildings in
connection therewith and such building or buildings, structure or structures
being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room
equipment and capacity.[Ord. No. 2004-2]
KEG — Any metal, wooden, plastic, paper or other container designed to
hold four or more gallons of liquid and actually containing, any amount of
alcoholic liquor.[Ord. No. 2009-49]
kitchen and dining room space and equipment and maintaining a
sufficient number of servants and employees for cooking, preparing and
serving food and meals for its members and guests; provided that such
club files with the Mayor at the time of its application for a license
under this Ordinance two copies of a list of names and residences of
its members and similarly files within 10 days of the election of any
additional member, his name and address; and provided further, that
its affairs and management are conducted by a Board of Directors,
Executive Committee, or similar body chosen by the members at their
annual meeting and that no member or any officer, agent, or employee
of the club is paid, or directly or indirectly receives in the form of
salary or other compensation any profits from the distribution or sale
of alcoholic liquor to the club or the members of the club or its guests
introduced by members beyond the amount of such salary as may be
fixed and voted at any annual meeting by the members or by its Board
of Directors or other governing body out of the general revenue of the
club and which:
Is affiliated with a national club or organization and/or clubs or
organizations in all 50 states; or
(1)
Maintains eating, golf and swimming facilities on club premises for
the use of members and their guests; or
(2)
Was chartered as a not-for-profit corporation prior to December
5, 1933 and regularly and routinely restricts admittance to the
premises to members of the club and their guests. [Ord. No.
2004-2]
(3)
§ 6-101 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 6-101
1:160
LICENSEE/LICENSE HOLDER — The individual or organized licensee or
license holder and any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or
employee of a licensee or license holder.[Ord. No. 2004-2]
ORIGINAL PACKAGE — A bottle, flask, jug, can, barrel, keg or other
receptacle or container whatsoever used, corked, or capped, sealed and
labeled by the manufacturer of alcoholic liquor to contain and to convey
any alcoholic liquor, except a bottle or can containing 12 ounces or less of
beer shall not be considered an original package unless grouped or fastened
in a receptacle containing no less than six such bottles or cans.[Ord. No.
2004-2]
RESIDENT OF THE CITY — Any person living in the City for a period of not
less than one calendar year.[Ord. No. 2004-2]
RETAIL GROCERY CONVENIENCE STORE — Any place kept, used,
maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where at least
five of the following seven categories of products can be purchased at retail:
dairy products, baked goods, frozen foods, groceries, snack foods, health
and beauty aids, and where a maximum of 15% of the total public selling
space is devoted to the display of alcoholic beverages offered for sale.
"Public selling space" includes all of the area between the floor and ceiling
of the premises which is open, accessible, and/or visible to members of the
general public, including the interior of any cooler or other refrigeration
units or storage cases accessible and/or visible to the general public and
any area with restricted public access, such as the area behind sales
counters, from which sales are made to members of the general
public.[Ord. No. 2004-2]
RETAIL SALE — The sale for use or consumption and not for resale.[Ord.
No. 2004-2]
SALE — Any transfer or exchange in any manner or by any means
whatsoever for a consideration, and includes and means all sales made by
any person, whether as principal, proprietor, agent, servant, or employee,
and includes, but is not limited to, all of the following acts when done for
consideration:
A. The selling of liquor;
B. The giving away of liquor;
C. The dispensing of liquor;
The providing of mix, ice, water or glasses for the purpose of mixing
drinks containing alcoholic liquor for consumption on the same
premises;
D.
E. The pouring of liquor;
F. The providing of "setups" containing alcoholic liquor;
G. The storage of any alcoholic beverage. [Ord. No. 2004-2]
§ 6-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-101
1:161
SETUP ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment not holding a Class A, B
or C liquor license, which engages in any of the activities described in the
definition of Sale of this chapter.[Ord. No. 2004-2]
SINGLE SERVING SIZE — An original package that contains 40 ounces or
less of alcoholic liquor.[Ord. No. 2004-2]
SPIRITS — Any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by distillation,
mixed with water or other substance in solution and includes brandy, rum,
whiskey, gin or other spirituous liquors, and such liquors when rectified,
blended or otherwise mixed with alcohol or other substances.[Ord. No.
2004-2]
TO SELL — Includes to keep or expose for sale and to keep with intent to
sell.[Ord. No. 2004-2]
UNFORTIFIED, WINE — Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the
fermentation of the natural contents of fruits or vegetables containing
sugar, excluding such beverages when fortified by the addition of alcohol or
spirits, as above defined.[Ord. No. 2004-2]
WINE, BEER AND SPIRITS TASTING — A supervised presentation of beer,
wine or spirits products to the public, offered free of charge or for a fee, in
which small quantities of beer, wine or spirits are served for consumption
on the premises as a sample of the product being sold by the license holder
and which meets the following conditions:
§ 6-102. [Ch. 6, Sec. 2] License required; change of ownership
approval; temporary extension of license to buyer.
Samples of beer are offered in amounts of two ounces or less, samples
of wine are offered in amounts of one ounce or less and samples of
spirits are offered in amounts of 1/2 ounce or less.
A.
B. A maximum of two tastings may be conducted during any week.
Each tasting shall have a maximum duration of four hours. [Ord. No.
2012-16]
C.
D. No tasting shall take place after 9:00 p.m.
All samples shall be poured by the licensee, an employee of licensee or
a licensed Registered Tasting Representative.
E.
No tastings shall occur at premises of license holders with a GPB or
GPA license. [Ord. No. 2011-02]
F.
A. It shall be illegal for any person either by himself or his agent or any
person acting as an agent, barkeeper, Clerk or servant of another
person or legal entity, to sell or offer for sale at retail any alcoholic
beverage or to engage in any sale as defined in § 6-101 of this chapter
or for compensation to cater parties or other gatherings of persons
without the person or his principal first having obtained a license to do
so as provided in this chapter. [Ord. No. 1983-109]
§ 6-101 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 6-102
1:162
B. It shall be illegal for any person described in such Subsection A to
engage in any activity described in Subsection A in violation of any
term, or condition of any liquor license. [Ord. No. 1983-105]
C. It shall be illegal for any liquor license holder to engage in any activity
specified in Subsection A above if there has been a change of ownership
as defined in § 6-101 of this chapter without having first obtained a
license for the new ownership to do so or approval of the new
ownership as required by this chapter. Prior to when a change of
ownership occurs, the existing license holder and the proposed new
owner(s) shall both have the responsibility of applying in writing for
approval of the new entity or organization as a liquor license holder in
the City of Bloomington. The failure to so apply and obtain the
necessary approval as indicated is a violation of this Ordinance which
can result in penalties being assessed against all involved persons
pursuant to § 6-142 and/or 6-151 of this Code. With respect to existing
license holders involved in such activity, any license in which they may
have any interest may be suspended or revoked in the same manner as
though it were directly involved in the violation involved in this matter.
[Ord. No. 1983-105]
D. The Liquor Commissioner may approve or reject changes in the form of
ownership, such as an individual or partnership incorporating or
deletion of a partner or shareholder. The Liquor Commissioner shall
have the option of approving or rejecting changes of ownership as
defined in Subsections B and C of the definition of "change of
ownership" in § 6-101 or of submitting the requested change to the City
Council with a recommendation to approve or disapprove licensing the
changed ownership. In the discretion of the Liquor Commissioner, the
recommendation may be developed with or without a public hearing
and with or without notice being mailed to all residents within 500 feet
of the establishment and published notice shall not be necessary. In the
discretion of the Liquor Commissioner persons having an ownership
interest in a liquor establishment after a change of ownership may be
required to file a new application for a liquor license to be evaluated
and considered in the same manner as all such applications are
processed. Every request for approval of any change of ownership must
be in writing as specified by the Liquor Commissioner and must fully
explain the change. [Ord. No. 1983-105]
E. Each contract for the sale of all or part of a business for which the sale
of alcoholic beverages is significant should be made contingent upon
the City Council creating licenses for the new owner(s) or the change of
licensed ownership otherwise being approved. When all other aspects
of the sale or change of licensed ownership of a business may be
completed before the liquor license application of the buyer(s) or new
licensed ownership entity will be considered by the City Council, the
Mayor in writing may extend the license(s) of the seller(s) to the
buyer(s) for a period not to exceed 45 days or until the date of the
§ 6-102 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-102
1:163
§ 6-103. [Ch. 6, Sec. 3] Number of licenses limited - applications.
[Ord. No. 2018-89]
Applications for creation of such licenses shall be made to the Mayor upon
forms prepared and furnished by the City Clerk. Each application shall
be signed and verified by the oath or affirmation of the applicant, if an
individual. If the applicant is a partnership, all parties shall sign and verify
the application. In case the application is a corporation or club, all officers
must sign and verify the application and indicate their official position.
The information recited in the application form must be verified as to each
person signing the application. Such application shall be submitted and
filed with the City Clerk's Office after payment to the City of an application
fee as set forth in the Schedule of Fees. Each application shall contain the
following information and statements:
Council Meeting at which the application will be considered, whichever
occurs first, subject to the following conditions:
(1) The buyer(s)/new ownership entity must have filed with the City
Clerk a liquor license application; and
(2) The buyer(s)/new ownership entity must request the extension in a
letter to the Mayor wherein the reasons for the request are stated.
[Ord. No. 1985-2]
A. The name, age and address of the applicant in the case of an individual;
in the case of a copartnership, the persons entitled to share in the
profits thereof; and in the case of a corporation for profit or club, the
date of incorporation, the objects for which it was organized, the names
and addresses of the officers and directors, and if a majority in interest
of the stock of such corporation is owned by one person or his
nominees, the name and address of such person;
B. The citizenship of the applicant, his place of birth, and if a naturalized
citizen, the time and place of his naturalization;
C. The character of business of the applicant, and in case of a corporation,
the objects for which it was formed;
D. The length of time that said applicant has been in business of that
character or in the case of a corporation, the date on which its charter
was issued;
E. The amount of goods, wares and merchandise on hand at the time the
application is made;
F. The location and description of the premises and place of business
which is to be operated under such license; and whether or not the
proposed location is within 100 feet of any church, hospital, home for
aged, or indigent persons, or for war veterans, their wives or children;
§ 6-102 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 6-103
1:164
§ 6-104. [Ch. 6, Sec. 4] Disqualification for license.
No such license shall be issued to:
G. A statement whether applicant has made similar application for a
similar license on premises other than described in this application and
the disposition of such application;
H. Whether food for human consumption is to be sold in such place of
business if application is allowed;
I. Whether the applicant is the owner of the premises for which a license
is sought and if he is not, the name of the landlord and the terms of the
lease;
J. Whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of being the
owner or an inmate of a house of ill fame or pandering or any other
crime or misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality;
K. A statement that he is not at the time of making the application
connected with the house of ill fame;
L. A statement that applicant has never been convicted of a felony and is
not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing
contained in this chapter, laws of this State, or the Ordinances of this
City, other than minor traffic violations;
M. Whether a previous license by any state or subdivision thereof or by
federal government has been revoked and reasons therefor;
N. A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of the
State of Illinois or of the United States or any Ordinance of the City in
the conduct of his place of business;
O. A statement that the applicant will testify under oath to all competent,
relevant, and material questions propounded to him in any hearing
conducted by the local liquor commission, either before or after the
issuance of a license to him and that his failure to so testify shall be
sufficient reason for the refusal to issue any such license to him or for
the suspension or revocation of any license which has been issued to
him;
P. Responses to all questions asked of applicant on forms sent by the City
to the applicant. [Ord. No. 1998-87]
A. A person not of legal age or under any legal disability;
B. A person not a resident of McLean County;
C. A person who is not a good character and reputation in the community
in which he resides;
D. A person who has been convicted of a felony under the laws of the State
of Illinois or any other state or the United States, unless the
§ 6-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-104
1:165
§ 6-105. [Ch. 6, Sec. 4A] Notice and hearing on application for
creation of license; inspection of premises.
Commissioner determines, after investigation, that such person has
been sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant the public trust;
E. A person who has been convicted of being the keeper of or is keeping a
house of ill fame;
F. A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or
misdemeanor opposed to decency or morality;
G. A person whose license issued under this Ordinance has been revoked
for cause;
H. A person who at the time of application for renewal of any license
hereunder would not be eligible for such license upon a first
application;
I. A partnership unless all members of the partnership reside within
McLean County and all are otherwise qualified to obtain a license;
J. A corporation, if any official, manager or director thereof or any
stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than 5% of
the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license
hereunder for any reason other than citizenship or residence within the
City;
K. A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent
unless said manager or agent possess the same qualifications required
of the licensee;
L. A person who has been convicted of a violation of any Federal or State
law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor
subsequent to the passage of this Code or shall have forfeited his bond
to appear in court to answer charges for any such violation;
M. A person who does not own the premises for which a license is sought
or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which the license
is to be issued;
N. Any law enforcing public official, any Mayor or Councilman, and no
such official shall be interested in any way, either directly or indirectly,
in the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor;
O. Any person, association or corporation not eligible for a state retail
liquor dealer's license;
P. Any person who fails to furnish or falsely furnishes information or who
fails to make or falsely makes statements required in the application for
license as set forth in this chapter. [Ord. No. 2006-113]
A. Notice.
§ 6-104 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 6-105
1:166
(1) Upon the filing of an application for creation of a license, the Liquor
Commissioner shall fix a time and place for a hearing thereon
before the Liquor Commission. Notice of the hearing shall be given
not less than seven days prior to the hearing:
(a) By publication in a newspaper published in the City, and
(b) By delivery of a copy of the notice to the properties or by mail
to occupants of the properties which abut the property for
which a license is sought if a license issued pursuant to this
Code has been in effect for said premises within six months of
the date of the scheduled hearing or if the application is for the
creation of an LA or LB license regardless of whether a license
has been in effect for said premises within six months of the
scheduled hearing, unless a 500 feet notice is requested or
required as hereinafter provided.
(2) At the request of any Liquor Commissioner or member of the City
Council or when an application is received: for the first liquor
license at a particular location, or if a liquor establishments been
nonfunction at a location for more than six months prior to the date
of the hearing, such notice shall be given by delivery of a copy of
the notice to the properties or by mail to the occupants of the
properties which are within 500 feet of the proposed premises.
Defects in the giving of such notices provided for in this subsection
shall not be grounds for challenge to any decision to issue or not to
issue a liquor license absent a showing of substantial prejudice
stemming from such defect. [Ord. No. 1992-102]
B. The City Clerk, upon receipt of an application for creation of a liquor
license, shall send notice of such application to the Building Safety
Department, Fire and Police Departments of the City, and McLean
County Health Department. The Building Safety, Fire and Health
Departments shall inspect the premises sought to be licensed and
report their findings to the Liquor Commission; the Police Department
shall investigate the background including criminal history information
of persons interested in the application and report its findings to the
Liquor Commission. [Ord. No. 1992-102]
C. Hearing and evidence. The Liquor Commission shall receive any and
may require such evidence as it may deem necessary to make findings
based upon the standard and factual criteria outlined in § 6-106 of this
chapter. [Ord. No. 1992-102]
D. Report to Council. After conducting a hearing on an application for
creation of a new license at which all interested persons have had an
opportunity to speak, the Liquor Commission shall report its findings to
the City Council along with a recommendation. The report shall relate
its findings of fact to the factual criteria listed in § 6-106 of this chapter.
[Ord. No. 1992-102]
§ 6-105 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-105
1:167
§ 6-106. [Ch. 6, Sec. 4B] Creation of new license - findings.
E. The Liquor Commission shall not be required to conduct a hearing on
applications for catering licenses (Class W) or secondary premises
licenses (Class SA and SB). The Mayor, on behalf of the Commission, or
two members of the Liquor Commission, in the Mayor's absence, may
issue an SA or SB license upon receipt of an application therefor and
proof of adequate dram shop insurance. The City Clerk may issue
catering licenses as provided in § 6-114 of this Code. [Ord. No.
1992-102]
A. Standard for creation. The City Council shall not create a new liquor
license unless it has previously found that the creation of such license is
necessary for the public convenience of residents of Bloomington and is
in the best interest of the City of Bloomington. [Ord. No. 1981-18]
B. Factual criteria. In deciding whether creation of a new license is
necessary, the City Council shall consider:
(1) The class of liquor license applied for;
(2) Whether most of the establishment's anticipated gross revenue will
be from sale of alcohol or other resources;
(3) The character and nature of the proposed establishment;
(4) The general design, layout and contents of the proposed
establishment;
(5) The location of the proposed establishment and the probable
impact of a liquor establishment at that location upon the
surrounding neighborhood or the City as a whole giving particular
consideration to; [Ord. No. 2004-2]
(a) The type of license(s) requested in the application;
(b) The nature of the proposed establishment; [Ord. No. 2004-2]
(c) The location of the building of the proposed establishment in
relation to any dwelling, church, school, hospital, home for the
aged, indigent or veteran's and their wives, or any military or
naval station with particular emphasis on its entrances/exits,
windows and parking facilities; [Ord. No. 2004-2]
(d) The hours of operation of the proposed establishment; [Ord.
No. 2004-2]
(e) The effect of live entertainment and/or amplified music in the
proposed establishment upon persons in the surrounding area,
particularly with respect to any dwelling, church, school,
hospital, home for the aged, indigent or veteran's and their
wives, or any military or naval station; [Ord. No. 2004-2]
§ 6-105 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 6-106
1:168
(f) Signs and lights which are visible from the exterior of the
proposed establishment;
(g) Whether a Sunday license is being requested for the proposed
establishment;
(h) The extent to which other businesses are licensed to sell
alcoholic beverages at retail in the area under consideration;
(i) Whether and what types of alcohol the applicant proposes to
sell in single serving sizes for consumption off of the premises.
[Ord. No. 2004-2]
(6) The probable demand for the proposed liquor establishment in the
City;
(7) The financial responsibility of the applicant;
(8) Whether the applicant, or (if the applicant is a partnership or
corporation) whether any partner, officer or director of the
applicant has ever held a liquor license and his or her performance
as a licensee; [Ord. No. 1977-69]
(9) Whether the applicant intends to furnish live entertainment in the
establishment, and if so, the nature of such entertainment;
(10) Whether the applicant intends to obtain a dancing permit pursuant
to Chapter 7 of Bloomington City Code;
(11) Whether the proposed establishment poses any problem to the
Bloomington Police Department or Liquor Commissioner in the
enforcement of City Ordinance or State and Federal Law;
(12) Whether a current City of Bloomington liquor license has been
issued for the premises sought to be licensed in the application;
(13) Whether the premises complies with all pertinent health and safety
codes applicable within the City of Bloomington;
(14)No license shall be created for, or maintained by, an establishment
whose primary or major focus is video gaming. In determining
whether an establishment's primary or major focus is video
gaming, the following factors may be considered:
(a) The layout and design of the establishment, including such
factors as:
[1] The number of video gaming machines relative to the
customer seating capacity of the establishment; and
[2] The square footage of space devoted to video gaming
relative to the amount of space devoted to other activities;
§ 6-106 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-106
1:169
§ 6-107. [Ch. 6, Sec. 4C] Conditions of creation. [Ord. No. 2004-2]
If the City Council finds that any change in the applicant's plans is needed to
give the City Council grounds for finding necessity for the creation of such
license under § 6-106 above, the Council may make such change a condition
of the creating of a license such conditions may include, but are not limited
to (1) restricting the hours of sale; (2) adding exterior lighting; (3) erecting
fencing; (4) patrolling the premises; (5) restricting the sale of single serving
sizes of all types or a particular type of alcohol for consumption off of
the premises; (6) requiring employee training; (7) establishing a minimum
number of employees; (8) limiting the number and/or location of signs. The
failure of the applicant at any time to adhere to or perform such condition
shall be grounds for revocation of the applicant's license.
§ 6-108. [Ch. 6, Sec. 4E] Permits for licenses.
§ 6-109. [Ch. 6, Sec. 4F] Change of license classification.
(b) Whether the probable revenue derived from the establishment
will be primarily from video gaming;
(c) The number of employees at the establishment and their
proposed function;
(d) Other relevant factors. [Ord. No. 2013-13]
(15) The recommendation of the Liquor Commission. [Ord. No.
2013-13]
C. All licenses created hereby are subject to issuance by the Mayor in his
discretion as provided in 235 ILCS 5/4-4 and § 6-142 of this chapter.
[Ord. No. 2013-13]
A. Issuance of permits. Whenever an applicant is not ready to begin
immediate operation, his application shall be considered as provided
above. If the City Council approves his application it shall create a
permit for license which shall entitle the holder thereof to a liquor
license when the holder is ready to begin operations subject to the
other requirements of this chapter. [Ord. No. 1981-18]
B. Duration. Permits for license shall expire 180 days from the date of
creation or when exchanged for a license. Permits may be renewed by
the Liquor Commission for one period not to exceed 180 days for good
cause shown. [Ord. No. 1981-18]
C. Effect of creation of permit. A permit created pursuant to this § 6-108
shall entitle the holder thereof to a liquor license which shall be deemed
created at the time the holder is ready to begin operations subject to
the discretion of the Mayor as provided in Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 43, § 1127
and § 6-142 of this chapter. [Ord. No. 1981-18]
7. Editor's Note: See 235 ILCS 5/4-4.
§ 6-106 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 6-109
1:170
§ 6-110. [Ch. 6, Sec. 5] Location restrictions.
A. Applications. Any licensee may apply for a change in license
classification by filing said application with the City Clerk. The fee due
upon the filing of said application shall be the same as the fee required
for filing an application for creation of a new liquor license set forth in
§ 6-103 of this chapter. The Mayor, upon receipt of an application, shall
schedule a hearing thereon before the Liquor Commission. Notice of
the hearing shall be given not less than seven days prior to the hearing.
(1) By publication in a newspaper published in the City; and
(2) By mailing notice to occupants of the properties which are located
within 500 feet of the proposed premises. Defects in the giving of
such notices provided for in this subsection shall not be grounds for
challenge to any decision to issue or not to issue a change in license
classification absent a showing of substantial prejudice stemming
from such defects. The Clerk shall send notice of such application
to the Department of Planning and Code Enforcement, Fire and
Police Departments of the City and the McLean County Health
Department. These departments shall inspect the premises sought
to be reclassified and report their findings to the Liquor
Commission. [Ord. No. 2012-73]
B. Hearing and decision. The Liquor Commission shall receive any and
may require such evidence as it may deem necessary to make findings
based upon the standard and factual criteria outlined in § 6-106 of this
chapter. Based upon said criteria, the Commission shall decide whether
to approve or disapprove the application. If the application is approved,
it shall be forwarded to the City Council for consideration. [Ord. No.
2012-73]
C. The City Council shall not allow a change in license classification unless
it finds that the change in classification is necessary for the public
convenience of residents of the City of Bloomington and is in the best
interests of the City of Bloomington. In deciding whether the change of
license classification should be granted, the City Council shall consider
the factors set forth in § 6-106 of this chapter and may impose such
conditions upon the reclassification license as provided in § 6-107 of
this chapter. No change of license may be allowed if, on the basis of said
criteria, the Council determines that the change would be detrimental
to the City. [Ord. No. 2012-73]
A. No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor at
a tavern (Class TA, TB), package licensed store (Class GPA, GPB, PA,
PB) or any business at which the sale of alcoholic liquor is the principal
business if it is within 100 feet of any church, school, (including
preschools, but excluding institutions of higher learning), hospital,
home for aged or indigent persons or for veterans, their spouses or
children, any military or naval station, or any day-care center licensed
by the Illinois Department of Children and Family Services, undertaking
§ 6-109 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-110
1:171
§ 6-111. [Ch. 6, Sec. 6] License fee payment and penalty,
termination on failure to pay, reinstatement of licenses and advance
license fee payment refunds. [Ord. No. 1984-54; amended 7-8-2019
by Ord. No. 2019-53]
establishment or mortuary. In the case of a church, the distance of
100 feet shall be measured from the property line of the licensed
premises to the nearest part of any building used for worship services
or educational programs. In all other instances, the measurement shall
be made from the property line of the licensed premises to the property
line of the school, hospital, home for aged or indigent persons, home
for veterans, their spouses or children, any military or naval station
or any day-care center licensed by the Illinois Department of Children
and Family Services undertaking establishment or mortuary. This
prohibition shall not apply to the renewal of the license for the sale
at retail of alcoholic liquor on premises within 100 feet of any church,
day-care, or school where the church, day-care, or school has been
established within such 100 feet since the issuance of the original
license. This prohibition does not affect licensed establishments having
liquor licenses issued by the City of Bloomington prior to April 25, 2018.
[Ord. No. 2018-32]
B. No license shall be issued for the sale of any type of alcoholic liquor at
any premise at which motor vehicle fuels are sold, except that licenses
for the sale of beer and wine only may be issued to such premises that
are "retail grocery convenience stores" as defined in § 6-101. Any
license for the sale of all types of alcohol created, issued and/or
renewed for a premise at which motor vehicle fuels are sold on or
before January 1, 2007 shall remain in effect and allow the sale of all
types of alcohol by the existing license holder and may be renewed
annually by that license holder for the premises identified in the license
until such time as there is either a change in ownership (as defined in
§ 6-101) of the licensee or the licensee is no longer qualified for a
license for any of the reasons set forth in § 6-104. The sale of alcohol at
such premises shall be prohibited thereafter as provided in this section.
A premise shall be considered to be one that sells motor vehicle fuel if
there are fuel dispensing pumps within 100 feet of any door to the
premise or any location where fuel sales are consummated. [Ord. No.
2018-32]
A. When a license is created by the City Council and is subsequently
issued, the license fee shall be prorated on the basis of the remaining
days of the calendar year in which the license is issued. Application fees
shall not be prorated.
B. To be paid without a penalty, each liquor license fee must be received by
the City Clerk on or before the following. If a date listed below is a
holiday, license fees may be received by the Clerk on the following
business day without a penalty. If a license fee is received late, the
§ 6-110 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 6-111
1:172
§ 6-112. [Ch. 6, Sec. 7A] Classification.
license holder must pay a penalty in the amount of 10% of the invoiced
license fee.
(1) Annually paid liquor licenses: December 1.
(2) Semiannually paid liquor licenses: June 1 and December 1.
C. All liquor licenses shall be considered invalid at 12:00 midnight on the
date of expiration listed on the license. Thereafter, if fees are not paid
during the first month of the succeeding period, the license shall cease
to exist and the number of created licenses shall be reduced thereby. To
again hold a liquor license, the former license holder must reapply for a
new license.
D. Upon the termination of any liquor license or licensed business for any
reason, the license fee shall not be refunded.
A. All licenses shall be classified as follows:
(1) Class "CA" (Clubs - All Types of Alcoholic Liquor) primary licenses
authorize the retail sale on the specified premises of all types of
alcoholic liquor for consumption only on the premises of Clubs as
the same are herein defined. [Ord. No. 1992-102]
(2) Class "CB" (Clubs - Beer and Wine Only) primary licenses authorize
the retail sale on the specified premises only of beer and wine for
consumption only on the premises. [Ord. No. 1992-102]
(3) Class "EA" (Entertainment/Recreational Sports Venue - All Types of
Alcoholic Liquor) primary licenses authorize the retail sale on the
specified premises of all types of alcoholic liquor for consumption
only on the premises. "EA" licenses shall be issued and renewed at
premises that primarily function as entertainment or recreational
sports venues. The sale of liquor at the premises shall be incidental
to the primary function of the premises as an entertainment or
sports venue. "EA" licenses shall be issued and renewed only at
premises where gross sales of admissions to entertainment events,
or admission fees and/or rental of recreational sports equipment,
constitute at least 60% of the gross sales of the licensee, and where
gross sales of alcoholic liquor constitute no more than 40% of the
licensee's total gross sales.
(a) A licensee under this section shall keep a record of gross sales
of admissions to entertainment events, or where admission
fees and/or the rental of recreational sports equipment, as well
as the gross sales of alcoholic liquor sold on the premises. The
Licensee shall provide said gross sales records to the City
Clerk's office within 30 days of receipt of a written request by
the Liquor Commissioner. If, in any quarter, gross sales of
admissions to entertainment events, or admission fees and/or
§ 6-111 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-112
1:173
rental of recreational sports equipment, constitute less than
60% of the gross sales of the Licensee for any two months of
the quarter, the "EA" liquor license may be revoked, may not
be renewed, or may be subject to added conditions pursuant
to § 6-142F of this chapter. If, in any quarter, gross sales of
alcohol sold on the premises exceed 40% of the Licensee's
gross sales for any two Months of the quarter, the "EA" liquor
license may be revoked, may not be renewed, or may be
subject to added conditions pursuant to § 6-142F of this
chapter. [Ord. No. 2013-95]
(b) For purposes of the application of this section:
[1] Entertainment venues shall include premises that host live
musical or theatrical performances, art exhibitions or oral
presentations;
[2] Recreational sporting venues shall include premises where
such recreational sports as golf and bowling occur;
[3] Video gaming shall not be included within the definition of
entertainment or recreational sports; and
[4] Revenues from video gaming shall not be counted as gross
sales from entertainment or from recreational sports for
purposes of determining whether an entertainment or
recreational sports license shall be issued, revoked or
renewed. [Ord. No. 2013-95]
(4) Class "EB" (Entertainment/Recreational Sports Venue - Beer and
Wine Only) primary licenses authorize the retail sale on the
specified premises of beer and wine only for consumption only on
the premises. "EB" licenses shall be issued and renewed at
premises that primarily function as entertainment or recreational
sports venues. The sale of beer and wine at the premises shall be
incidental to the primary function of the premises as an
entertainment or sports venue. "EB" licenses shall be issued and
renewed only at premises where gross sales of admissions to
entertainment events, or admission fees and/or rental of
recreational sports equipment, constitute at least 60% of the gross
sales of the licensee, and where gross sales of beer and wine
constitute no more than 40% of the licensee's gross sales.
(a) A licensee under this section shall keep a record of gross sales
of admissions to entertainment events, or admission fees and/
or the rental of recreational sports equipment, as well as the
gross sales of beer and wine sold on the premises. The
Licensee shall provide said gross sales records to the City
Clerk's office within 30 days of receipt of a written request by
the Liquor Commissioner. If, in any quarter, gross sales of
admissions to entertainment events, or admission fees and/or
§ 6-112 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 6-112
1:174
rental of recreational sports equipment, constitute less than
60% of the gross sales of the Licensee for any two months of
the quarter, the "EB" liquor license may be revoked, may not
be renewed, or may be subject to added conditions pursuant to
§ 6-142F of this chapter. If, in any quarter, gross sales of beer
and wine sold on the premises exceed 40% of the Licensee's
gross sales for any two months of the quarter, the "EB" liquor
license may be revoked, may not be renewed, or may be
subject to added conditions pursuant to § 6-142F of this
chapter. [Ord. No. 2013-95]
(b) For purposes of the application of this section:
[1] Entertainment venues shall include premises that host
musical or theatrical performances, art exhibitions or oral
presentations;
[2] Recreational sporting venues shall include premises where
such recreational sports as golf and bowling occur;
[3] Video gaming shall not be included within the definition of
entertainment or recreational sports; and
[4] Revenues from video gaming shall not be counted as gross
sales from entertainment or from recreational sports for
purposes of determining whether an entertainment or
recreational sports license shall be issued, revoked or
renewed. [Ord. No. 2013-95]
(5) Class "GPA" (Convenience Store - All Types of Alcohol) primary
licenses authorize the retail sale of all types of alcoholic liquor only
in the original package for consumption off of the premises at retail
grocery convenience stores, as those premises are defined in
§ 6-101 of this chapter, at which motor vehicle fuels are sold. [Ord.
No. 2013-95; Ord. No. 2014-02]
(6) Class "GPB" (Convenience Store - Beer and Wine Only) primary
licenses authorize the retail sale of beer and wine only in the
original package for consumption off of the premises at retail
grocery convenience stores, as those premises are defined in
§ 6-101 of this chapter, at which motor vehicle fuels are sold. [Ord.
No. 2013-95; Ord. No. 2014-04]
(7) Class "LA" (Limited - All Types of Alcoholic Liquor) primary licenses
authorize the retail sale of all types of alcoholic liquor by civic,
charitable, fraternal, educational, patriotic, festival and/or
religious organizations on premises in nonresidential locations for
a maximum period of 60 days with the following conditions. Only
civic, charitable, fraternal, educational, patriotic and/or religious
organizations which have been in active and continuous existence
for a period of one year prior to the date of making the application
or those which are incorporated under the laws of the State of
§ 6-112 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-112
1:175
Illinois will be eligible to receive an "LA" license. No organization
shall be issued more than three LA licenses in any twelve-month
period. The license shall only apply to catered functions and special
events sponsored by the organization. [Ord. No. 2013-95]
(8) Class "LB" (Limited - Beer and Wine Only) primary licenses
authorize the retail sale of beer and wine of alcoholic liquor by
civic, charitable, fraternal, educational, patriotic, festival and/or
religious organizations on premises in nonresidential locations for
a maximum period of 60 days with the following conditions. Only
civic, charitable, fraternal, educational, patriotic and/or religious
organizations which have been in active and continuous existence
for a period of one year prior to the date of making the application
or those which are incorporated under the laws of the State of
Illinois will be eligible to receive an "LB" license. No organization
shall be issued more than three "LB" licenses in any twelve-month
period. [Ord. No. 2013-95]
(9) Class "MA" (Motel/Hotel Rooms - All Types) primary licenses
authorize the retail sale of alcoholic beverages of all types from
locked containers in rented motel and hotel rooms for consumption
on the premises. The license holder may provide key(s) to
registered guests for the locked container(s) in rooms rented by
them provided they are over 21 years of age and no one under that
age who is not the spouse or child (natural, adopted or foster) of a
registered guest will be staying in the room, during the rental
period. [Ord. No. 2013-95]
(10) Class "MB" (Motel/Hotel Rooms - Beer and Wine Only) primary
licenses authorize the retail sale only of beer and wine from locked
containers in rented motel and hotel rooms for consumption on the
premises. The license holder may provide key(s) to registered
guests for the locked container(s) in rooms rented by them
provided they are over 21 years of age and no one under that age
who is not the spouse or child (natural, adopted or foster) of a
registered guest will be staying in the room during the rental
period. [Ord. No. 2013-95]
(11) Class "O" (Outdoor) - authorizes the retail sale of alcoholic liquor
by any person holding either a Class R license or Class T license
upon a sidewalk designated in a sidewalk cafe permit adjacent to
the licensed premises during the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.,
Monday through Saturday, and 12:00 noon to 10:00 p.m. on
Sunday, provided that a valid sidewalk cafe permit has been issued,
pursuant to Article IX of Chapter 38. During the times when
alcoholic liquor may be served under the Class O license, the
licensee shall: (1) Not allow or permit any customer, employee or
other person to remove alcoholic liquor from the area designated in
the sidewalk cafe permit or the service premises of the licensee. (2)
Not serve, allow or permit any person to be served, be in
possession of, or consume alcoholic liquor in the area designated in
§ 6-112 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 6-112
1:176
the sidewalk cafe permit unless that person is utilizing the seating
which has been provided in accordance with the site plan approved
with the sidewalk cafe permit. (3) Comply with all requirements set
forth in Article IX of Chapter 38. (4) Provide table service, which
may include food service, in the sidewalk cafe area during the
hours when alcoholic liquor is permitted to be served. The sidewalk
cafe area shall be subject to all provisions of this chapter as though
the sidewalk cafe area was part of the licensee's service premises
during the times permitted by this section for alcoholic liquor sales.
Prior to the issuance of a Class O license the licensee shall provide
proof of dram shop insurance. The policy shall name the City
of Bloomington as an additional insured, and will indemnify and
hold it harmless from any action, proceeding or claim of liability
asserted against it as a result of the operation of a sidewalk cafe.
Failure by the licensee to maintain the insurance required by this
section shall result in the revocation of the license. [Ord. No.
2015-26]
(12) Class "PA" (Package Sales - All Types of Alcoholic Liquor) primary
licenses authorize the retail sale on the specified premises of all
types of alcoholic liquor only in original packages for consumption
only off of the premises and for consumption if beer and wine on
the premises in conjunction with a beer and wine tasting as defined
in § 6-101. [Ord. No. 2013-95]
(13) Class "PB" (Package Sales - Beer and Wine Only) primary licenses
authorize the retail sale on the specified premises only of beer and
wine in the original packages for consumption only off of the
premises and for consumption on the premises in conjunction with
a beer and wine tasting as defined in § 6-101. [Ord. No. 2013-95]
(14) Class "PBP" (Packaged Sales - Beer and Wine, On or Off Premises)
primary licenses authorize the retail sale on the specified premises
of beer and wine in original packages for consumption on or off the
premises where sold. This class of license shall only be available to
establishments where the sale of packaged or prepared food is the
primary source of revenue for the establishment. This class of
license shall not be available for any establishment at which motor
vehicle fuels are sold. [Ord. No. 2018-69]
(15) Class "RA" (Restaurant - All Types of Alcoholic Liquor) primary
licenses authorize the retail sale on the specified premises of all
types of alcoholic liquor for consumption only on the premises. The
sale of liquor at a restaurant shall be incidental to the principal
purpose of the sale of food. "RA" licenses shall be issued and
renewed only if the licensee has and maintains gross sales on the
premises of all types of alcoholic liquor in an amount less than the
gross sales of all types of food. Restaurants shall keep a record of
all alcohol and food items sold on the premises and shall, within 30
days of receipt of a written request by the Liquor Commissioner,
provide to the City Clerk's office financial statements for the period
§ 6-112 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-112
1:177
requested, certified by an independent certified public accountant,
showing the proportion of gross sales of alcoholic beverages
compared to sales of food. If, in any quarter, gross sales of alcoholic
beverages exceed gross sales of food for any two months, the
restaurant liquor license may be revoked, may not be renewed, or
may be subject to added conditions pursuant to § 6-142F of this
chapter. A restaurant liquor license shall be issued and renewed
only at premises kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out
to the public as a place where meals are sold and served and
where meals are actually and regularly sold and served to the
public. A restaurant shall have seating available for patrons as
well as adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment,
and shall have employed therein a sufficient number and kind of
employees to prepare, cook and serve full meals for its guests.
[Ord. No. 2013-95; Ord. No. 2014-02]
(16) Class "RB" (Restaurant - Beer and Wine Only) primary licenses
authorize the retail sale on the specified premises only of beer and
wine for consumption only on the premises. The sale of beer and
wine at a restaurant shall be incidental to the principal purpose of
the sale of food. "RB" licenses shall be issued and renewed only if
the licensee has and maintains gross sales on the premises of beer
and wine in an amount less than the gross sales of all types of food.
Restaurants shall keep a record of all beer, wine and food items
sold on the premises and shall, within 30 days of receipt of a
written request by the Liquor Commissioner, provide to the City
Clerk's office financial statements for the period requested,
certified by an independent certified public accountant, showing
the proportion of gross sales of beer and wine compared to sales of
food. If, in any quarter, gross sales of beer and wine exceed gross
sales of food for any two months, the restaurant liquor license may
be revoked, may not be renewed, or may be subject to added
conditions pursuant to § 6-142F of this chapter. A restaurant liquor
license shall be issued and renewed only at premises kept, used,
maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where
meals are sold and served and where meals are actually and
regularly sold and served to the public. A restaurant shall have
seating available for patrons as well as adequate and sanitary
kitchen and dining room equipment, and shall have employed
therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook
and serve full meals for its guests. [Ord. No. 2013-95; Ord. No.
2014-02]
(17) Class "S" (Sunday) secondary licenses issued to the holder of any
primary license described herein (except Class "W" which is valid
on Sunday) extend the authority of primary licenses to Sunday
hours as specified in § 6-128 of this chapter. [Ord. No. 2013-95]
(18) Class "SA" (Secondary Premises - All Types of Alcohol) authorizes
the retail sale of all types of alcoholic liquor by the current holder
§ 6-112 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 6-112
1:178
of a EA, EB, TA, TB, RA, RB, PA or PB license at nonresidential
public premises other than the premises covered by the existing
license at locations and on days approved by the Liquor
Commissioner. All of the terms and conditions of the license
holder's primary license shall extend to and apply to the license
issued. The license holder must submit proof of adequate Dram
Shop Insurance covering the premises licensed under the "SA"
license prior to being issued such license. Any violation of the
terms of the "SA" license shall be considered a violation of the
license holder's primary license and shall subject the license holder
to penalties and/or sanctions directed at the primary license. [Ord.
No. 2018-37]
(19) Class "SB" (Secondary Premises - Beer and Wine Only) authorizes
the retail sale of beer and wine by the current holder of a EA, EB,
TA, TB, RA, RB, PA or PB license at nonresidential public premises
other than the premises covered by the existing license at locations
and days approved by the Liquor Commissioner. All of the terms
and conditions of the license holder's primary license shall extend
to and apply to the license issued. The license holder must submit
proof of adequate Dram Shop Insurance covering the premises
licensed under the "SB" license prior to being issued such license.
Any violation of the terms of the "SB" license shall be considered a
violation of the license holders primary license and shall subject
the license holder to penalties and/or sanctions directed at the
primary license. [Ord. No. 2018-37]
(20) Class "SPA" (Seasonal Performance - All Types of Alcohol) [Ord.
No. 2013-95]
(a) Authorizes by secondary license the retail sale of all types of
alcoholic liquor at a performance venue designated by the
Liquor Commissioner for a specified season by the holder of a
current TA, TB, RA, RB, PA or PB license. This license may be
issued at the discretion of the Liquor Commissioner. All of the
terms and conditions of the license holder's primary license
shall extend to the issued seasonal performance license. The
license holder's must submit proof of adequate Dram Shop
insurance covering the premises licensed under the SPA
license prior to being issued such license. Any violation of the
terms of the SPA license shall be considered a violation of the
license holder's primary license and shall subject the license
holder to penalties and/or sanctions directed at the primary
license.
(b) As used in this and in the succeeding subsection, the term
"season" shall mean a defined span of time, not less than 30
days and no more than one year, during which a given venue
hosts four or more performances per month. The length of the
performance season for a given venue shall been as defined
§ 6-112 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-112
1:179
herein, or as otherwise designated by the Liquor
Commissioner.
(c) The term "season" as applied to the Bloomington Center for the
Performing Arts shall mean the period of time from August 1
through May 31 of the succeeding year.
(d) The term "season" as applied to the Illinois Shakespeare
Festival performed at Ewing Manor shall be the period from
June 1 through August 31. [Ord. No. 2009-71]
(21) Class "SPB" (Seasonal Performance - Beer and Wine Only)
authorizes by secondary license the retail sale of beer and wine at a
performance venue designated by the Liquor Commissioner for a
specified season by the holder of a current TA, TB, RA, RB, PA or PB
license. This license may be issued at the discretion of the Liquor
Commissioner. All of the terms and conditions of the license
holder's primary license shall extend to the issued seasonal
performance license. The license holder must submit proof of
adequate Dram Shop insurance covering the premises licensed
under the SPB license prior to being issued such license. Any
violation of the terms of the SPB license shall be considered a
violation of the license holder's primary license and shall subject
the license holder to penalties and/or sanctions directed at the
primary license. [Ord. No. 2013-95]
(22) Class "ST" (Stadium) primary licenses authorize the retail sale of
alcohol throughout a stadium for consumption only on the
premises. A Class "ST" license shall also authorize the retail sale of
all types of alcoholic liquor in designated private suites for
consumption in those designated private suites only. The Class "ST"
license shall be issued on the following conditions:
(a) Hours of operation. Liquor may be sold only on days when a
game or event is scheduled. Liquor sales may commence when
doors officially open prior to the event. For football or hockey
games, all alcohol sales will cease at the commencement of the
fourth quarter, or the third period, respectively. For all other
events, liquor sales will cease upon the conclusion of the event.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, liquor may be served in
restaurant areas of the stadium for up to one hour after the
conclusion of all events.
(b) Place of sale. The license holder shall take adequate means to
prevent liquor sold in the stadium from being removed from
the stadium. The license holder shall take adequate means to
prevent liquor sold in the private suites from being removed
from the private suites.
(c) Other conditions:
§ 6-112 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 6-112
1:180
§ 6-113. [Ch. 6, Sec. 7B] License fees.
[1] Liquor in plastic or paper cups only. Except for liquor sold
in the private suites, all drinks containing alcohol will be
sold in plastic bottles, plastic cups, or paper cups only. No
glasses, glass bottles, or aluminum bottles or cans of beer
will be permitted to be sold in the general interior stadium
area. Liquor may be sold in cups, glasses, glass bottles,
plastic bottles, aluminum bottles or cans in the private
designated suites, but no glasses, glass bottles, aluminum
bottles or cans may be removed from the private
designated suites.
[2] Prevention of consumption of alcohol by minors. The
licensee shall employ a sufficient number of persons at
events at which alcohol is sold to monitor and prevent the
consumption of alcohol by minors. These required
monitors may not have as an additional duty the sale of
beer or alcohol during the event. There shall be sufficient
monitors such that the entire stadium is regularly
monitored during the event.
[3] Exterior premises clean-up. As a condition of the Class
"ST" license, the license holder shall remove all trash and
debris from the parking lots and exterior of the premises
no later than 10:00 a.m. on the day following a game or
other event at which liquor was sold. [Ord. No. 2013-95]
(23) Class "TA" (Tavern - All Types of Alcoholic Liquor) primary licenses
authorize the retail sale on the specified premises of all types of
alcoholic liquor for consumption only on the premises. [Ord. No.
2013-95]
(24) Class "TB" (Tavern - Beer and Wine Only) primary licenses
authorize the retail sale on the specified premises only of beer and
wine for consumption only on the premises. [Ord. No. 2013-95]
(25) Class "W" (Catering) primary licenses authorize the holder thereof
to provide catering services to private parties pursuant to § 6-114
of this chapter provided, however, that a Class "W" license does not
authorize the sale of alcoholic beverages. An additional Sunday
license shall not be required. [Ord. No. 2013-95]
A. The annual license fee for each of the classes of licenses shall be as set
forth in the Schedule of Fees. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
B. The fee for each Class "LA," "LB," "SA" and "SB" licenses issued shall be
as set forth in the Schedule of Fees. A separate license is required for
each premise for which a license is issued. A separate license is also
required for each event at a single premise, provided however that a
series of performances at a single premise sponsored, hosted, produced
§ 6-112 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-113
1:181
§ 6-114. [Ch. 6, Sec. 8] Catering licenses - fees.
or organized by the same person, entity, group or organization shall be
considered a single related event and such related events shall require
only one license. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
C. The annual license fee for a Class "W" license shall be as set forth in the
Schedule of Fees. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
D. The fee for each Class "SPA" or "SPB" license issued shall be as set forth
in the Schedule of Fees. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
A. It shall be illegal for any person for compensation to agree or contract
to obtain or provide any type of alcoholic liquor or to mix, pour and/or
serve any type of alcoholic liquor at any private party or other type of
private gathering of people within the City of Bloomington without
having first obtained a Class "W" liquor license. Catering shall include
the acts described herein and those described in § 6-101 of this chapter.
[Ord. No. 1992-102]
B. Catering licenses may be obtained by registering with the City Clerk
and by providing her with information not inconsistent with the type of
information requested of applicants for other liquor licenses. Catering
licenses are personal only and each application must be signed by the
person who will perform the catering services and by his/her employer
or principal, if any. [Ord. No. 1992-102]
C. A person engaged in catering may not sell alcoholic beverages of any
type. However, any person engaged in catering may procure alcoholic
liquor for the purpose of providing the catering services, provided that
the person providing the catering service may only charge the
contractor for such services the actual cost of the alcoholic liquor,
without a markup. All such alcoholic liquor purchased by the caterer
shall belong to the contractor for the services. [Ord. No. 1992-102]
D. Before any person may obtain a catering license, each applicant or each
applicant's employer must provide the City Clerk with a Certificate of
Insurance which shows that the licensee and, if applicable, his
employees, agents and servants are covered by an insurance policy for
any liability which may develop from the performance of catering
services. [Ord. No. 1992-102]
E. There shall not be a limit at this time to the number of catering licenses
which may be issued by the City Clerk. Notices prior to the issuance of
such licenses and bond shall not be required. Catering licenses may be
suspended or revoked by the Liquor Commissioner for the violation of
any law directly or indirectly associated therewith. [Ord. No.
1992-102]
§ 6-113 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 6-115
1:182
§ 6-115. [Ch. 6, Sec. 8A] Annexation of territory. [Ord. No.
1974-124]
If any time subsequent to the effective date of the above section any
territory is annexed to the City wherein a valid license issued by the County
of McLean is in existence, it shall not be revoked or invalidated but shall
be allowed to continue in the same manner as heretofore until the following
December 31st when it shall be renewed by the Mayor as a City license in
the same manner as heretofore.
§ 6-116. [Ch. 6, Sec. 9] License to be posted - lost license. [Ord. No.
2018-89]
Every person licensed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
immediately shall post the license so issued in a conspicuous place on
the licensed premises and shall keep such license so posted during all of
the time said license is in force. Whenever such license shall be lost or
destroyed a duplicate license shall be issued at a cost as set forth in the
Schedule of Fees.
§ 6-117. [Ch. 6, Sec. 10] Disposition of fees. [Ord. No. 1974-124]
All such fees shall be paid to the City Clerk at the time application is made
and shall be forthwith turned over to the Director of Finance. In the event
the license applied for is denied, then the fee shall be deposited in the
general corporate fund or in such other fund as shall have been designated
by the Council, by proper action.
§ 6-118. [Ch. 6, Sec. 11] List. [Ord. No. 1974-124]
The City Clerk shall keep or cause to be kept a complete record of all
such licenses issued by the Mayor and shall furnish the Mayor and Chief of
Police each with a copy thereof; upon the issuance of any new license or the
revocation of any old license, the Mayor shall give written notice of such
action to the City Clerk and Chief of Police within 48 hours of such action.
§ 6-119. [Ch. 6, Sec. 12] Nature of license or permit for license;
renewals; cessation of operations.
A. Nature of license or permit for license. A license or permit for license
shall be purely a personal privilege, good for not to exceed one year
after issuance unless sooner revoked as in this Ordinance provided, and
shall not constitute property nor shall it be subject to attachment,
garnishments, or execution, nor shall it be alienable or transferable
voluntarily or involuntarily or subject to being encumbered or
hypothecated. Such license or permit for license shall not descent by
the laws of testate or intestate devolution, but it shall cease upon the
death of the holder, provided that executors or administrators of the
estate of any deceased holder and the trustee of any insolvent or
bankrupt holder, when such estate consists in part of alcoholic liquor
may continue the business of the sale or manufacture of alcoholic liquor
§ 6-115 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-119
1:183
§ 6-120. [Ch. 6, Sec. 13] Renewal; application, payment of license
fees. [Ord. No. 1992-102]
All applications for the renewal of a license shall be made in writing to
the Mayor not later than December 1 of each year. If the information
and statements contained in the original application (and questionnaire,
if applicable) have not changed, in lieu of an application for renewal, a
licensee may file with the Mayor not later than December 1 of each year, an
affidavit stating that such facts and statements have not changed.
§ 6-121. [Ch. 6, Sec. 14] Change of location. [Ord. No. 1992-102]
A liquor license shall permit the sale of alcoholic beverages and sales
as defined in § 6-101 only in the premises described in the application
and license except that the Mayor, on behalf of the Commission or two
members of the Commission when the Mayor is unavailable, may issue a
secondary premises license, Class SA or SB, which authorizes the licensee
to operate temporarily at a location other than the premises at which said
licensee is licensed to operate. Any licensee desiring a secondary premises
license shall submit an application containing the name of the licensee, a
description of the temporary location (which shall not include street rightof-
way), the expected hours of operation as may be requested by the Liquor
Commission and such other information relevant to the sale of alcohol
at that location. No secondary premises license shall be issued for any
premises which is not a proper one for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor
under the laws of this state and the Code of the City.
§ 6-122. [Ch. 6, Sec. 15] Peddling.
It shall be unlawful to peddle alcoholic liquor in the City.
§ 6-123. [Ch. 6, Sec. 16] Sanitary conditions.
All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor or for the storage of
such liquor for such sale shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and
shall be kept in full compliance with the ordinances regulating the condition
of premises used for the storage or sale of food for human consumption. All
premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the
under order of the appropriate court and may exercise the privileges
of the deceased or insolvent or bankrupt holder after the death of such
decedent, or such insolvency or bankruptcy until the expiration of such
license or permit for license but not longer than one year after the
death, bankruptcy or insolvency of such holder. [Ord. No. 1974-124]
B. Renewals. Any holder may renew his license at the expiration thereof
provided he is then qualified to received a license, there has not been
an unapproved change of ownership (§ 6-102) and the location and
premises for which the renewal license is sought are suitable for such
use. [Ord. No. 1983-105]
§ 6-119 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 6-123
1:184
premises shall provide separate toilets and washstands for male and female
patrons and shall maintain the same in a clean and sanitary condition.
§ 6-124. [Ch. 6, Sec. 17] Signs. [Ord. No. 1992-102]
All premises licensed for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor may have only
one lighted sign advertising a particular brand of alcohol or alcohol product
visible from the exterior of the premises. Any premises displaying more
than one such sign on the effective date of this Ordinance shall have until
December 31, 1992 to remove any excess signs.
§ 6-125. [Ch. 6, Sec. 18] Employees - diseases - age limits.
A. It shall be unlawful for any licensee or for any officer, associate,
member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee to employ
in any licensed premises any person who is afflicted with, or who is a
carrier of, any contagious infection or venereal disease; and it shall be
unlawful for any person who is afflicted with, or a carrier of, any such
disease to work in or about any premises or to engage in the handling,
preparation or distribution of such liquor. [Ord. No. 1992-102]
B. It shall be illegal for any liquor licensee or for any officer, associate,
member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee to employ
in any premises used for the sale of alcoholic beverages any person
under 21 years of age for the purpose of drawing, pouring or mixing
alcoholic beverages or tending bar or to sell or consummate the sale of
any such beverages to be consumed off the licensed premises, such as
but not limited to such sales at a packaged liquor store, a grocery store,
or a pizza establishment. It shall be illegal for any person under 21
years of age to be so employed as specified in this paragraph.
C. It shall be lawful for a liquor licensee or for any officer, associate,
member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee to employ
a person 19 years of age or older to deliver, serve and/or to consummate
the sale of alcoholic beverages which are to be consumed on the
premises, provided that at all times when the employee under 21 years
of age is on the premises, another employee 21 years of age or over is
working on duty on the premises; the person charged with an offense
hereunder shall have the burden of proving that the employee 21 years
of age or older was so employed and was working on duty on the
premises at the time of any alleged violation.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 19 years to sell or
deliver or serve any alcoholic beverage in any licensed establishment or
at any other place and this section shall be broadly construed. [Ord.
No. 1992-102]
§ 6-123 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-126
1:185
§ 6-126. [Ch. 6, Sec. 19] Solicitation of drinks prohibited. [Ord. No.
1992-102]
No licensee shall employ or permit any person to solicit any other person
to purchase the solicitor a drink or drinks in or about any premises offering
alcoholic or malt or vinaceous beverages for sale.
§ 6-127. [Ch. 6, Sec. 20] Serving, etc., to persons in motor vehicles.
§ 6-128. [Ch. 6, Sec. 21] Closing hours - Sunday sales.
A. It shall be illegal for any licensee, his agent, or employee to serve, give
or in any manner be concerned with placing any alcoholic liquor in or
upon or about any motor vehicle or to sell, serve, deliver or give any
alcoholic liquor to any occupant of a motor vehicle, whether such
vehicle is moving or parked or is at a curb or in a public place or on
premises or property used by a licensee or other private property,
except in the original package and with the seal unbroken. [Ord. No.
1992-102]
B. All of the actions specified in the previous paragraph at drive-up
windows are subject to each of the following conditions and failure to
comply with each of them is a violation of this Code:
(1) Before any such liquor transfer occurs the evening lighting of the
exterior of the sales area must make all persons in any vehicle in
the transfer area clearly visible and all such lighting systems and
any changes or alterations in such systems must be approved by
the Liquor Commission before any such liquor transfer occurs, and
rules and regulations to obtain such approval are available from the
City Clerk; and
(2) Liquor transfers in the original package with the seal unbroken
may be made only to the driver of a vehicle and any such transfer to
any passenger is illegal; and
(3) The licensee must check the pictured driver's license of every
driver before such a transfer is made to determine that the person
has a driver's license and to determine the age of young persons,
and no substitute ID such as a traffic ticket, another type of
pictured ID such as the Illinois Identification Card, or other ID may
be accepted; and
(4) A permanent § 6-131 sign must be posted in such a manner that it is
clearly visible and it must be kept readily readable by all persons
who are in a vehicle which is in the transfer area. [Ord. No.
1992-102]
C. All of the actions specified in Subsection A for curbside pickup and offpremises
delivery of alcoholic liquor shall be subject to the conditions
provided in § 6-138.1 of this chapter. [Added 9-23-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-73]
§ 6-126 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 6-128
1:186
A. (1) Except as provided in Subsection C below, it shall be unlawful for
any liquor license holder to sell or offer for sale at retail, or allow
consumption on the premises of any alcoholic liquor during the
following hours unless the license is issued for a premise located
inside the passenger terminal owned and operated by the Central
Illinois Regional Airport in which case Subsection A(2) shall apply:
Monday -
Friday
1:00 a.m. - 6:00 a.m.
Saturday -
Sunday
2:00 a.m. - 6:00 a.m.
(2) Except as provided in Subsection C below, it shall be unlawful for
holders of licenses for premises located inside the passenger
terminal owned and operated by the Central Illinois Regional
Airport to sell or offer for sale at retail or allow consumption on the
premise of any alcoholic liquor during the following hours: [Ord.
No. 2009-55]
Monday -
Friday
1:00 a.m. - 5:00 a.m.
Saturday 2:00 a.m. - 5:00 a.m.
Sunday 2:00 a.m. - 6:00 a.m.
B. Except as provided in Subsection D below, it shall be unlawful for any
liquor license holder, other than a holder of a Class "C" or "S" license, to
sell or offer for sale at retail or allow consumption on the premises of
any alcoholic liquor during the following hours: [Ord. No. 2009-55]
Sunday 6:00 a.m. - 12:00 midnight
Monday 12:00 midnight - 1:00 a.m.
C. Notwithstanding anything in Subsection A above, it shall be lawful for
liquor license holders to operate between 1:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. on
January 1. [Ord. No. 1992-102]
D. Notwithstanding anything in Subsection B above, it shall be lawful for
all liquor license holders to operate between 6:00 a.m. on December 31,
through 2:00 a.m. on January 1, whenever December 31 falls on a
Sunday. [Ord. No. 2009-55]
E. Hours stated in this section shall mean Central Standard Time or
Central Daylight Savings Time, whichever is being observed in the City.
[Ord. No. 1992-102]
F. The closing hours provided in Subsections A through E above shall also
apply to any event or premises at which alcoholic liquor is served or
consumed whenever there is a charge imposed on persons attending,
any part of which may be considered a direct or indirect charge for
alcoholic liquor. Such charges include, but are not limited to cover
§ 6-128 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-128
1:187
§ 6-129. [Ch. 6, Sec. 22] Open containers - not to be removed from
premises. [Ord. No. 1992-102]
No licensee or officer, employee or agent of a licensee shall permit any
person on the licensed premises to leave the licensed premises with any
open container of any alcoholic beverage.
§ 6-130. [Ch. 6, Sec. 23] Sale, possession and transportation of
kegs.
charges, admission charges, entertainment charges, any charges
enumerated in § 6-101 of this chapter or any other similar charge.
[Ord. No. 1992-102]
A. No licensee shall sell alcoholic liquor in a keg without first having
obtained the signature of the purchaser on an adult responsibility form
provided by the City. The licensee shall retain one copy of the form and
provide one copy of the form to the purchaser. The licensee shall retain
copies of all such forms for a period of not less than three months from
the date of sale and produce any and all forms for inspection by the
Liquor Commissioner, his designee, or police officers.
B. Any person who purchases alcoholic liquor in a keg from a licensee in
Bloomington must sign an adult responsibility form provided by the
licensee/seller at the time and point of sale. The form shall contain the
following:
(1) The licensee's name, address and phone number;
(2) The purchaser's name, address and phone number;
(3) The driver's license number or other identification used by the
licensee to identify the purchaser;
(4) The location the keg is to be used;
(5) The date and signature of the purchaser; and
(6) The following statement:
As purchaser of a keg of alcohol I understand that I am responsible
for the proper use of the contents of the keg.
I agree that the contents of the keg will not be sold to another
person. This includes selling cups, tickets or charging admission to
an event at which the alcohol may be "given" away.
I understand that the legal drinking age in Bloomington is 21, and
that the contents of the keg will not be furnished to any person
under 21 years of age except as allowed by ordinance.
§ 6-128 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 6-130
1:188
I understand that I am required to keep a copy of this Adult
Responsibility Form with the keg at all times, and to provide a copy
to the Police upon request.
I understand that if I do not produce a copy of this form when
requested by police, or if the contents of the keg are sold or
furnished to a minor, I will be held to have violated a City
ordinance.
C. Any person who purchases alcoholic liquor in a keg in another
jurisdiction other than Bloomington shall sign an adult responsibility
form as required in that jurisdiction.
D. Any person in possession of a keg containing alcoholic liquor shall keep
any required adult responsibility form in the same location as the keg at
all times and shall have the form readily available for inspection until
the keg is returned to licensee.
E. Presumptions.
(1) If a keg is found to be on any residential premises and no adult
responsibility form is produced, there shall be a rebuttable
presumption that any resident of the dwelling unit in which the keg
is found is in possession of the keg in violation of this section. A
person so charged shall have the burden of proving that he did not
have unlawful possession of the keg.
(2) If any keg is used in the unlawful sale of alcohol, there shall be a
rebuttable presumption that the person signing the adult
responsibility form is responsible for the unlawful sale of alcohol.
The City shall have the burden of proving that the keg was used in
the unlawful sale of alcohol and the Defendant was the person
signing the adult responsibility form. The Defendant shall have the
burden of proving that he had no knowledge of the unlawful sale of
alcohol, and took reasonable means to prevent the unlawful sale of
alcohol.
(3) If any keg is used in the unlawful furnishing of alcohol to a minor,
there shall be a rebuttable presumption that the person signing the
adult responsibility form is responsible for the unlawful furnishing
of alcohol to a minor. The City shall have the burden of proving that
the keg was used in the unlawful furnishing of alcohol to a minor
and the Defendant was the person signing the adult responsibility
form. The Defendant shall have the burden to prove that he had no
knowledge of the unlawful furnishing of alcohol, and took
reasonable means to prevent the unlawful furnishing of alcohol.
F. Hours of sale and transportation of kegs. No person shall transport
alcoholic liquor stored in a keg on any public street between the hours
of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. unless such person holds a distributor's
license from the State of Illinois. No license holder shall sell a keg at
10:00 p.m. [Ord. No. 2009-49]
§ 6-130 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-131
1:189
§ 6-131. [Ch. 6, Sec. 24] Warning signs to be posted.
§ 6-132. [Ch. 6, Sec. 25] Bond and insurance requirements;
termination of licenses.
A. In every premises upon which the sale of alcoholic liquor for
consumption upon the premises is licensed hereunder, a card shall be
posted by the licensee thereof to be furnished by said licensee which
shall read substantially as follows:
WARNING TO MINORS
You are subject to a fine of up to $500 under the Ordinance of the
City of Bloomington if you purchase alcoholic liquor or are served or
delivered alcoholic liquor or misrepresent your age for the purpose of
purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor.
B. Such card shall be displayed at all times in a prominent place in said
licensed premises. [Ord. No. 1992-102]
A. Each person and corporation or other entity having a liquor license
shall obtain and at all times maintain in effect a penal bond to the City
of Bloomington in the sum of $2,000 from a solvent surety company
licensed to do business in the State of Illinois and each such bond is
subject to being approved by the Corporation Counsel. Each bond shall
be filed with the City Clerk before liquor licenses to which the bond
applies are distributed by the City Clerk and shall be conditioned upon
the faithful observance by the licensee of all of the provisions of this
chapter and of any other provisions of the Bloomington City Code and of
the laws of the State of Illinois and of the United States of America
applying to the sale and possession of intoxicating liquor.
B. Each person and corporation or other entity that has a liquor license
shall at all times have and maintain in effect dram shop liability
insurance for not less than the maximum liability amount provided by
law for each injury to the person (including death) or the property of
any person and each such policy shall contain reasonable total
maximum limits.
C. Each liquor licensee is required at all times to have on file with the City
Clerk proof from the surety company, the insurance company or their
authorized agents that the required bond and insurance are in effect at
all times as required by this section.
D. The failure of any person, corporation or other entity to at all times
maintain in effect the bond and insurance required by this section shall
automatically terminate the license(s) issued pursuant to this chapter
to such person, corporation or other entity. Automatically terminated
licenses may be reinstated by the Liquor Commissioner in his discretion
upon a showing of evidence by the licensee that the required bond and
insurance have been obtained and are in effect. The responsibility to
maintain in effect the bond and insurance referred to herein shall be
§ 6-131 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 6-132
1:190
§ 6-133. [Ch. 6, Sec. 26] No sale, gift or delivery to or by a person
under the age of 21 years or an incompetent - illegal purchase or
procurement - illegal possession - parents' responsibility.
solely that of the licensee(s) and neither the City Clerk, the Liquor
Commissioner, nor any other person associated with the Liquor
Commission or with the City of Bloomington shall be responsible for
notifying the licensee(s) of the expiration date of any bond or insurance
policy or have any other responsibility with respect to maintaining
in effect at all times such bond and insurance policy or assuring
compliance with any aspect of this section or any related provision
thereof.
E. The failure of a licensee to comply with any aspect of this section is a
violation of this chapter for which the licensee may be penalized
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. [Ord. No. 1992-102]
A. It is unlawful for any person including but not limited to any licensee or
any associate, member, representative, agent, or employee of such
licensee to sell, give, deliver or serve any alcoholic beverage to any
person under the age of 21 years or to any intoxicated person or to any
person known to be a spendthrift, insane, mentally ill, mentally
deficient or a habitual drunkard. [Ord. No. 1992-102]
B. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to
purchase, accept or procure or to attempt to purchase, accept or
procure any alcoholic beverage from any liquor dealer or from any
other person. [Ord. No. 1992-102]
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to order, purchase or to in any
manner to obtain any alcoholic beverage for another person under the
age of 21 years. It shall be illegal for any person to sell, give or deliver
any alcoholic liquor to another person under the age of 21 years. It shall
be illegal for any person to directly or indirectly have any alcoholic
beverage sold, given or delivered to another person under 21 years of
age or to permit the sale, gift or delivery of any alcoholic beverage to
another person under 21 years of age. [Ord. No. 1992-102]
D. It shall be illegal for any person to have any alcoholic beverage in an
open container in his/her possession on any street or highway or upon
any other public property, except at the following locations:
(1) Possession of beer and wine by persons over the age of 21 is
permitted at Prairie Vista Golf Course, The Den at Fox Creek Golf
Course and Highland Golf Course pursuant to Chapter 31,
§ 31-701, of the Bloomington City Code. [Ord. No. 2013-95]
(2) Possession of all types of alcohol is permitted inside the
Bloomington Center for Performing Arts and on the grounds of
Festival Park outside of Bloomington Center for the Performing
Arts under the following conditions: [Ord. No. 2009-32]
§ 6-132 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-133
1:191
(a) Alcohol shall only be procured from and served by an
individual or entity with a Class EA or EB license or by an
individual or entity with a W, T or R liquor license who has
obtained a Class SA or SB license for that location. [Ord. No.
2013-95; Ord. No. 2014-04]
(b) Possession of open alcohol shall be allowed only at events that
are either sponsored or organized by the City of Bloomington
or by individuals or entities who have signed rental
agreements with the City of Bloomington for use of the
facilities that permit the individual or entity to serve alcohol.
[Ord. No. 2009-32]
(c) Possession of open alcohol on the grounds of Festival Park shall
only be permitted when there is perimeter fencing around the
grounds and entrance to the park must be made through gates
at two designated locations. Possession of open alcohol on the
grounds of Festival Park shall be allowed inside the fenced
area only. [Ord. No. 2013-95]
(d) Possession of open alcohol inside the Bloomington Center for
Performing Arts shall be prohibited after 12:00 midnight
whether or not alcohol was procured from the source
enumerated in Subsection D(2)(a). Possession of open alcohol
on the grounds of Festival Park shall be prohibited after 11:00
p.m. [Ord. No. 2013-95]
(e) All state and local liquor control laws must be obeyed. [Ord.
No. 2013-95]
(f) All rules and regulations for the Bloomington Center for the
Performing Arts and Festival Park must be obeyed. [Ord. No.
2013-95]
(3) Possession of open containers of all types of alcohol is permitted on
a sidewalk designated in a sidewalk cafe permit adjacent to a
licensed premise with an O license during the time allowed by the
O license or as otherwise provided as a condition on the license or
order of the Liquor Commission. [Ord. No. 2006-6]
(4) Possession of all types of alcohol is permitted inside the Coliseum
located in the block bounded by Madison Street, W. Front Street,
Lee Street and W. Olive under the following conditions: [Ord. No.
2013-95; Ord. No. 2014-02]
(a) Alcohol shall only be procured from and served by an
individual or entity with a Class ST, EA, EB, W, T or R license
authorizing the sale of alcohol in those premises; [Ord. No.
2013-95]
§ 6-133 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 6-133
1:192
(b) Possession of open alcohol other than that procured from the
sources enumerated in Subsection D(4)(a) shall be prohibited;
[Ord. No. 2013-95]
(c) All state and local liquor control laws must be obeyed; [Ord.
No. 2013-95]
(d) All rules and regulations for the Coliseum must be obeyed.
[Ord. No. 2013-95]
(5) Possession and consumption of beer and wine by persons over the
age of 21 may be permitted at Miller Park Pavilion and Davis
Lodge, as part of a special event approved by the City Clerk, under
the following conditions: [Added 9-9-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-71]
(a) The event organizer has entered into a valid event location
contract with the City;
(b) The City Clerk has issued a valid permit allowing the serving
and consumption of beer and wine during the special event;
(c) All beer and wine at the special event shall be served by an
individual or entity with a Class W catering license; and
(d) The event organizer and all attendees must fully comply with
federal, state, and local laws as well as all rules and
regulations for the event location.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person to whom the sale, gift, delivery or
service of any alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of age to consume
or to possess in any manner, including by consumption, any such
alcoholic liquor, except as otherwise provided by law. The violation
referred to in this section which relates to the possession of alcohol
after it has been consumed may be identified as the "Illegal Possession
of Alcohol by Consumption" or by the number of the chapter and section
of this Ordinance. This violation may be proven by evidence which
indicates that the breath of the person charged with such offense had a
smell associated generally or specifically with any alcoholic liquor and
no additional evidence relating thereto shall be necessary to find the
Defendant to be in violation of this Ordinance. It shall not be necessary
to show that the person charged with an offense hereunder was at the
time in question under the influence of any alcoholic liquor in any
manner, but such evidence shall be admissible to prove a violation of
this Ordinance.
F. The possession and dispensing or consumption by a person under the
age of 21 years of an alcoholic beverage in the performance of a
religious service or ceremony or the consumption of alcoholic liquor by
a person under the age of 21 years under the direct supervision and
direct approval of the parents or parent of such person in the privacy of
a home is not prohibited by this Ordinance, and this provision shall be
considered only as a defense for which the burden of proving that it
§ 6-133 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-133
1:193
§ 6-134. [Ch. 6, Sec. 27] No underage or intoxicated person in
licensed premises - exceptions and burden of proof.
applies to and was reasonably relied upon in a particular case shall be
on the person charged with an offense under this chapter. [Ord. No.
1992-102]
G. It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to suffer or permit his or
her child or ward under the age of 18 years to violate any provisions of
this chapter. [Ord. No. 1992-102]
H. It is illegal for the holder of a Class "MA" or "MB" license to sell or
otherwise provide to any person any liquor or a key to a container that
has liquor in it in a rented room on the premises if any person staying in
the room is under 21 years of age except when such person is the
spouse or a natural, adopted or foster child of the person who is renting
the room who must be 21 years of age or older. These alcoholic
beverages may be provided for refreshment purposes only and license
holders may not provide in any room enough alcoholic beverages which
could cause the persons over 21 years of age who are renting the room
to become intoxicated. If there is any doubt whether a registered guest
is 21 years of age or older or whether any terms of this license may be
violated, the license holder must request identification which will prove
that the terms of the license are not being violated. It is illegal for a
person under 21 years of age to obtain or to attempt to obtain a key to a
refreshment container that has alcoholic beverages in it or to use such
a key to obtain any alcoholic beverage from such a container. [Ord. No.
1992-102]
A. It shall be unlawful:
(1) For any intoxicated person to be or remain in any premises licensed
hereunder;
(2) For any person under the age of 21 years to enter, to be or remain
in any licensed premises having a Class T (Tavern) liquor license,
except that any person under the age of 21 years may be or remain
on the premises: [Ord. No. 2013-95; Ord. No. 2014-02]
(a) If accompanied by his or her parent(s) or legally appointed
guardian; or [Ord. No. 2013-95]
(b) If legally employed by the license holder of the premises or by
an authorized representative thereof as provided in § 6-125 of
this chapter and if the person is actively performing his/her
duties as a legal employee at the time in question; [Ord. No.
2013-95; Ord. No. 2014-02]
(3) For any licensee or employee thereof to be or remain on the
premises in an intoxicated condition. [Ord. No. 1992-136]
B. It shall be unlawful:
§ 6-133 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 6-134
1:194
§ 6-135. [Ch. 6, Sec. 28] Determination of age and identity -
falsification - checking as defense - burden of proof.
(1) For any licensee hereunder or the licensee's officer, partner,
associate, representative, agent or employee to allow or permit any
intoxicated person to be or remain on the licensed premises; [Ord.
No. 2013-95; Ord. No. 2014-02]
(2) For any licensee holding a Class T (Tavern) liquor license, or the
licensee's officer, partner, associate, representative, agent or
employee to allow or permit any person under the age of 21 years
to be or remain in the portion of any licensed premises, except:
[Ord. No. 2013-95; Ord. No. 2014-02]
(a) If accompanied by his or her parent(s) or legally appointed
guardian; or [Ord. No. 2013-95]
(b) If legally employed by the license holder of the premises or by
an authorized representative thereof as provided in § 6-125 of
this chapter and if the person is actively performing his/her
duties as a legal employee at the time in question. [Ord. No.
2013-95]
C. The Defendant/Respondent in any court or administrative hearing shall
have the burden of proving as an affirmative defense the exceptions to
the prohibitions of minors in taverns set forth in this section, and the
prosecutor shall have no responsibility to prove that any of said
exceptions do not apply. [Ord. No. 2013-95; Ord. No. 2014-02]
A. If a licensee or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or
employee of such licensee believes or has any reason whatsoever to
suspect or believe that the sale, gift, delivery or service to a prospective
recipient of any alcoholic liquor is prohibited by this chapter because of
the age of such person, he/she shall demand written evidence, and may
not rely on oral evidence, of the prospective recipient's age and identity
before making such sale, gift, delivery or service.
(1) Any person from whom such written evidence is demanded shall
forthwith display his/her motor vehicle operator's license, federal
selective service card, federal armed forces identification card or
other written evidence of age and identity issued by a public officer
in the performance of his official duties.
(2) If any such person fails to present such written evidence, he/she
shall be considered to be an under age person who is not entitled to
any such alcoholic liquor. However, if such written evidence of age
and identity is produced and shows the prospective recipient to be
of the age required to purchase such alcoholic liquor and if such a
sale, gift, delivery or service of alcoholic liquor is made in
reasonable reliance thereon, then the licensee and his
§ 6-134 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-135
1:195
§ 6-136. [Ch. 6, Sec. 29] Alcohol education training requirements.
representative shall not be subject to the penalty provisions of this
chapter.
(3) The burden of proving that a demand of written evidence of the age
and identity was made, that such written evidence was shown, the
content of the written evidence presented, and the reasonableness
of the reliance thereon shall be on the person charged with an
offense under this chapter. [Ord. No. 1992-102]
B. It shall be unlawful for any person whomsoever to present or offer to
any licensee or to any officer, associate, member, representative, agent
or employee of a licensee or to any other person any written, printed or
photostatic evidence of age and identity which is false, fraudulent or
not actually his or her own for the purpose of ordering, purchasing,
attempting to purchase or otherwise procuring or attempting to
procure the serving of any alcoholic beverage in violation of § 6-133 of
this Ordinance or for the purpose of gaining entry into any licensed
premises where alcoholic liquor is drawn, poured, mixed or otherwise
served for consumption on the premises in violation of § 6-134A(2) of
this Ordinance.
C. It shall also be unlawful for any person to sell, give, or furnish any
person under the age of 21 years any false or fraudulent written,
printed or photostatic evidence of the age and identity of such person or
to sell, give, or furnish any person under the age of 21 years evidence of
the age and identification of any other person. [Ord. No. 1992-136]
A. It shall be unlawful to sell, offer for sale or serve alcoholic liquor unless
a minimum of one person employed by the licensee is present on the
premises who has successfully completed a Beverage Alcohol Sellers
and Servers Education and Training (BASSET) course approved by the
State of Illinois or another alcohol education and training course
approved by the Bloomington Liquor Commission. Copies of certificates
showing successful completion of said training shall be kept on the
premises at all times and shall be made immediately available upon
request by any law enforcement officer or Liquor Commissioner. For
secondary and catering licenses, the premises shall be construed as the
area where alcohol is being sold, poured or served.
B. All holders of any class of liquor license within the City of Bloomington
shall require the general manager of the business to successfully
complete a BASSET or other alcohol education and training course
approved by the Bloomington Liquor Commission. A copy of the
certificate showing successful completion of said course shall be filed
with the City Clerk's office and another copy shall be kept on the
licensed premises at all times and made immediately available upon
request by any law enforcement officer or Liquor Commissioner. All
new general managers shall be allowed 60 days from the first date of
§ 6-135 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 6-136
1:196
§ 6-137. [Ch. 6, Sec. 30] No alcoholic liquor in passenger area of
automobile with broken seal. [Ord. No. 1992-102]
No person shall transport, carry, possess or have any alcoholic liquor in
the passenger area of any motor vehicle in the City, except in the original
package and with the seal unbroken. Any person, firm or corporation
violating the provisions of this section shall be fined not less than $50 and
not more than $500 for each offense.
§ 6-138. [Ch. 6, Sec. 31] No gambling or disorderly conduct
permitted. [Ord. No. 1992-102]
No gambling which is illegal under state law shall be permitted and no
gambling device which is illegal under state law shall be kept in any
commencement of work performed to complete the required alcohol
education and training course.
C. Any class T license holder having an establishment with a fire code
occupancy of over 100 persons shall be subject to the following
requirements:
(1) At times when eight or fewer employees are working at the
establishment, there shall be a minimum of one employee on the
premises who has completed BASSET or another alcohol education
and training course approved by the Bloomington Liquor
Commission;
(2) At times when more than eight but fewer than 16 employees are
working at the establishment, there shall be a minimum of two
employees on the premises who have completed BASSET or
another alcohol education and training course approved by the
Bloomington Liquor Commission.
(3) At times when more than 16 but fewer than 24 employees are
working at the establishment, there shall be a minimum of three
employees on the premises who have completed BASSET or
another alcohol education and training course approved by the
Bloomington Liquor Commission.
(4) At times when 24 or more employees are working at the
establishment, there shall be a minimum of four employees on the
premises who have completed a BASSET or another alcohol
education and training course approved by the Bloomington Liquor
Commission.
D. Failure to comply with the requirements of this section shall subject the
licensee to fines, suspension or revocation of license as provided in
§ 6-142 of this chapter.
E. The provisions of this section shall become effective July 1, 2013. [Ord.
No. 2013-22]
§ 6-136 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-138
1:197
premises licensed hereunder. No riotous, disorderly, indecent or offensive
conduct of any kind shall be allowed in or about said premises.
§ 6-138.1. [Ch. 6, Sec. 32] Curbside pickup and off-premises
delivery. [Added 9-23-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-73]
A. No licensee may deliver or serve alcoholic liquor for off-premises
consumption outside of the interior of the licensed premises except as
provided in this section, except as allowed for drive-up windows as set
forth in § 6-127A.
B. The holder of a Class PA or PB license may assist customers in placing
alcoholic liquor inside of their vehicles after the alcoholic liquor has
been purchased inside a licensed establishment.
C. The holder of a Class PA or PB license with a licensed premises of
10,000 square feet or more may allow online or telephone purchases of
alcoholic liquor and curbside pickup of those purchases if all of the
following requirements are met:
(1) The licensee has registered its curbside pickup service with the
City in the form and manner required by the City Clerk.
(2) The licensee's employee or agent making the curbside delivery has
completed all BASSET training required for making deliveries of
alcoholic liquor under the Liquor Control Act of 1934.
(3) The licensee's employee or agent making the curbside delivery is at
least 21 years of age.
(4) The licensee may not take an online or telephone order for
alcoholic liquor from any person that the licensee reasonably
knows or should know to be less than 21 years of age. The licensee
must have reasonable processes in place to ensure that persons
under the age of 21 are not allowed to place online or telephone
orders for alcoholic liquor.
(5) The licensee's employee or agent making the curbside delivery
must verify that the person to whom the delivery is made is 21
years or older.
(6) Curbside delivery may not be made to any person who is
intoxicated. Curbside delivery may not be made to a vehicle if any
occupant of that vehicle is intoxicated.
(7) The curbside delivery must occur on the licensed premises. It may
not occur on any public right-of-way.
(8) The curbside delivery may not occur outside of the hours where the
sale of alcoholic liquor is authorized for a Class PA or PB license.
D. The holder of a Class PA or PB license with a licensed premises of
10,000 square feet or more may allow online or telephone purchases of
§ 6-138 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 6-138.1
1:198
alcoholic liquor and delivery of those purchases if all of the following
requirements are met:
(1) The licensee has registered its delivery service with the City in the
form and manner required by the City Clerk.
(2) The licensee's employee or agent making the delivery has
completed all BASSET training required for making deliveries of
alcoholic liquor under the Liquor Control Act of 1934.
(3) The licensee's employee or agent making the delivery is at least 21
years of age.
(4) The licensee may not take an online or telephone order for
alcoholic liquor from any person that the licensee reasonably
knows or should know to be less than 21 years of age. The licensee
must have reasonable processes in place to ensure that persons
under the age of 21 are not allowed to place online or telephone
orders for alcoholic liquor.
(5) The licensee's employee or agent making the delivery must verify
that the person to whom the delivery is made is 21 years or older.
The employee agent making the delivery must require
identification, proof of age and the signature of the individual to
whom delivery is made. The licensee must maintain a record of all
deliveries, which must include the name of the delivery driver,
name of the purchaser, the address where delivery was made, the
name, date of birth, and signature of the person to whom delivery
was made, and a list of all alcoholic liquor items delivered. The
licensee must retain the delivery record for at least six months and
must make the record available for examination and copying
immediately upon request by the City of Bloomington Police
Department or the Local Liquor Commissioner.
(6) Delivery may not be made to any person who is intoxicated.
(7) The delivery may not occur outside of the hours where the sale of
alcoholic liquor is authorized for a Class PA or PB license in the City
of Bloomington.
E. Any violation of this section is a violation of the conditions of the
licensee's Class PA or PB license. In addition to any other fine, penalty,
revocation or suspension, the Local Liquor Commissioner may suspend
or revoke the licensee's authority to provide curbside pickup or offpremises
delivery. Any such revocation or suspension must be made in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter pertaining to license
revocation or suspension.
F. A retailer that is licensed by the Town of Normal to sell and deliver
alcoholic liquor may make deliveries to locations in the City of
Bloomington if the retailer meets all requirements of Subsection D of
this section, with the exception of the requirement that the retailer
§ 6-138.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-138.1
1:199
§ 6-139. [Ch. 6, Sec. 33] Entertainment.
The following types of entertainment are prohibited in establishments
holding liquor licenses:
must hold a Class PA or PB liquor license; instead, the retailer must
hold a Normal license that permits sale of packaged alcohol for
consumption off -premises. The delivery under this Subsection F may
occur if the Town of Normal has adopted regulations to provide that a
violation of Subsection D of this section is a violation of the retailer's
license.
G. If the Town of Normal has adopted regulations to allow the delivery of
alcoholic liquor by licensees of the City of Bloomington to locations in
the Town of Normal, then it is a violation of the licensee's Class PA or PB
license if the licensee makes a delivery to a location in the Town of
Normal in contravention of any regulation of the Town of Normal
regarding delivery.
H. The restrictions of Subsection D do not apply to alcoholic liquor that is
shipped through the U.S. Mail or any interstate freight shipping
company.
A. Card games, dice games, or any other game that may encourage
gambling that is illegal under state law. [Ord. No. 1997-58]
B. Conduct that exposes the following to public view:
(1) Human genitals and pubic regions;
(2) Human buttocks, perineum and anal region;
(3) Human female breast below a point immediately above the areola;
(4) Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered;
(5) Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy, bestiality,
oral copulation, flagellation, or any other sexual acts prohibited by
law;
(6) Fondling, touching, or caressing human genitals, pubic regions,
buttocks and/or female breasts. [Ord. No. 1997-58]
C. Dancing, except in licensed premises holding a current license, for
dance purposes issued under Chapter 7, Article XII, of the Bloomington
City Code. Pool, bowling, billiards, shuffleboard, display of television or
music entertainment is permitted. [Ord. No. 1997-58]
§ 6-138.1 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 6-140
1:200
§ 6-140. [Ch. 6, Sec. 34] Access from licensee's premises to
dwelling quarters. [Ord. No. 1992-102]
Except in the case of hotels and clubs, no alcoholic liquor shall be sold
at retail upon the premises which has any access which leads from such
premises to any other portion of the same building or structure used for
dwelling or lodging purpose and which is permitted to be used or kept
accessible for use by the public. This provision shall not prevent any
connection between such premises and such other portion of the building
or structures which is used only by the licensee, his family, and personal
guests.
§ 6-141. [Ch. 6, Sec. 36] Local Liquor Control Commissioner -
designated; enforcement of state law, ordinances, etc. [Ord. No.
1992-102]
The Mayor of the City shall be the local Liquor Control Commissioner and
shall be charged with the administration of the appropriate provisions of
the Illinois Liquor Control Act, of this chapter, and of such Ordinances,
Resolutions, and rules and regulations relating to alcoholic liquor as
hereafter may be adopted.
§ 6-142. [Ch. 6, Sec. 37] Same - powers and duties generally.
The local Liquor Control Commissioner shall have the following powers and
duties:
A. Recommend the granting, fining, suspending or revoking. To
recommend to the City Council the creating and granting of licenses
and to fine licensees and/or to suspend or revoke for cause all licenses
created under this chapter for premises within the local Liquor Control
Commissioner's jurisdiction. [Ord. No. 1992-102]
B. Right of entry.
(1) To enter any time into any premises licensed hereunder to
determine whether any of the provisions of the Illinois Liquor
Control Act or of this Code or any other laws or of any rules and/or
regulations adopted by the Commissioner or by the State
Commission have been or are being followed or violated by any
person. This authorization provision also applies to law
enforcement officers and any member of the Liquor Commission.
(2) It shall be the responsibility and duty of any license holder and of
any employee, agent or other representative of a license holder to
enable and permit the Liquor Commissioner, any member of the
Liquor Commission and any law enforcement officer to enter a
licensed establishment at any time before or after the closing time
and the failure to do so shall be a violation of this Code. [Ord. No.
1992-102]
§ 6-140 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-142
1:201
C. Exercise powers, etc. Granted Under State Law, Etc. To exercise all the
powers, functions and duties which now or hereafter may be granted to
him by the Illinois Liquor Control Act regulations of the Illinois State
Liquor Control Commission, or by this chapter. [Ord. No. 1992-102]
D. Liquor Commission. The local Liquor Commissioner may appoint one or
more persons to the Bloomington Liquor Commission to assist him and
such person(s) shall have any and all of the authority the Commissioner
has in the exercise of the powers and the performance of the duties
provided for the local Liquor Control Commissioner. [Ord. No.
1982-102]
E. Fine and/or suspension or revocation of license. To fine any licensee
and/or to suspend or revoke any license(s) issued under this chapter for
any of the following reasons:
(1) That the licensee has violated any of the laws of the United States
relating to the sale of alcoholic liquor or any of the provisions of the
Illinois Liquor Control Act, of this chapter, or any applicable rules
and regulations adopted by the local Liquor Control Commissioner
or by the State Commission.
(2) The willful making of any false statement as to a material fact in the
application for such license or in any change of ownership
application or request or affidavit for the renewal of any license.
Making a false statement shall include not making a complete
statement of all relevant facts which relate to the situation.
(3) The permitting of any violation of state law or Bloomington City
Code by any person upon the licensed premises.
(4) Failure to use and maintain the licensed premises in compliance
with all codes and regulations pertaining to health and safety
applicable within the City of Bloomington, including but not limited
to Building, Plumbing, Electrical and Fire Codes, Zoning
Ordinances, McLean County Health Ordinances, and all
regulations and orders of the McLean County Health Department.
(5) The refusal of any licensee to testify under oath to all relevant and
material questions propounded to him at any hearing conducted by
the local Liquor Control Commissioner.
(6) Suspension or revocation of the license of the licensee by the State
Commission.
(7) Payment by the licensee of the special federal tax imposed under
Section 4411 (Wagering) or Section 4461 (Coin Operated Gaming
Devices) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended.
(8) Maintaining or operating a dram shop on any premises registered
as a place of business where activities are carried on which make
the person or persons carrying on such activities subject to the
§ 6-142 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 6-142
1:202
special federal tax on wagering. (Section 4411 of said Internal
Revenue Code).
(9) Having on the premises where the licensee carries on his business
any coin operated gaming device subject to the special federal tax
imposed under Section 4461 of said Internal Revenue Code,
whether or not said tax is paid.
(10) Permitting any gambling device or equipment to be located on the
licensed premises, except for devices and equipment licensed and
operated in accordance with the Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 440/
1, et seq.8 [Ord. No. 2012-50]
(11) Failure to adhere to any changes or requirements imposed as a
condition of being issued by the City Council pursuant to § 6-107 or
by the Liquor Commissioner pursuant to [Sec. 4D] of this chapter.
[Ord. No. 1992-102]
(12) Failure to pay any food and beverage, package liquor, hotel, utility
or other taxes due to the City of Bloomington. [Ord. No. 2018-05]
F. Conditions on license. The Liquor Commission may require changes in
the licensee's operations in addition to or in lieu of assessing a fine and/
or suspending a license for any of the reasons stated in § 6-142E. Such
changes may include, but are not limited to:
(1) Restricting the hours of sale;
(2) Adding exterior lighting;
(3) Erecting fencing;
(4) Patrolling the premises;
(5) Restricting the sale of single serving sizes of all types or a
particular type of alcohol for consumption off of the premises;
(6) Requiring employee training;
(7) Establishing a minimum number of employees;
(8) Limiting the number and/or location of signs. [Ord. No. 2004-2]
G. Fines.
(1) Each fine imposed hereunder may not be less than $250 nor more
than $3,500. A separate fine may be imposed for each violation and
each day that the activity of a violation occurs or continues shall be
a separate violation for which a separate fine may be assessed.
(2) Fines shall be payable in the manner indicated in any Order which
results from a hearing or as the Liquor Commissioner may
8. Editor's Note: See now 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.
§ 6-142 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-142
1:203
otherwise specify in writing and the failure to pay any part of a fine
as so indicated or specified may result in the license being similarly
suspended or revoked by the Liquor Commissioner. The licensee
may request a hearing on such action but pending a hearing and
a decision thereon by the Liquor Commissioner, the license shall
remain suspended or revoked. It shall be the duty of each licensee
who makes a fine payment as indicated or specified to request a
hearing at the earliest possible time to explain the situation and
request that license(s) not be suspended or revoked as provided for
herein or for any other reason. Any fine may be collected in court.
[Ord. No. 2004-2]
H. Examination of applicants, licensees and records.
(1) To examine or cause to be examined under oath any applicant or
any representative of an applicant for a local license or for a
renewal thereof or any licensee (see Subsection G) and to hear
testimony and take proof of any witness or person having
information about the issues being considered and to consider any
other relevant evidence and for such purposes to issue subpoenas
which shall be effective in any part of the State.
(2) Each licensee involved in a hearing for a possible violation of this
Code or other law(s) shall provide to the Liquor Commissioner at
his request a copy of the income statement and/or any other
requested financial statement of the involved establishment for a
reasonable period of the past of not less than one year and the
failure to do so shall be a violation of this Code. This provision is not
intended to be a limitation of the authority of the Liquor
Commissioner under Chapter 43, Illinois Revised Statutes (See Ch.
43, Sec. 126a9). [Ord. No. 1982-90]
I. Investigation of complaints, etc. To receive the complaint of any
resident of the City and to investigate upon such complaint or to
investigate upon his own initiative any alleged action of any law of the
United States relating to the sale of alcoholic liquor or any of the
provisions of the Illinois Liquor Control Act or of this Code, or any
applicable rules and regulations adopted by the local Liquor Control
Commissioner or by the State Commission. [Ord. No. 1992-102]
J. Rules and regulations. To make, promulgate, alter, amend, repeal, and
enforce such reasonable rules and regulations relating to the
administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter as may
be deemed by him to be desirable. [Ord. No. 1992-102]
K. Ordering the License Classification of any establishment to be changed
upon application as provided in § 6-109 of this chapter or upon his own
initiative if he finds, after hearing evidence, that an establishment fails
to qualify for the license it holds. [Ord. No. 1992-102]
9. Editor's Note: See 235 ILCS 5/6-10.
§ 6-142 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 6-143
1:204
§ 6-143. [Ch. 6, Sec. 38] Same - hearings. [Ord. No. 1992-102]
For the purpose of administering and enforcing the provisions of this
chapter, and proposing amendments thereto to the City Council, the local
Liquor Control Commissioner may in his discretion hold public hearings at
any time within the City concerning any matters embraced or which may be
embraced within this chapter.
§ 6-144. [Ch. 6, Sec. 38A] Record of hearings - costs.
§ 6-145. [Ch. 6, Sec. 39] Mayor - Liquor Control Commissioner.
[Ord. No. 1992-102]
Wherever in this chapter the term "Mayor" is used, the same rights,
privileges, and duties shall apply to the Liquor Control Commissioner of the
City.
A. A certified court reporter shall at the public hearing take the complete
record of all evidence, testimony and comments and, upon notification
by the Commission, shall prepare a certified official record of the
proceedings suitable for filing with the State Liquor Control
Commission and that all reviews of the proceedings of the Commission
be on the record. The cost of taking the certified official record of the
proceedings shall be shared equally between the Commission and the
licensee, with payment of the licensee's share to be made to the City of
Bloomington at or before the time the Order of the Commission
becomes effective. [Ord. No. 2010-29]
B. Each licensee who is appealing an Order which results from a hearing
shall pay 1/2, or an equal amount with the City and multiple appealing
respondents, of any certified court or certified shorthand reporter's fee
for the original transcription of the hearing record for the appeal. Each
licensee shall make this payment to the City within seven days after the
transcribed record is sent to the appellate commission or court as part
of the appeal. If any additional transcripts are requested from the
reporter or obtained by the Liquor Commission, any party to the
hearing or any other person(s), each shall pay the reporter's fee for
each transcript or copy of the record which is requested or otherwise
obtained.
C. If a City employee transcribes the record of a hearing from a tape
recording of the hearing or otherwise, the fee therefor shall be
computed at the same rate as the prevailing rate for the transcription of
records by a certified court or certified shorthand reporter and shall be
paid in the same proportionate amount and manner as indicated herein
for such transcripts. The computation of the amount and the payment of
these fees shall not be affected by problems associated with the
recording system other than as the number of pages may be reduced as
a result thereof. [Ord. No. 1992-102]
§ 6-143 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-146
1:205
§ 6-146. [Ch. 6, Sec. 40] Investigation expense. [Ord. No. 1992-102]
The Liquor Control Commissioner of the City shall be permitted to expend
not to exceed $1,000 annually in the performance of his duties under this
Ordinance.
§ 6-147. [Ch. 6, Sec. 41] Mayor may close by proclamation - penalty.
[Ord. No. 1992-102]
In all cases where, in the opinion of the Mayor or City Council, the public
peace is likely to be endangered by the keeping open of such places where
intoxicating liquor is sold at retail, it shall be lawful for the Mayor to issue
his proclamation under the seal of the City, commanding and enjoining all
persons so licensed by said City, and their servants and agents, to close
such places of business for such time as the said Mayor or City Council may
deem necessary and neither to sell, give away, or suffer to be drunk any of
said liquors in or about their premises during the time mentioned in said
proclamation; and if any person shall disobey said proclamation by keeping
open such place of business, or by selling, giving away, or suffering to be
drunk in or about his premises any of said liquors, he or she shall forfeit and
pay the sum of $100.
§ 6-148. [Ch. 6, Sec. 42] Abatement of place used in violation. [Ord.
No. 1992-102]
Every lot, parcel, or tract of land, and every building, structure,
establishment or place whatsoever, together with all furniture, fixtures,
ornament and machinery located therein, wherein there shall be conducted
any unlawful sale of any alcoholic liquor or in any other manner used in
violation of any of the provisions of this article is hereby declared to be a
public nuisance and shall be abated as provided by the laws of this State for
the abatement of public nuisances.
§ 6-149. [Ch. 6, Sec. 43] Adoption of state law. [Ord. No. 1992-102]
All of the provisions of the Illinois Liquor Control Act and of the rules and
regulations issued by the Illinois Liquor Control Commission which are or
may hereafter be in force, which are applicable to the City, are hereby
incorporated into and declared to be a part of this chapter the same as if
they were expressly set forth herein.
§ 6-150. [Ch. 6, Sec. 44] Evidence - accountability - witnesses.
A. In all prosecutions under this chapter it shall not be necessary to state
the kind of liquor sold, nor to describe the place where sold, nor to show
the knowledge of the principal to convict him for the acts of any agent
or servant.
B. Every act or admission of any nature constituting a violation of any of
the provisions of this act by any officer, director, manager, agent or
employee of any licensee shall be deemed and held to be the act of such
§ 6-146 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 6-150
1:206
§ 6-151. [Ch. 6, Sec. 45] Penalty. [Ord. No. 1992-102]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall,
unless otherwise provided in this chapter, be fined not less than $250 nor
more than $2,000 for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed
to have occurred on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
§ 6-152. [Ch. 6, Sec. 46] Severability. [Ord. No. 1992-102]
Each section, paragraph, sentence, clause and provision of this Ordinance
is separate and if any provision is held unconstitutional or invalid for any
reason, such holding shall not affect the remainder of this Ordinance or any
part thereof.
Chapter 7
AMUSEMENTS
licensee and said licensee shall be punishable in the same manner as if
such acts or admissions had been done or admitted by him personally.
In all cases, persons to whom intoxicating liquors shall be sold in
violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be competent witnesses.
[Ord. No. 1992-102]
§ 6-150 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-152
1:207

ARTICLE I
Motion Picture Theaters and Theatricals
§ 7-101. [Ch. 7, Sec. 1] Definitions.
PERSON — Any natural individual, firm, partnership, association, joint
stock company, joint adventure, public or private corporation, or a receiver,
executor, trustee, conservator, or other representative appointed by order
of any court or in any other manner.
PLACE — The theater, opera house, auditorium, hall, park grounds,
gardens, tent or other enclosure.
THEATER — Any place within the corporate limits of the City wherein any
show, moving picture, theatrical exhibition, amusement, or entertainment is
shown, exhibited, or staged and for which an admission charge is made, for
the purpose of the determination of the annual fee for license hereinafter
provided, a moving picture theater within a building auditorium or any
other enclosure, having permanent seats shall be known as an enclosed
theater. Any place for moving pictures or other entertainment as aforesaid
in which the enclosure is not within a building and in which less than 5%
of the total seating capacity is provided with fixed or permanent seats and
in which the common term "drive in" or automobile theater" is applicable,
shall be known as a drive in theater.
§ 7-102. [Ch. 7, Sec. 2] License required.
It shall be unlawful to give, present, or conduct any motion pictures, or
theatricals, for admission to which a fee is charged excepting performances
given solely for the benefit of and under the supervision of a religious,
educational, charitable, or nonprofit organization without having first
secured a license therefor as herein provided.
§ 7-103. [Ch. 7, Sec. 3] Annual fee. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
Any person securing an annual license for motion pictures, or theatricals,
naming a specific place or building where the performances are to be
presented, may present therein any number of performances, including
theatricals, during the year for which the license was secured without
having to pay any additional fee. The license fee on enclosed theaters shall
be as set forth in the Schedule of Fees. The license fee on drive in theaters
shall be as set forth in the Schedule of Fees.
§ 7-104. [Ch. 7, Sec. 4] Motion pictures in unlicensed places.
For motion pictures or theatricals, which are to be presented in premises
which are not covered by an annual license fee, the fee to be paid shall
be $5 per day; provided that no such motion picture or theatrical shall be
presented in or on any premises or building which does not fully comply
with requirements of this Code for the construction and maintenance of
buildings for this purpose.
§ 7-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-105
1:209
§ 7-105. [Ch. 7, Sec. 5] Application: contents.
An application for the license required by the preceding Section shall be
made in writing to the City Manager, setting out the full name of the
applicant if an individual, and if a corporation the full name and residence of
its principal officers; the location and description of the building, enclosure,
or place for which a license is desired or where it is desired to present any
public amusement; the class of entertainment it is desired to produce, offer,
or present at such place; the seating capacity.
§ 7-106. [Ch. 7, Sec. 6] Prorating of license. [Ord. No. 1974-124]
The annual license fee shall be payable on or before January 1 and said
license shall be valid until December 31st of the same year. In the event of
a transfer of a theater from one owner to another, the issued license may
be transferred to the new owner upon approval of the City Manager. In the
event a license is applied for after January 1, the annual license fee shall
be abated 1/4 for each full quarter year which may have elapsed since the
beginning of the calendar year. If a license is surrendered before the end of
the calendar year, no refund shall be given.
§ 7-107. [Ch. 7, Sec. 7] Issuance - generally.
Upon receipt of the application for a license required by this article, the City
Manager shall make or cause to be made an examination of the premises
for which the license is desired, and if it shall appear that such place is
constructed and maintained in compliance with and in conformity to all
laws, provisions of this Code, health and fire regulations applicable thereto
and is properly ventilated and supplied with separate and sufficient toilet
conveniences for each sex and is a safe and proper place for the purpose
for which it shall be used, then the City Manager shall issue or cause to be
issued by the City Clerk upon payment of the license fee required by this
article a license to such applicant.
§ 7-108. [Ch. 7, Sec. 8] Posting.
Every license issued under the provisions of this article shall at all times
during the life thereof be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the
principal entrance of the premises described in such license, so the same
may be easily seen and read by any person passing in or out of such
premises.
§ 7-109. [Ch. 7, Sec. 9] Information to be shown in license
generally. [Ord. No. 1974-124]
Such license shall state the number of persons such licensed theater, hall,
building, or place has accommodations for, and no more than that number
shall be allowed to occupy such theater, hall, building, or place at any one
time.
§ 7-110. [Ch. 7, Sec. 10] Compliance with Building Code.
§ 7-105 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 7-110
1:210
§ 7-111. [Ch. 7, Sec. 11] License subject to ordinances and in
discretion of City Manager.
Every license granted under the provisions hereof shall at all times be
subject to the Code of the City existing when the same shall be issued or
which shall thereafter be passed, so far as the same shall apply. And the
City Manager may, in his discretion, refuse to grant any such license when
he has reasonable cause to believe that the giving of any such proposed
exhibition would be a violation of any provisions of the Code of the City, or
he may revoke the same after having been granted for the same reasons.
§ 7-112. [Ch. 7, Sec. 12] Prohibitions in licenses - revocation -
penalty.
All licenses for entertainment, where a license is required, shall contain
a proviso that no gaming, raffle, lottery, or chance gift, distribution of
money or articles of value shall be connected therewith or allowed by the
person obtaining such license, or in anywise permitted or held out as an
inducement to visitors. Whoever shall violate the provisions of his, her, or
their license as aforesaid shall forfeit and pay a fine of not less than $5 or
more than $50 for each offense; and it shall be the duty of the City Manager
to revoke the license of any such person or persons upon conviction for any
such offense.
§ 7-113. [Ch. 7, Sec. 13] Mutilation of amusement bills - penalty.
It shall not be lawful for any person or persons to destroy, tear, mutilate,
cover, or otherwise deface or injure any bill or poster posted in such place
as may be permitted, descriptive of any performance or entertainment given
A. No theatrical, lecture, or other amusement or entertainment to which
the public is invited or which may be attended by groups of more than
100 persons shall be given in any building or premises which does not
comply in its manner of construction with the provisions of the Building
Code applicable to theater buildings. Amusements or exhibitions given
outdoors or within a tent or other enclosure are not to be construed as
structures under the Building Code, but all tents and other similar
enclosures shall be fireproofed before being used for the above
purposes.
B. Exit lights. It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant in charge of any
building or hall used as an assembly hall with accommodations for 100
persons or more in which theatricals, shows, amusements, lectures and
other entertainment is offered, operated, or presented to provide and
place a sign on which the word "Exit" shall appear in letters at least six
inches high over every door or other opening from such hall to every
means of egress therefrom, and a light shall be provided with a red
globe and placed at or over such sign, which light shall be kept burning
during the entire period that the hall is open to the public and until the
audience has left the hall.
§ 7-110 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-113
1:211
in any licensed moving picture theater or hall or in pursuance of a license
given by the City; and any person or persons violating the provisions of this
section shall be subject to a fine of not less than $5 or not exceeding $25 for
each violation thereof.
§ 7-114. [Ch. 7, Sec. 14] Intoxicating liquors - smoking - penalty.
§ 7-115. [Ch. 7, Sec. 15] Seats in passageways - penalty.
No chairs, stools or seats of any description shall be placed or permitted to
remain in or across the lobby, aisles or passageways in any moving picture
theater, hall or other public building when occupied by the public nor shall
people be allowed to stand therein, under a penalty of $10 for each and
every violation of this section; and it shall be the duty of the police force
to see that the foregoing provisions are strictly observed, and in case of
any violation thereof forthwith to proceed to clear any obstructed aisle,
passageway or lobby and to arrest the offender or offenders.
§ 7-116. [Ch. 7, Sec. 16] Special police patrolmen.
It shall be the duty of every owner or lessee of every licensed moving
picture theater, hall or other building to keep and preserve good order in
and about his premises, and to that end he shall hire and keep at his own
expense a sufficient number of special police patrolmen.
§ 7-117. [Ch. 7, Sec. 17] Refusal to move on after notice - penalty.
It shall not be lawful for any person or persons to stand in the lobby or outer
entrance of any licensed moving picture theater, hall, or any other public
building, or on the sidewalk adjacent to and within 50 feet of such entrance,
after a request to move on made by the owner, lessee, or any police officer,
under a penalty of $5 for every such offense.
§ 7-118. [Ch. 7, Sec. 18] Penalty.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article
where no specific penalty is provided shall be fined not less than $5 nor
A. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to sell or give away any
spirituous, vinous, malt or other intoxicating liquor in any moving
picture theater, hall or other building where entertainment are given
for gain or in any room or rooms connected with the same, under a
penalty of not less than $20 or more than $50 for each offense.
B. Smoking. It shall be unlawful to smoke or carry a lighted cigar,
cigarette or pipe beneath the stage or in the seating area of any
building used as an assembly hall with seating accommodations for
more than 100 persons or in which theatricals, shows, amusements,
lectures, or other entertainment are offered, presented, operated, or
exhibited.
§ 7-113 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 7-118
1:212
more than $100 for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 7-119. [Ch. 7, Sec. 19] Unauthorized exhibition of motion picture.
A. A person commits the offense of unauthorized exhibition of a motion
picture if he knowingly publicly displays or allows the public display of
any sexually offensive motion picture.
B. Definitions.
(1) A person exhibits a sexually offensive motion picture knowingly if
he has actual or constructive knowledge of the subject material. A
person shall be deemed to have constructive knowledge of its
character and content if he has knowledge of its character and
content if he has knowledge of facts which would put a reasonable
and prudent man on notice as to the suspect nature of the material.
(2) A motion picture is publicly displayed if:
(a) A person on his own or public property has an unobstructed
view of not less than 50% of the total area of the surface upon
which the motion picture is projected; or
(b) Sexually offensive scenes from the movie or other sexually
offensive material visible from public property is displayed at
the premises upon which the motion picture is being shown; or
(c) Sexually offensive material is utilized in the advertising of such
motion picture.
C. Penalty. A person convicted of Unauthorized Exhibition of a Motion
Picture shall, for the first offense, be fined not to exceed $200, and for
each subsequent offense be fined $200-$500 or imprisoned not to
exceed 90 days or both; the court may also enjoin the further public
display of such motion picture upon the conviction whether for a first
offense or otherwise. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day in which a sexually offensive motion picture is publicly
displayed. In addition, upon conviction for any offense, the license of
the theater publicly displaying a sexually offensive motion picture may
be suspended or revoked.
D. Severability. If any subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase
of this Code shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such
decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this section which
shall continue in full force and effect, and to this end the provisions of
this Code are hereby declared to be severable. [Ord. No. 1973-104]
§ 7-118 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-119
1:213

ARTICLE II
(Reserved)
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-119
1:215

ARTICLE III
Mechanical Musical Devices
§ 7-301. [Ch. 7, Sec. 33] Definitions; purpose of article.
Whenever in this article the following terms are used, they shall have, for
the purposes of this article, the meanings respectively ascribed to them in
this section:
MECHANICAL MUSICAL DEVICE OR MACHINE — Includes a mechanical
victrola, a mechanical piano, or any other mechanical musical instrument,
the operation of which may be governed or controlled by the deposit of
a coin or token therein, so that the person inserting the coin or token
can cause the device to reproduce a selected musical piece which has
been recorded on a disc, cylinder or other type of record. This definition
is intended to include all mechanical musical instruments which are
commonly located in public places where furnishing a choice of pieces of
music.
OPERATOR — Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association, or
club who sets up for operation more than three of such devices, or who sets
up any such device for operation in any location or establishment not owned
or operated by him or it, or who leases or distributes any such device for
the purpose of operation by another.
PROPRIETOR OF THE ESTABLISHMENT — Includes any person acting in
the capacity, of owner or lessee or in any other capacity in controlling,
directly or through an agent, the room or place wherein a mechanical
musical device is located for the purpose of being operated.
PUBLIC PLACE — A tavern, barroom, drugstore, eating place, club room, or
other place open to the public generally or to a group of selected members
or patrons, wherein a mechanical device is maintained for the purpose of
furnishing music for the enjoyment or benefit of the patrons, members, and
other persons who may be in such place. It is the purpose of this article
to regulate and license such a place as a place of amusement and the
proprietor of such an establishment as the keeper of theatricals or other
exhibitions and amusements.
§ 7-302. [Ch. 7, Sec. 34] License required.
A. No person, firm, corporation, partnership, association, or club shall
become an operator as herein defined or lease or distribute for the
purpose of operation any such device as above defined without first
having obtained a license therefor in the manner hereinafter set forth,
to be known as an operator's license.
B. No proprietor of an establishment shall use and operate or maintain for
use and operation any mechanical musical device in any public place in
the City, unless a license therefor shall first have been obtained in the
manner required by this article.
§ 7-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-303
1:217
§ 7-303. [Ch. 7, Sec. 35] Operator's license fee. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
The license fee for each operator, as above defined, shall be as set forth
in the Schedule of Fees, payable quarterly in advance. No license shall be
issued for less than one year, and in no case shall any portion of said license
fee be repaid to the licensee.
§ 7-304. [Ch. 7, Sec. 36] License fee for each machine. [Ord. No.
2018-89]
In addition to the license fee required in the preceding Sections there shall
be a fee, as set forth in the Schedule of Fees, for each device operated or
set up for operation by an operator or proprietor of an establishment. Said
fee shall be paid quarterly in advance, and no license shall be issued for less
than one year. In no case shall any portion of said license fee be repaid to
the licensee. Payment of the fees required in §§ 7-303 and 7-304 shall be
made to the Director of Finance.
§ 7-305. [Ch. 7, Sec. 37] Number limited to operator.
No operator shall set up for operation, lease, or distribute more than 100
machines at any one time upon any license granted hereunder. If more
than 100 machines are set up for operation, leased, or distributed, then the
operator shall take out another operator's license at the same fee for every
100 machines or fraction thereof in excess of the first 100.
§ 7-306. [Ch. 7, Sec. 38] Application for license as an "operator" -
issuance.
A. Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association, or club desiring
to secure a license as an operator shall file with the City Manager an
application for a license as an "operator" of mechanical musical
devices, which shall be signed by the applicant, if an individual, or by a
duly authorized officer, manager, or agent thereof, if a firm, partnership
corporation or club. The application shall contain the following
information and statements:
(1) In case the applicant is an individual, his name and age and the
address of his residence; in the case of a firm or partnership, the
trade name and the names and addresses of the members of such
firm or partnership and of the managers of the establishment. In
the case of a corporation or club, the date of incorporation or
organization, the object for which it was organized, and the names
and addresses of the officers and managers.
(2) The location and description of the premises or place where the
business of such operator will be conducted or that of the place
from which distribution will be made.
§ 7-303 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 7-306
1:218
§ 7-307. [Ch. 7, Sec. 39] Application for license as "proprietor" of
an establishment; issuance - nontransferable.
(3) The number of mechanical musical devices for which the applicant
seeks a license and a description by trade name, model number,
and serial number of each device.
(4) Prior conviction of applicant, if any.
(5) In case the "operator" is not a distributor, the application shall
contain the following information:
(a) The character of the principal business carried on in the place
in which the mechanical musical devices are to be located.
(b) A schedule of the hours during which the public place is open
for use by the members, patrons or public.
(c) A schedule of the days of the week and the hours of such days
during which the applicant seeks permission for the operation
of the mechanical musical device.
A. Any person firm, corporation, partnership, association, or club desiring
to secure a license as a proprietor of an establishment to operate an
individual mechanical musical device in a public place shall file with the
City Manager an application which shall be signed by the applicant, if
an individual, or by a duly authorized officer, manager, or agent thereof
if a firm, partnership, corporation or club. The application shall contain
the following information and statements:
(1) In case the applicant is an individual, his name and age and the
address of his residence; in the case of a firm or partnership, the
trade name and names and addresses of the members of such firm
or partnership and of the managers of the establishment; in the
case of a corporation or club the name of the corporation or club,
the date of incorporation, or organization, the object for which it
was organized, and the names and addresses of the officers and
managers.
(2) The location and description of the premises or place where the
business of such proprietor will be conducted.
(3) The number of mechanical musical devices for which the applicant
seeks a license and description by trade name, model number, and
serial number of each device.
(4) Prior conviction of applicant, if any.
(5) The character of the principal business carried on in the place in
which the mechanical musical devices are to be located.
(6) A schedule of the hours during which the public place is open for
use by the members, patrons, or public.
§ 7-306 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-307
1:219
§ 7-308. [Ch. 7, Sec. 40] Payment of fees - posting of license.
No license shall be issued under the provisions of this article until the fees
are fully paid. All licenses for mechanical musical devices shall be posted in
a conspicuous place in the establishments of the licensee.
§ 7-309. [Ch. 7, Sec. 41] False statements.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sign or present any application for a
license required by this article, knowing it to contain any false statement.
§ 7-310. [Ch. 7, Sec. 42] Issuance; duration; contents.
§ 7-311. [Ch. 7, Sec. 43] Restrictions upon issuance.
No license required by this article shall be issued to:
(7) A schedule of the days of the week and the hours of such days
during which the applicant seeks permission for the operation of
the mechanical musical device.
A. After the application for license required by this article has been duly
approved in the manner prescribed in this article and the license fee
has been paid as herein provided, the applicant shall submit to the City
Clerk his approved application for a license and receipt for the license
fee or other proof that the license fee has been paid, whereupon the
City Clerk shall issue a license for the number of machines designated
in the application for which the license fee has been paid. Each license
shall be an annual license expiring on the 31st day of December of the
year in which it is issued. [Ord. No. 1974-124]
B. The license shall state the date of issuance, the date of expiration, the
amount of the license fee paid, the name and address of the
establishment in which the machine or machines are to be located, the
name of the operator or proprietor and the trade name, model number
and serial number of each machine.
A. A person not of legal age or under any legal disability.
B. A person who is not of good moral character or reputation in the
community in which he resides.
C. A person who is not a citizen of the United States.
D. A person who has previously had a license issued under this article,
which has been revoked for good cause.
E. A person who, at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued under this article, would not be eligible for such a license upon a
first application.
F. A firm or partnership, unless each of the members of such firm or
partnership is authorized to obtain a license under this article.
§ 7-307 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 7-311
1:220
§ 7-312. [Ch. 7, Sec. 44] Grounds for disapproval.
Prior to the issuance of any license under this article, the application for
such license must contain the approval, by initial or other memorandum
on the application of the Chief of Police, or other officer designated by the
City Manager to inspect the premises and investigate the applicant. This
approval shall not be given until after the establishment has been inspected,
and the location and proposed rooms for operation of the mechanical
musical device have been found satisfactory. The application shall not be
approved:
§ 7-313. [Ch. 7, Sec. 45] Validity, transferability, inc.
The license required by this article shall be valid only for the establishment
described in the license and for the machine or machines described in the
license and shall not be transferable or assignable, except as provided in
this article.
G. A corporation or club not authorized to do business in the state or of
which any officer or manager, or any employee to be left in immediate
control of the establishment, would not be eligible to obtain a license
under this article.
A. If the construction and the location of the establishment are such that
the operation of the mechanical musical device during any of the hours
designated in the application would constitute a nuisance or would
unreasonably annoy the residents of the neighborhood.
B. If the establishment is being operated in such a manner that the
operation of a mechanical musical device therein would constitute a
nuisance or would unreasonably annoy the residents of the
neighborhood.
C. If the building in which the mechanical musical device is to be operated
is structurally unsafe for the accommodation of the patrons, members
of the club, or other persons who may be in such place or if there would
be any fire hazard to the patrons, members of the club, or other
persons. For the purpose of enforcing these requirements, the Chief of
Police or any other person designated by him may require an inspection
and approval by the Building Official, the Chief Fire Marshal, or officers
designated by them.
D. If the operation of the mechanical musical device in the establishment
would in any way endanger the patrons, members of the club, or other
persons who may be in such place or the residents of the neighborhood
or the general public.
§ 7-311 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-314
1:221
§ 7-314. [Ch. 7, Sec. 46] Number tags - evidence of ownership -
record of location.
The City Clerk shall issue a number tag for each device licensed hereunder,
and such number tag shall at all times be firmly fixed to such machine
in a conspicuous place, and no tag shall be transferred from one device
to another. Prior to the issuance of each license for an individual device,
evidence of ownership thereof shall be filed with the City Clerk and any
transfer of ownership immediately shall be filed with said City Clerk. No
machine shall be installed for operation, taken out of the location thereof or
changed from the location to another without a written statement thereof
immediately being filed with said City Clerk.
§ 7-315. [Ch. 7, Sec. 47] Inspection.
The City through its officers, agents, and employees shall have the right, to
enter at all times any establishment, place, or building in which any of such
devices are operated or set up for operation and to inspect, investigate, and
test such devices.
§ 7-316. [Ch. 7, Sec. 48] Procedure of new proprietor for license
when establishment sold.
If an establishment is sold where there is located a mechanical musical
device, the new proprietor shall submit a new application for a license for
the balance of the year. If the applicant shall state on the application that
both the establishment and the machine are to be operated in the same
manner as they were theretofore operated by the previous proprietor, the
City Manager may approve the application without making a new inspection
of the establishment, and if the old license is returned to the City Clerk with
a new application for license, the license fee for the new license shall be 1/
2 the amount the fee would have been if it had been an application for an
original license which fee shall be paid to the Director of Finance. The new
license certificate and license tag shall contain the word "transfer" written
at the top thereof. If the proprietor of the establishment wishes to replace
one machine with another, he shall remove the tag from the old machine and
bring said tag, together with his license certificate to the City Clerk, who
shall change the certificate by crossing off the trade name, model number
and serial number of the removed machine and shall insert thereon the
trade name, model number, and serial number of the new machine. The
City Clerk shall also issue a new tag for the new machine. At the time the
licensee makes application to the City Clerk for the change in his license,
he shall submit to the City Clerk the receipt for the transfer fee as provided
in this article.
§ 7-317. [Ch. 7, Sec. 49] Regulation of operation.
No mechanical musical device or machine shall be operated or kept for
operation in any public place:
§ 7-314 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 7-317
1:222
§ 7-318. [Ch. 7, Sec. 50] Revocation of license.
Any license issued hereunder may be revoked by the City Manager
whenever in his judgment the public welfare requires such revocation.
The acceptance of any license under this Ordinance shall constitute an
agreement between the parties to such license even though the license
itself does not state such fact, that the same may be so revoked.
§ 7-319. [Ch. 7, Sec. 51] Notice to licensee of violation of article;
revocation of license; right of appeal of aggrieved licensee.
The City Manager or the officer or other employee of the City designated by
the City may at any time notify any licensee of any charge of the violation
of any of the provisions of this article in connection with the operation of
any mechanical musical device or machine for which a license has been
issued and of the time and place in which such licensee or his agent may
appear to answer such charge. Evidence both for and against the licensee
shall be heard at the time and place designated in the notice or at such
time and place to which the hearing shall be adjourned. Such hearing shall
be presided over and judged by the City Manager or by such officer or
other employee of the City whom he may designate. Upon a finding after
such hearing or a default that the violation of the license has occurred,
the City Manager may order the revocation of the license and the license
A. Valid license required. Where a valid license is not in full force and
effect for the operation by an operator or proprietor of the
establishment of the particular mechanical musical device or machine.
B. Display of tag. When the particular mechanical musical device or
machine does not have prominently displayed on a part of the machine,
clearly visible to any person operating the machine, a tag issued by the
City Clerk, which describes the particular machine by trade name,
model number and serial number, and which describes the location by
the name and address of the establishment.
C. Nuisance, etc. At any time when because of the construction or location
of the establishment or the nature of the mechanical musical device or
machine or the time of the day or night or any other reason, the
operation of the mechanical musical device or machine would
constitute a nuisance or a fire hazard or would unreasonably annoy the
residents of the neighborhood or would in any way danger the patrons,
members of the club or other persons who may be in such place, or the
residents of the neighborhood or the general public.
D. Prohibited hours of operation. At any time on Sunday or at any time on
any other day between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. if, because of the
nearness of residents or the opening of windows or other
characteristics of the establishment any of the sound of music can be
heard in any residence or other building in which people reside or
sleep, or at any time not designated as a time for operation in the
license.
§ 7-317 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-319
1:223
shall there upon be terminated. Any licensee who feels aggrieved by the
revocation of any license may appeal to the circuit court of the county by
way of injunction proceedings.
§ 7-320. [Ch. 7, Sec. 52] Penalty for violation of article.
If a mechanical musical device or machine is operated or is kept for
operation in any public place in the City in violation of any of the terms
of this article, the operator or proprietor of the establishment and also the
manager, officer, barkeeper or other agent who, for the time being, is in the
establishment in charge of the establishment and also any officer, employee,
barkeeper or other agent who, for the time being, is present and apparently
responsible for maintaining discipline within the establishment shall, each
of them separately, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined in a sum
not less than $10 nor more than $200 for each offense, and every day or
fraction of a day that this Code is violated shall constitute and be considered
a separate and distinct offense.
§ 7-319 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 7-320
1:224
ARTICLE IV
Automatic Amusement Devices
§ 7-401. [Ch. 7, Sec. 53] Definitions.
AMUSEMENT CENTER — An establishment, the principal use of which is
the operation of automatic amusement devices as defined in this chapter.
Said establishment shall be posted "No Smoking," shall not contain
cigarette vending machines or more than 140 automatic amusement
devices, shall be supervised by an adult over 21 years of age, shall have
a minimum level of illumination of at least twenty-footcandles, and shall
have a minimum of six inches of space between each automatic amusement
device.[Ord. No. 1983-71]
AUTOMATIC AMUSEMENT DEVICE —
DEVIATE SEXUAL CONDUCT — Any act involving the sexual organs of one
person and the mouth or anus of another.[Ord. No. 1983-71]
HARMFUL MATTER — Any picture, photograph, motion picture, film or
other visual representation or image of a person or portion of the human
body that depicts nudity, sadomasochistic abuse, sexual conduct or sexual
excitement.[Ord. No. 1983-71]
MINOR — Any unmarried person under 18 years of age.[Ord. No.
1983-71]
The term "automatic amusement device" (hereinafter also referred to
as "device" or "machine") shall mean any machine or device which upon
the insertion of a coin or slug operates or may be operated as a game
or contest of skill or amusement of any description. The term includes,
but is not limited to:
(1) Pinball machines and similar devices;
(2) Mechanical rides;
(3) Shooting games;
(4) Driving games or obstacle courses;
Games involving photoelectric cells, with or without projections of
images onto a surface;
(5)
(6) Movie devices;
(7) Bowling or shuffleboard games;
Pool or billiard tables unless they are licensed under Article VI
of this chapter; coin operated pool tables may be licensed under
Article VI.
(8)
A.
The term shall not include gambling devices, any device which contains
a mechanism for payoffs in any manner other than free plays, or any
device which dispenses merchandise. [Ord. No. 1983-71]
B.
§ 7-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-401
1:225
NUDITY, NUDE — Pertains to uncovered, or less than opaquely covered,
post-pubertal human genitals, pubic areas, the post-pubertal human female
breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, or the covered
human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. For the purpose of this
definition, a female breast is considered uncovered if the nipple only or the
nipple and aerola only are covered.[Ord. No. 1983-71]
OBSCENE MATTER — As used in this article, matter is obscene if:
OPERATOR — Any person who sets upon for operation more than 15 of
any such devices or who sets up any device for operation in any location
or establishment not owned or operated by him or it or who leases or
distributes any such device for the purpose of operation by another.[Ord.
No. 1983-71]
PERSON — Any natural person, firm, partnership, corporation, association
or club.[Ord. No. 1983-71]
PLACE OF PUBLIC RESORT — Includes but is not limited to inns,
restaurants, eating houses, hotels, soda fountains, soft drink parlors,
taverns, roadhouses, barber shops, stores, club rooms, theaters, skating
rinks, golf courses, golf driving ranges, concerts, cafes, bicycle rinks, ice
cream parlors or rooms, railroads, public swimming pools and other places
of public accommodation and amusement of every kind and
description.[Ord. No. 1983-71]
PROPRIETOR OF THE ESTABLISHMENT — Includes any person acting in
the capacity of owner or lessee or in any other capacity in controlling,
directly or through an agent, any room or place wherein an automatic
amusement device is located for the purpose of being operated.[Ord. No.
1983-71]
SADOMASOCHISTIC ABUSE — Flagellation or torture by or upon a person
who is nude or clad in undergarments or in revealing or bizarre costume, or
the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained on
the part of one so clothed.[Ord. No. 1983-71]
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Human masturbation, sexual intercourse, deviate
sexual conduct, or any touching of the genitals, pubic areas or buttocks
of the human male or female, or the breasts of the female, whether alone
or between members of the same or opposite sex or between humans and
animals in an actual or simulated act of apparent sexual stimulation or
gratification.[Ord. No. 1983-71]
It depicts or describes in a patently offensive manner sadomasochistic
abuse or sexual conduct; and
A.
The average person applying contemporary community standards
would find the work, taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest
in sex; and
B.
Taken as a whole, it lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific
value. [Ord. No. 1983-71]
C.
§ 7-401 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 7-401
1:226
SEXUAL EXCITEMENT — The condition of human male or female genitals
or the breasts of the female when in a state of sexual stimulation, or the
sensual experiences of humans engaging in or witnessing sexual conduct or
nudity.[Ord. No. 1983-71]
§ 7-402. [Ch. 7, Sec. 54] License required.
§ 7-403. [Ch. 7, Sec. 55] Operator's license fee. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
The license fee for each operator, as above defined, shall be as set forth in
the Schedule of Fees, per year in advance, payable annually, semiannually
or quarterly. No license shall be issued for less than one year, and in no
case shall any portion of said license fee be repaid to the licensee. The fee
charged for any license issued during a quarter shall be on the basis of the
number of quarters or parts thereof remaining in the year.
§ 7-404. [Ch. 7, Sec. 56] License fee for each machine.
§ 7-405. [Ch. 7, Sec. 57] Number limited to operator and location.
A. No person, firm, corporation, partnership, association, or club shall
become an operator as herein defined, or lease or distribute for the
purpose of operation, any such device as above defined without first
having obtained a license therefor in the manner hereinafter set forth.
B. No proprietor of an establishment shall use and operate or maintain for
use and operation any automatic amusement device in any public place
in the City, unless a license therefor shall first have been obtained in the
manner required by this article. [Ord. No. 1977-88]
A. In addition to the operator's license fee required in this article, there
shall be paid an annual license fee as set forth in the Schedule of Fees
for each device operated. Said fee shall be paid in advance annually,
semiannually or quarterly, and no license shall be issued for less than
one year. In no case shall any portion of said license fee be repaid to the
licensee. Payment of the license fee required by this article shall be
made to the Director of Finance.
B. The fee charged for any license issued during a quarter shall be on the
basis of the number of quarters or parts thereof remaining in the year.
[Ord. No. 2018-89]
A. Except in an amusement center, no person shall set up for operation or
allow operation of more than 30 machines in any one location or
establishment. [Ord. No. 1983-71]
B. Except in an amusement center, no person shall operate, set up for
operation or permit operation of any machine where the total gross
income from all machines at such location or establishment exceeds
50% of the gross income of the establishment. The City shall have the
right to inspect the financial records of any business at reasonable
§ 7-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-405
1:227
§ 7-406. [Ch. 7, Sec. 58] Application for license - issuance.
times and upon the giving of reasonable notice of intent to do so.
The burden of establishing the proportion of income from, operation of
automatic amusement devices shall be upon the business. [Ord. No.
1983-71]
C. No person shall set up for operation or allow the operation of more than
140 machines in an amusement center. [Ord. No. 1983-71]
A. Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association, or club desiring
to secure a license as an "operator" shall file with the City Manager an
application for a license as an "operator" of automatic amusement
devices, which shall be signed by the applicant, if an individual, or by a
duly authorized officer, manager, or agent thereof, if a firm,
partnership, corporation, or club. The application shall contain the
following information and statements:
(1) In case the applicant is an individual, his name and age and the
address of his residence; in the case of a firm or partnership, the
trade name and the names and addresses of the members of such
firm or partnership and of the managers of the establishment; in
the case of a corporation or club, the name of the corporation or
club, the date of the incorporation or organization, the object for
which it was organized, and the names and addresses of the
officers and managers.
(2) The location and description of the premises or place where the
business of such operator will be conducted or that of the place
from which distribution will be made.
(3) The number of automatic amusement devices for which the
applicant seeks a license. [Ord. No. 1975-63]
(4) Prior conviction of applicant, if any.
(5) In case the "operator" is not a distributor, the application shall
contain the following information:
(a) The character of the principal business carried on in the place
in which the automatic amusement device or devices are to be
located.
(b) A schedule of the hours during which the public place is open
for use by the members, patrons or public.
(c) A schedule of the days of the week and the hours of such days
during which the applicant seeks permission for the operation
of the automatic amusement device.
B. Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association, or club desiring
to secure a license as a proprietor of an establishment to operate an
automatic amusement device in a public place shall file with the City
§ 7-405 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 7-406
1:228
§ 7-407. [Ch. 7, Sec. 59] False statements.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sign or present any application for a
license required by this article, knowing it to contain any false statement.
§ 7-408. [Ch. 7, Sec. 60] Grounds for disapproval.
Manager an application which shall be signed by the applicant, if an
individual, or by a duly authorized officer, manager, or agent thereof, if
a firm, partnership, corporation, or club. The application shall contain
the following information and statements:
(1) In case the applicant is an individual, his name and age and the
address of his residence; in the case of firm or partnership, the
trade name and names and addresses of the members of such firm
or partnership and of the managers of the establishment; in the
case of a corporation or club, the date of incorporation or
organization, the object for which it was organized, and the names
and addresses of the officers and managers.
(2) The location and description of the premises or place where the
business of such proprietor will be conducted.
(3) The number of automatic amusement devices for which the
applicant seeks a license. [Ord. No. 1975-63]
(4) All felony convictions of the applicant within five years of the
application. If applicant is a partnership or corporation, such
information shall be furnished with respect to all partners or
officers and directors.
(5) The character of the principal business carried on in the place in
which the automatic amusement devices are to be located.
(6) A schedule of the hours during which the public place is open for
use by the members, patrons, or public.
(7) A schedule of the days of the week and the hours of such days
during which the applicant seeks permission for the operation of
the automatic amusement device. [Ord. No. 1977-129]
C. No license shall be issued under the provisions of this article until the
fees are fully paid. All licenses for automatic amusement devices shall
be posted in a conspicuous place in the establishment of the licensee.
A. Prior to the issuance of any license under this article, the application for
such license must contain the approval by initial or other memorandum
on the application of the Chief of Police or other officer designated by
the City Manager for inspection of the premises and investigation of the
applicant. This approval shall not be given until after the establishment
has been inspected and the location and proposed rooms for operation
of the automatic amusement device have been found to comply with all
§ 7-406 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-408
1:229
§ 7-409. [Ch. 7, Sec. 61] Restrictions upon issuance.
No license required by this article shall be issued to:
§ 7-410. [Ch. 7, Sec. 62] Issuance; duration; contents of license.
health and safety codes of the City of Bloomington. [Ord. No.
1977-129]
B. Upon receipt of information required under Subsection A of this
section, the City Manager shall conduct a hearing on said application,
and shall give the applicant seven days' written notice thereof. Such
hearing shall be held for the purpose of determining whether the
applicant meets the standards set forth in the Article for licensing.
[Ord. No. 1977-129]
C. Within two business days after completion of the hearing, the City
Manager shall notify the applicant in writing of his decision to license
or not license the establishment. [Ord. No. 1977-129]
A. A person not of legal age or under any legal disability.
B. A person who has been convicted within five years immediately
preceding the application of a felony involving moral turpitude, unless
the City Manager finds such person has been rehabilitated.
C. A person who is not a citizen of the United States.
D. A person who has previously had a license issued under this article,
which has been revoked for good cause.
E. A person who at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued under this article would not be eligible for such a license upon a
first application.
F. A firm or partnership unless each of the members of such firm or
partnership is authorized to obtain a license under this article. [Ord.
No. 1977-129]
A. After the application for the license has been duly approved in the
manner prescribed in this article and the license fee has been paid as
herein provided, the applicant shall submit to the City Clerk his
approved application for a license and receipt for the license fee, or
other proof that the license fee has been paid, whereupon the City Clerk
shall issue a license for the number of machines designated in the
application for which the license fee has been paid. Each license shall
be an annual license, expiring on the 31st day of December of the year
in which it is issued. Each license shall state the date of issuance, the
date of expiration, the amount of the license fee paid, the name and
address of the establishment in which the machine or machines are to
be located, the name of the operator or proprietor and the trade name,
model number, and serial number of each machine.
§ 7-408 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 7-410
1:230
§ 7-411. [Ch. 7, Sec. 63] Suspension or revocation.
§ 7-412. [Ch. 7, Sec. 64] Device permit - evidence of ownership.
The City Clerk shall issue a device permit for the devices licensed
hereunder on each premises and said permit shall at all times be
prominently displayed in a conspicuous place on the premises. Prior to the
issuance of each permit, evidence of ownership thereof shall be filed with
the City Clerk and any transfer of ownership immediately shall be filed with
said City Clerk. Each permit shall contain:
§ 7-413. [Ch. 7, Sec. 65] Devices to be kept in plain view - gambling
devices - required or prohibited features.
B. All licenses shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the establishment
of the licensee. Such license shall be nonassignable and
nontransferable and in case of an individual device, shall apply to the
premises for which the license is issued. [Ord. No. 1974-124]
A. The City Manager may at any time notify any licensee of any charge of
the alleged violation of any of the provisions of this article in connection
with the operation of any automatic amusement device, and after a
hearing presided over by the City Manager, he may order the
suspension or revocation of the license upon a finding that the violation
has occurred, and the license shall thereupon be suspended or
terminated. The acceptance of any license under this article shall
constitute an agreement between the parties to such license, even
though the license itself does not state such fact, that the same may be
so revoked. Upon suspension or revocation of an operator's license, all
devices operated under said license shall be removed, or in the case of
suspension, rendered inoperable during the period of such suspension.
[Ord. No. 1977-88]
B. The suspension or revocation of an operator's license shall not prohibit
the City of Bloomington from seeking or imposing penalties as
otherwise provided in this article; all penalties provided for herein are
intended to be cumulative. [Ord. No. 1977-88]
A. The name of the premises;
B. The owner of the device;
C. The period for which the permit is valid. [Ord. No. 1975-63]
A. All devices shall at all times be kept and placed in plain view of all
persons who may frequent or be in any place of business or other place
where such devices are kept or used. [Ord. No. 1977-88]
B. Nothing in this article shall be construed to authorize, permit or license
any gambling device of any nature whatsoever which is prohibited by
the Code of the City or by the laws of the State of Illinois. [Ord. No.
1977-88]
§ 7-410 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-413
1:231
§ 7-414. [Ch. 7, Sec. 67] Inspection.
The City through its officers, agents and employees shall have the right to
enter at all times any establishment, place or building in which any of such
devices are operated or set up for operation and to inspect, investigate and
test such devices.
§ 7-415. [Ch. 7, Sec. 68] Display of obscene matter prohibited. [Ord.
No. 1977-129]
No person knowing or having reason to know the character of the material
displayed on the device, shall permit or offer to permit any person to use an
automatic amusement device to view an obscene matter.
§ 7-416. [Ch. 7, Sec. 69] Access of minors to harmful matter
prohibited. [Ord. No. 1977-110]
No person, being the owner, operator or manager of a business or acting
in a managerial capacity, shall knowingly or recklessly permit a minor who
is not accompanied by his parent or legal guardian to enter or remain
in the establishment, if in that part of the premises where the minor is
so permitted to be, there is contained an automatic amusement device
containing or equipped to exhibit harmful material.
§ 7-417. [Ch. 7, Sec. 70] Displaying harmful material to minors.
[Ord. No. 1977-110]
No person, knowing or having good reason to know the character of the
material displayed, shall permit or offer to permit a minor to use an
automatic amusement device to view harmful matter.
§ 7-418. [Ch. 7, Sec. 71] Affirmative defenses in prosecutions under
§§ 7-416 and 7-417.
In any prosecution under § 7-416 or 7-417 of this chapter it shall be an
affirmative defense for the defendant to prove:
C. No such device shall include an internal or external accumulation
counter which would indicate the number of free plays which had been
awarded and which counter could be manipulated to show a reduced
number of free plays in any manner than by actually playing the free
plays. [Ord. No. 1977-88]
A. That the defendant was in a parental or guardianship relationship with
the minor; or
B. That the defendant was a bona fide school, museum or public library, or
was acting in the course of his employment as an employee of such
organization or of a retail outlet affiliated with and serving the
educational purpose of such organization; or
§ 7-413 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 7-418
1:232
§ 7-419. [Ch. 7, Sec. 72] Penalty.
§ 7-420. [Ch. 7, Sec. 73] Severability. [Ord. No. 1977-129]
It is the intent of the City Council that the provisions of this article be
construed as severable to the extent legally possible, and the invalidity of
any section or portion thereof shall not affect the validity of the remainder
of the Article.
C. That the defendant was charged with the sale, showing, exhibition or
display of matter, those portions of which might otherwise be
contraband forming merely an incidental part of an otherwise nonoffending
whole, and serving some legitimate purpose therein other
than titillation; or
D. That the minor displayed to the defendant written evidence that he had
attained the age of 18. [Ord. No. 1977-110]
A. Except as provided in Subsection B, any person, firm, partnership,
corporation or club violating this article or any of the provisions thereof
shall be fined in a sum of not less than $15 nor more than $200 for each
offense. [Ord. No. 1977-88]
B. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or club found guilty of
operating unlicensed devices shall for each offense be fined not less
than an amount equal to twice the annual license fee for each
unlicensed machine. [Ord. No. 1977-88]
C. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day or fraction
thereof that a violation occurs or continues to exist. [Ord. No.
1977-88]
§ 7-418 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-420
1:233

ARTICLE V
(Reserved)
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-420
1:235

ARTICLE VI
Bowling Alleys and Pool Rooms
§ 7-601. [Ch. 7, Sec. 83] License - required. [Ord. No. 1977-88]
No person shall have, keep or conduct for profit within the City any billiard,
pool or bagatelle table, or bowling alley, without first obtaining a license
therefor as provided in this chapter. Any billiard, pool, or bagatelle table
or bowling alley kept, used or operated in any tavern or public place or
any room or place conducted or used as an adjunct or part of any tavern
or public place, the use of which table or bowling alley is permitted to the
patrons or customers of such tavern or public place, shall be licensed under
the provisions of this chapter, whether a fee is charged for the use of such
table or bowling alley or not.
§ 7-602. [Ch. 7, Sec. 84] Application. [Ord. No. 1977-88]
Any person desiring to have, keep or conduct any billiard, pool or bagatelle
table or any bowling alley for profit in the City shall make written
application to the City Manager for a license so to do, setting forth in such
application the full name of the applicant and the place at or in which
such billiard, pool or bagatelle table or bowling alley is to be kept, used or
operated.
§ 7-603. [Ch. 7, Sec. 85] Grounds for disapproval. [Ord. No.
1977-88]
Prior to the issuance of any license under this article, the application for
such license must contain the approval, by initial or other memorandum on
the application, of the Chief of Police, or other officer designated by the City
Manager. This approval shall not be given until after the establishment has
been inspected and the location and proposed rooms for operation of the
bowling alley, billiard, bagatelle, or pool table has been found satisfactory.
§ 7-604. [Ch. 7, Sec. 86] Restrictions upon issuance.
No license required by this article shall be issued to:
A. A person not of legal age or under any legal disability.
B. A person who is not of good moral character or reputation in the
community in which he resides.
C. A person who is not a citizen of the United States.
D. A person who has previously had a license issued under this article,
which has been revoked for good cause.
E. A person who, at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued under this article, would not be eligible for such a license upon a
first application.
§ 7-601 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-604
1:237
§ 7-605. [Ch. 7, Sec. 87] License fee.
§ 7-606. [Ch. 7, Sec. 88] Issuance. [Ord. No. 1977-88]
Upon the grant of the application required by this article by the City
Manager and upon the payment by the applicant to the Director of Finance
of the license fee above set out for each billiard, pool or bagatelle table,
or bowling alley which such applicant desires to use, keep or operate, the
City Clerk shall issue to the applicant a license authorizing the keeping,
conducting or operating of such billiard, pool or bagatelle table or bowling
alley, as the case may be at the place described in such application for and
during the term of such license.
§ 7-607. [Ch. 7, Sec. 89] Minors prohibited. [Ord. No. 1977-88]
It shall be unlawful for any person having a license from said City to keep
any billiard, pool or bagatelle table to suffer or permit any minor under the
age of 14 years to play in or to frequent, remain or be harbored in or about
any such billiard, pool or bagatelle table or room and any person violating
this section shall be fined not less than $15 nor more than $200 for each
offense. The Court in which the trial is had may in its discretion enter as
a part of the judgment a forfeiture of the license. It shall be an affirmative
defense to a charge of violation of this section that the minor showed the
F. A firm or partnership, unless each of the members of such firm or
partnership is authorized to obtain a license under this article.
G. A corporation or club not authorized to do business in the state or of
which any officer or manager or any employee to be left in immediate
control of the establishment, would not be eligible to obtain a license
under this article.
A. Licenses may be granted to the keepers of any billiard or pool tables,
bagatelle tables or bowling alleys on the following terms and
conditions:
(1) To the keepers of billiard or pool tables for the term of one year a
fee, as set forth in the Schedule of Fees, for every table, payable
annually in advance.
(2) To the keepers of bagatelle tables for the term of one year a fee, as
set forth in the Schedule of Fees, for every table, payable annually
in advance.
(3) To the keepers of nine or 10 pin alleys for the term of one year a
fee, as set forth in the Schedule of Fees, for every alley, payable
annually in advance.
B. Every license shall expire on the 31st day of December of the year in
which it is issued. The fee charged for any license issued during a
quarter shall be on the basis of the number of quarters or parts thereof
remaining in the year. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
§ 7-604 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 7-607
1:238
licensee or an agent thereof written evidence that he was of the age of 14
or older.
§ 7-608. [Ch. 7, Sec. 90] Manner of conducting premises.
It shall be unlawful for any person to whom a license has been issued under
this article to allow or permit any lewd or lascivious conduct, disorderly
conduct, or profanity or to permit therein any person under the influence of
liquor or anyone known to be a prostitute, pimp, or procurer. Any member
of the Police Department shall have power to enter and inspect any such
place licensed hereunder at any time.
§ 7-609. [Ch. 7, Sec. 91] When to close.
On week days all places mentioned in this article shall be closed by midnight
of each day and be kept closed until 5:00 a.m. in the morning of the next day
following. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be
fined for each offense not less than $10 nor more than $50.
§ 7-610. [Ch. 7, Sec. 92] Revocation. [Ord. No. 1977-88]
The City Manager may at any time notify any licensee of any charge of
the violation of any of the provisions of this article in connection with the
operation of any billiard, pool or bagatelle table or bowling alley for which
a license has been issued, and after a hearing presided over by the City
Manager, he may order the revocation of the license upon a finding that
the violation has occurred, and the license shall thereupon be revoked. The
acceptance of any license under this article shall constitute an agreement
between the parties to such license, even though the license itself does not
state such fact, that the same may be so revoked.
§ 7-611. [Ch. 7, Sec. 93] Penalty.
Any person, firm, or corporation violating this article or any provision
thereof, for which no other penalty is provided in this article, shall be fined
in a sum not less than $10 nor more than $200 for each offense and each
day or fraction of a day that this article is violated shall constitute and be
considered a separate and distinct offense.
§ 7-607 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-611
1:239

ARTICLE VII
Skating Rinks
§ 7-701. [Ch. 7, Sec. 94] Licenses - penalty.
It shall not be lawful for any person, company, corporation, or other
association to own or operate any roller skating rink in the City without
first having obtained a license for that purpose as herein provided; and any
person violating this section shall forfeit and pay not less than $5 nor more
than $100 for each offense; provided, that the provisions of this section
shall not apply to any public entertainment the proceeds of which are for
the benefit of any religious, fraternal, charitable, or educational institution
located in the City.
§ 7-702. [Ch. 7, Sec. 95] Application for license.
Every application for a license hereunder shall be made to the City Manager
and shall state the location of the skating rink and the name of the person,
firm or corporation owning or operating it. The City Manager shall grant
said license whenever the provisions of this article have been complied
with.
§ 7-703. [Ch. 7, Sec. 96] License fee. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
Licenses shall be issued for one year, expiring December 31st of each year.
The owner or operator of roller skating rinks or places to be used for roller
skating rinks or places to be used for roller skating shall pay to the Director
of Finance for the license hereinabove required a fee as set forth in the
Schedule of Fees. The fee charged for any license issued during a quarter
shall be on the basis of the number of quarters or parts thereof remaining
in the year.
§ 7-701 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-703
1:241

ARTICLE VIII
Miniature Golf Courses
§ 7-801. [Ch. 7, Sec. 97] License.
No person, firm or corporation shall maintain or operate within the
corporate limits of said City any miniature golf course, commonly known
as Tom Thumb Golf Courses, where money directly or indirectly is charged
or solicited for playing thereon, without first having obtained a license for
said maintenance and operation as herein provided. All persons, firms or
corporations properly applying and complying with the provisions of this
article, and the Ordinances of said City, shall be granted a license.
§ 7-802. [Ch. 7, Sec. 98] Application for license.
Every application for a license hereunder shall be made to the City Manager
in writing and shall state the location of said miniature golf course and the
name of the person, firm or corporation owning or operating it. The City
Manager shall grant said license whenever the terms of this article have
been complied with.
§ 7-803. [Ch. 7, Sec. 99] License fee. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
No license shall be issued hereunder until the applicant has paid the
Director of Finance the annual fee in full. The fee of each said license for an
outdoor course shall be as set forth in the Schedule of Fees, per year, or any
part of a year, and for an indoor course, a fee as set forth in the Schedule of
Fees, per year or any part of a year. All licenses hereunder shall expire on
December 31st of the year in which they were issued.
§ 7-804. [Ch. 7, Sec. 100] Penalty.
Any person, firm or corporation maintaining or operating any such golf
course without first having obtained a license therefor as herein provided
shall be fined in a sum not less than $10 nor more than $100. Each day
or part of a day that any such golf course is maintained or operated shall
constitute a distinct and separate violation of this chapter.
§ 7-801 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-804
1:243

ARTICLE IX
Circuses and Carnivals
§ 7-901. [Ch. 7, Sec. 101] License.
It shall not be lawful to parade in the streets or to load or unload within
the corporate limits of said City in connection with any circus, menagerie,
wild west show, or other exhibition showing in tents or open air without
first having obtained a license for that purpose as herein provided; and any
person violating this section shall forfeit and pay not less than $5 nor more
than $100 for each offense.
§ 7-902. [Ch. 7, Sec. 102] Parade - license shall specify - penalty.
Whenever it is desired to do any of the things such as is described in the
first Section of this article, the license shall be so drawn as to include the
same and shall, if for a parade, specify the streets and avenues in and along
which any such parade may be made, and such parade shall not be made in
or along any other streets or avenues than those named in such license. Any
person, firm, or corporation so licensed to have a parade who shall violate
any of the terms of the license concerning such parade shall be subject to a
penalty of not less than $50 nor more than $200 for each offense.
§ 7-903. [Ch. 7, Sec. 103] License fee. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
The following or license fee shall be imposed upon each license granted and
shall be paid to the Director of Finance upon the granting of such license
by the City Manager; the managers of, or agents for, circus or menagerie
companies, wild west shows, or other exhibitions showing in tents or in
the open air shall pay to the Director of Finance a sum as set forth in the
Schedule of Fees to parade or to load or unload within the corporate limits
of the said City; said license shall expire on December 31st of the year in
which it is issued.
§ 7-901 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-903
1:245

ARTICLE X
Sundays
§ 7-1001. [Ch. 7, Sec. 104] Sundays - places of amusement closed.
It shall be unlawful to keep open on Sunday any of the places licensed under
Article VI of this chapter, except bowling alleys which may open at 12:00
p.m. on Sunday, within said City, or to suffer or permit persons to assemble
therein for the purpose of play or amusement. Any person violating the
provisions of this section shall be fined not less than $10 nor more than $50
for such offense.
§ 7-1002. [Ch. 7, Sec. 105] Sunday defined.
The word "Sunday" as used in this and the preceding Section shall be
construed to include the period between 12:00 midnight on Saturday night
and 12:00 midnight on the following night.
§ 7-1001 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-1002
1:247

ARTICLE XI
Shooting Galleries
§ 7-1101. [Ch. 7, Sec. 106] Shooting gallery - license penalty. [Ord.
No. 2018-89]
No person shall own, keep, or run any shooting gallery or place for target
shooting without first obtaining a license therefor, and payment of a fee as
set forth in the Schedule of Fees, from the City Manager under a penalty of
$25 for each offense. Each day that any such shooting gallery or place for
target shooting shall be kept or run shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 7-1102. [Ch. 7, Sec. 107] License fee. [Ord. No. 1974-124]
The rate of license for shooting galleries and places for target shooting shall
be $10 for one year, payable annually. The license shall expire on December
31st of the year in which it was issued.
§ 7-1101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-1102
1:249

ARTICLE XII
Dancing
§ 7-1201. [Ch. 7, Sec. 108] Public dancing.
It shall not be lawful to permit dancing in any establishment operated for
profit including but not limited to restaurants, public dance halls, theaters,
auditoriums or other places open to the public without first obtaining a
license therefor. This definition shall apply to any business establishment
without regard to whether a cover charge, admission charge or special
charge is made for dance privileges. Provisions herein shall not apply to
any public dance entertainment, the proceeds of which are for the benefit
of any religious, fraternal, charitable, educational or social organization
or sponsored by such which is for the benefit of institutions or charitable
projects, located within the City. Any person violating this article shall be
subject to a fine not less than $100 and not more than $300 for each offense.
§ 7-1202. [Ch. 7, Sec. 109] Application for license.
Every application for a license hereunder shall be made to the City Manager
and state the location of the proposed dance hall and the name of the
person, proposed dance hall and the name of the person, firm or corporation
owning and operating the same. It shall be the duty of the Manager or the
official designated by him for this purpose to make or cause to be made an
investigation into the character of each applicant. No license shall be issued
unless the premises on which the dance hall is proposed to be operated
shall comply with all existing safety, fire, zoning and other City regulations
and providing the person seeking the same is of good moral character. It
shall be unlawful for the owners or operators to permit any improper or
immoral conduct in the public hall and any violation thereof or disorderly
conduct occurring therein shall be cause for suspension or revocation of the
said license by the City Manager. Before issuance of such license, the fire
inspector shall certify as to the maximum allowable persons to be permitted
in the licensed premises at any one time. Admission of any persons in
excess of such maximum shall be cause for revocation of any license issued
hereunder.
§ 7-1203. [Ch. 7, Sec. 110] License fee. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
The fee for each public dance hall license shall be as set forth in the
Schedule of Fees. All licenses hereunder shall expire on December 31st
of the year in which they were issued. Applicant for the same shall pay a
prorated fee during the fiscal year whereby the same shall be charged 1/4 of
the total fee for each three months or fraction thereof until the succeeding
December 31st, after which time the annual fee shall be paid in full.
§ 7-1201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-1203
1:251

ARTICLE XIII
Video Gaming License
[Amended by Ord. No. 2018-13; Ord. No. 2019-08; Ord. No. 2019-11;
Ord. No. 2019-19; 7-22-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-55; 8-26-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-65]
§ 7-1301. [Ch. 7, Sec. 120] Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the certain words or phrases shall be defined
as set forth below:
CITY VIDEO GAMING LICENSE — The license issued by the City of
Bloomington that authorizes an establishment to have video gaming
terminals and to conduct video gaming on the premises as defined by the
Illinois Video Gaming Act.10
ESTABLISHMENT — Any business licensed by the State of Illinois to have
or operate a video gaming device in Bloomington and shall include any
licensed establishment, licensed fraternal establishment, licensed veterans
establishment, licensed truck stop establishment and licensed large truck
stop establishment as those terms are defined in the State of Illinois Video
Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/5.
LICENSED FRATERNAL ESTABLISHMENT — The location where a
qualified fraternal organization, that derives its charter from a national
fraternal organization, regularly meets.
LICENSED VETERANS ESTABLISHMENT — The location where a qualified
veterans organization, that derives its charter from a national veterans
organization, regularly meets.
LICENSED TRUCK STOP ESTABLISHMENT or REGULAR TRUCK STOP —
A facility (i) that is at least a three-acre facility with a convenience store; (ii)
with separate diesel islands for fueling commercial motor vehicles; (iii) that
sells at retail more than 10,000 gallons of diesel or biodiesel fuel per month;
and (iv) with parking spaces for commercial motor vehicles. "Commercial
motor vehicles" has the same meaning as defined in Section 18b-101 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code. The requirement of item (iii) of this definition may be
met by showing that estimated future sales or past sales average at least
10,000 gallons per month.
LICENSED LARGE TRUCK STOP ESTABLISHMENT or LARGE TRUCK
STOP — A facility located within three road miles from a freeway
interchange, as measured in accordance with the Department of
Transportation's rules regarding the criteria for the installation of business
signs: (i) that it is at least a three-acre facility with a convenience store; (ii)
with separate diesel islands for fueling commercial motor vehicles; (iii) that
sells at retail more than 50,000 gallons of diesel or biodiesel fuel per month;
and (iv) with parking spaces for commercial motor vehicles. "Commercial
motor vehicles" has the same meaning as defined in Section 18b-101 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code. The requirement of item (iii) of this definition may be
10.Editor's Note: See 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.
§ 7-1301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-1301
1:253
met by showing that estimated future sales or past sales average at least
50,000 gallons per month.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, firm, limited-liability
company, or other legal entity.
VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL — Any electronic video game machine that,
upon insertion of cash, electronic cards or vouchers, or any combination
thereof, is available to play or simulate the play of a video game, including
but not limited to video poker, line up, and blackjack, as authorized by the
Illinois Video Gaming Board, utilizing a video display and microprocessors
in which the player may receive free games or credits that can be redeemed
for cash. The term does not include a machine that directly dispenses coins,
cash, or tokens or is for amusement purposes only.
§ 7-1302. [Ch. 7, Sec. 121] License required.
No person, either as owner, lessee, manager, officer or agent, or in any
other capacity, shall operate or permit to be operated any video gaming
terminal, as defined herein, at any premises within the City of Bloomington
without first having obtained a video gaming license from the City. The
license provided for in this article shall permit a licensee to operate video
gaming terminals at the specified establishment.
§ 7-1303. [Ch. 7, Sec. 122] Licensure requirements.
A. No applicant, including any person, either as owner, lessee, manager,
officer or agent, shall be eligible for a video gaming license from the
City, nor shall an existing license holder be entitled to maintain a video
gaming license, unless each of the following requirements are met and
continue to be met:
(1) The applicant holds the appropriate certificate or license from the
State of Illinois permitting video gaming and is in good standing
with same;
(2) The establishment has been in operation at the location for at least
12 months at the time the application is filed;
(3) The establishment must maintain customer seating outside of the
gaming area but within the premises at a rate of five seats for each
permitted video gaming terminal;
(4) The applicant has not violated or is otherwise in violation of the
50% rule set forth in § 7-1303B;
(5) The applicant is not in arrears in any tax, fee or bill due to the City
of Bloomington or State of Illinois;
(6) The applicant has completed and complies with all the application
requirements set forth in § 7-1304 and is not disqualified due to a
felony, gambling offense, or crime of moral turpitude; and
§ 7-1301 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 7-1303
1:254
§ 7-1304. [Ch. 7, Sec. 123] Application requirements.
The license applicant shall provide the following information to the City of
Bloomington on a form provided by the City:
(7) The establishment is located outside of a residential zoning district.
B. Except for large truck stops, to be eligible to have video gaming at an
establishment, the revenues paid to the establishment from video
gaming cannot exceed 50% of the total gross revenues generated.
C. Large truck stop and regular truck stop establishments do not need to
meet the requirements set forth in § 7-1303A(3).
D. A new establishment must meet the requirements of § 7-1303A(2)
unless the applicant is also the current majority owner of an existing
business at another location, that has been operational for at least 12
months, and the business model for the new establishment is proposed
to replicate the existing business location and the applicant can provide
satisfactory evidence detailing that in the last twelve-month period
video gaming revenues at the other business location did not exceed
50% of the gross revenues.
E. An establishment licensed and in existence prior to September 1, 2019,
located within a residential zoning district does not have to meet the
requirements of § 7-1303A(7) and instead shall be considered
grandfathered from this provision. This exception shall not apply if the
establishment ceases operations for more than 60 days unless the
operation has ceased due to a fire or other natural disaster and the
establishment complies with § 7-1321B of this article and the business
operations resume within 12 months.
A. The legal name of the establishment;
B. The business name of the establishment;
C. The address of the establishment where the video gaming terminals are
to be located;
D. The type of establishment, including whether it is classified as a
veteran, fraternal, regular truck stop, large truck stop, or liquor
establishment, and supporting documentation demonstrating the
classification;
E. A floor plan, drawn to scale using a computer, detailing the overall
layout of the establishment, including the location and count of dining
seating, the location and count of video gaming terminals and seating
for said terminals, and other significant features of the establishment,
including exit locations, restrooms, and other equipment. A highresolution
electronic copy of the floor plan as well as a paper printed
copy (no smaller than 11 inches by 17 inches) shall be submitted at the
§ 7-1303 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-1304
1:255
time of application; hand-drawn floor plans and floor plans not
including a scale will not be accepted;
F. The amount of time the establishment has been in business under the
ownership of the applicant at the location where video gaming is
proposed to take place;
G. The business office address of the establishment if different from the
address of the establishment;
H. In the case of a corporation, limited-liability company, or trust, the
name and address of an agent authorized and designated to accept
service on behalf of the licensee;
I. A phone number for the establishment;
J. An e-mail address for the establishment;
K. The name and address of every person owning more than a 5% share of
the establishment;
L. The name, address, phone number and e-mail address of any terminal
operator or distributor proposed to own, service or maintain video
gaming terminals at the establishment;
M. A copy of the establishment's State of Illinois video gaming license;
N. In the case of a corporation, limited-liability company, or partnership, a
copy of the establishment’s state certificate of good standing;
O. A statement as to the number of video gaming terminals which the
establishment proposes to have on its premises (not to exceed five for
all establishments);
P. A statement that the establishment is not in arrears in any tax, fee or
bill due to the City of Bloomington or State of Illinois;
Q. A statement that the establishment agrees to abide by all state and
federal laws and any local ordinance;
R. A statement that no manager or owner with more than a 5% interest in
the establishment has ever been convicted of a felony, a gambling
offense, or a crime of moral turpitude. In the event that an
establishment cannot provide such statement, the establishment may
apply for a certificate of rehabilitation from the City Manager indicating
that the individual who would disqualify the establishment from
obtaining the video gaming license has been rehabilitated and is no
longer a threat to violate the law. The City Manager may consider the
nature of the offense, the length of time since the offense, the length of
time since release from custody, and other factors to determine if the
individual has rehabilitated himself such that he is no longer likely to
commit another offense;
§ 7-1304 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 7-1304
1:256
§ 7-1305. [Ch. 7, Sec. 124] Application filing; renewals.
§ 7-1306. [Ch. 7, Sec. 125] Fees.
The fee for a video gaming license shall be set forth in the Schedule of
Fees. Said fees are not subject to proration or refund and are due prior to
issuance of the license. The application fee shall also be set forth in the
Schedule of Fees and is not subject to reimbursement or refund upon denial
of a license.
§ 7-1307. [Ch. 7, Sec. 126] Limitation on number of video gaming
licenses in City.
There shall be no more than 60 establishments licensed to operate video
gaming terminals in the City at any given time.
§ 7-1308. [Ch. 7, Sec. 127] Limitation on number of video gaming
terminals on premises.
No establishment shall have on its premises more video gaming terminals
than are set forth on the license issued by the City. No license issued by the
City may permit more than five video gaming terminals at an establishment.
§ 7-1309. [Ch. 7, Sec. 128] Issuance of video gaming licenses; term;
late fee.
S. If the application is for a new establishment based on the business
model of another existing location, information regarding the existing
business location must be provided, including the type of business, the
gross receipts as compared to any video gaming revenue for the prior
twelve-month period, proof of the length of time the existing business
has been operational and proof of ownership verifying the applicant’s
ownership rights;
T. For renewal applications, a report or reports showing its gross annual
revenue for the previous calendar year by category of revenue
generated and showing the percentage of gaming revenue payable to
the establishment as compared to the total gross revenues of the
establishment.
A. Applications shall be processed by the City Clerk on a first come, first
served basis. Every application shall be date and time stamped upon
filing. An application received in the mail shall be considered filed on
the date and time it is opened by the City Clerk’s department.
B. Every video gaming license holder shall be required to file a renewal
application, which may contain the same or similar information as set
forth in § 7-1304. Renewal applications shall be due on or before April 1
unless the first falls on a holiday, in which case the application may be
received by the Clerk on the following business day.
§ 7-1304 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-1309
1:257
§ 7-1310. [Ch. 7, Sec. 129] Existing licenses.
Licenses existing in effect as of September 1, 2019, shall be continued in
effect through April 30, 2020, unless revoked or suspended pursuant to the
provisions of this article. Until May 1, 2020, a person holding an existing
license shall not be required to comply with the seating requirements of
§ 7-1303A(3) or the revenue requirements of § 7-1303B. Compliance with
§ 7-1303A(3) and § 7-1303B shall be required if any existing license is
transferred or a change in location granted.
§ 7-1311. [Ch. 7, Sec. 130] Denial of licenses.
A video gaming license shall be denied if any required information is
omitted or false, if the applicant does not meet the licensing requirements,
and/or if there is no license available under § 7-1307. The City Clerk shall
send a letter to an applicant stating the reason for the denial. An applicant
may appeal any denial to the City Manager, or his/her designee, who shall
then hold a hearing to determine if the denial of the license was for a
lawful reason. It shall be the burden of the applicant to show that he meets
the qualifications for a license. In order for an appeal to be considered, a
written request for appeal must be received by the City Clerk within 10 days
of the date of the notice of denial.
§ 7-1312. [Ch. 7, Sec. 131] Permit stickers; affixing requirements.
With the issuance of a video gaming license, the City shall also provide
a permit sticker that must be affixed to each video gaming terminal and
viewable to the general public. The permit sticker will demonstrate that the
establishment has a license from the City to have the video gaming terminal
on its premises and it may contain information on addiction services.
§ 7-1313. [Ch. 7, Sec. 132] Transfer of video gaming licenses.
A person desiring to transfer a video gaming license shall be required
to complete a transfer application. The person acquiring the license must
A. The City Clerk shall be responsible for the review and evaluation of all
video gaming license applications and the issuance of same. Video
gaming licenses shall be issued for a twelve-month period that shall run
from May 1 to April 30 of each year. All video gaming licenses shall be
considered invalid at 12:00 midnight on the date of expiration listed on
the license.
B. Renewal applications shall also be subject to this article and the video
gaming license fees as set forth in the Schedule of Fees. Each video
gaming license fee must be received by the City Clerk on or before April
1 unless the first falls on a holiday, in which case license fees may be
received by the Clerk on the following business day. If a license fee is
received late, the license holder must pay a penalty in the amount of
10% of the invoiced license fee and may be subject to the renewal
license being denied.
§ 7-1309 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 7-1313
1:258
meet the requirements of § 7-1303 of this article, including that the new
person holds the appropriate video gaming license from the State of Illinois.
The application to transfer shall include, at a minimum, the information
contained in § 7-1304 and shall be granted by the City Clerk if the new
applicant meets the requirements of § 7-1303. The fee for a transfer of a
license shall be as set forth in the Schedule of Fees.
§ 7-1314. [Ch. 7, Sec. 133] Location changes.
An establishment may change locations upon the completion and approval
of a location change application, which shall include information on the new
location, including floor plans and other pertinent information required by
§ 7-1304. The City Clerk shall be responsible for reviewing and granting
location change applications based on the criteria set forth in this article.
No location change application may be granted unless it meets the general
licensure requirements set forth in this article. The fee for a location change
application shall be the same as the license application fee set forth in the
Schedule of Fees.
§ 7-1315. [Ch. 7, Sec. 134] Unlawful activity.
No establishment shall permit the use of a video gaming terminal in any
manner not authorized by state law, including, but not limited to, improper
location of terminals, lack of required oversight, payouts in excess of those
provided for by law, side bets, underage use, and other illegal gambling
activities.
§ 7-1316. [Ch. 7, Sec. 135] Restriction on sale of cannabis.
No establishment shall allow or provide for the sale of cannabis on the
establishment’s premises.
§ 7-1317. [Ch. 7, Sec. 136] Restriction on sports betting.
No establishment, except for large truck stops and regular truck stops, shall
allow or provide for sports betting on the establishment's premises.
§ 7-1318. [Ch. 7, Sec. 137] Employer responsibility.
Any action by an employee of an establishment in violation of the provisions
of this article shall be considered a violation committed by the
establishment.
§ 7-1319. [Ch. 7, Sec. 138] Right of entry.
Any licensee must permit the entry into the establishment of any police
officer or agent of the City charged with investigating crime or compliance
with this Code at any time when persons are present in the establishment
for the purpose of investigating compliance with this Code or state statute
regarding video gaming. The City of Bloomington is authorized to obtain a
warrant from a court should entry to the establishment be denied.
§ 7-1313 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-1320
1:259
§ 7-1320. [Ch. 7, Sec. 139] Records; audit.
Each establishment shall maintain records for four years and shall provide
those records to the City within seven days of a request for the purpose of
an audit.
§ 7-1321. [Ch. 7, Sec. 140] Cessation of business operations.
§ 7-1322. [Ch. 7, Sec. 141] License revocation or suspension.
A. Any establishment that ceases its business operations, including the
operation of video gaming terminals, for more than 60 days shall have
its video gaming license revoked, except as provided in Subsection B.
B. Any establishment that ceases its business operations, including the
operation of video gaming terminals, as a result of either an Act of God
or as part of a planned remodel/upgrade to the establishment, shall
have its licensed revoked unless the business operations, including the
operation of video gaming terminals, resumes within 12 months. Any
and all license fees must be paid during the cessation period.
A. Any video gaming license may be revoked or suspended, after notice
and hearing by the City Manager, or his designee, for any of the
following reasons:
(1) Failure to pay the video gaming license fee;
(2) Violation of any law occurring on the establishment's premises
committed by the establishment or an employee of the
establishment;
(3) Violation of any law or state regulation regarding video gaming or
video gaming terminals;
(4) Violation of any law occurring on the establishment's premises
which the establishment did not take adequate means to prevent,
or to which the establishment did not respond in an appropriate
manner after it became aware of such violation;
(5) Failure to pay any tax, fee, or bill due to the City of Bloomington;
(6) Failure to provide current information regarding the ownership or
location of the business;
(7) Ceasing to meet the video gaming licensure requirements of
§ 7-1303A and § 7-1303B, except as may be permitted by § 7-1321;
(8) Exceeding the number of video gaming terminals as outlined in the
establishment’s video gaming license or as otherwise permitted by
this article;
(9) The failure to meet or abide by the requirements of this article.
§ 7-1320 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 7-1322
1:260
§ 7-1323. [Ch. 7, Sec. 142] Penalty.
In addition to the revocation/suspension provisions in § 7-1322, the
following shall be additional nonexclusive penalties for a violation of the
provisions of this article:
B. If in any quarter the video gaming revenues payable to the
establishment exceed 50% of the total gross revenues generated by the
establishment, the establishment's video gaming license may be
revoked, suspended or altered, including the potential reduction in the
number of video gaming terminals at the establishment. Any
establishment that exceeds the 50% requirement in § 7-1303B in total
for the previous calendar year shall be not be eligible for the reissuance
of a video gaming license and any existing video gaming license shall be
revoked.
C. For the administration of this section, the rules of evidence shall not
apply at the hearing and hearsay will be permitted. At the hearing, the
City Manager, or his designee, shall determine by a preponderance of
the evidence whether a lawful reason exists to revoke or suspend the
license. The City Manager, or his designee, after determining that a
lawful reason exists to revoke or suspend the license, shall also
determine whether that lawful reason merits the sanction of a
revocation or suspension of the license.
A. Any person, including any establishment, found guilty of violating,
disobeying, omitting, neglecting, or refusing to comply with or resisting
or opposing the enforcement of any of the provisions of this article,
except when otherwise specifically provided, upon conviction thereof
shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 for each offense.
A separate and distinct offense shall be regarded as committed each
day upon which said person shall continue any such violation or permit
any such violation to exist.
B. Any person, including any establishment, found guilty of violating this
Article XIII and operating a video gaming terminal without a video
gaming license shall subject the unlicensed video gaming terminal to
removal and/or seizure. The City shall be entitled to injunctive relief
and all other judicial remedies necessary to cause said removal and/or
seizure.
C. Failure to comply with the provisions of this article may result in the
sanction, suspension or revocation of liquor and other City-issued
licenses as may be permitted by the City Code.
§ 7-1322 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-1323
1:261
Chapter 8
ANIMALS AND FOWL
§ 7-1323 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 7-1323
1:262
ARTICLE I
In General
§ 8-101. [Ch. 8, Sec. 1] Running at large. [Ord. No. 1988-71]
No domestic animal, including horses, mules, cattle, sheep, or swine, or
domestic fowl of the species of geese, ducks, turkeys, hens, barn fowls,
guinea fowls or peacocks shall be suffered, allowed or permitted to run at
large within the limits of the City. It shall be illegal for the owner or keeper
of any such domestic animal or fowl to allow or permit the same to run at
large within the limits of the City.
§ 8-102. [Ch. 8, Sec. 2] Animals on annexed property. [Ord. No.
1990-12]
Except as permitted in Bloomington City Code Chapter 44, no person shall
keep, harbor or maintain within the City any horse, hog, goat or any
other type of animal typically found on a farm, except as to property not
previously within the corporate limits of the City upon which such animal
or animals had been so kept, harbored or maintained for three months
or more prior to the annexation of said property to the City, in which
event said animal or animals may remain upon such annexed property; but
offspring older than six months of age of such animals and substitutes for
said animals are prohibited.
§ 8-103. [Ch. 8, Sec. 3] Violation. [Ord. No. 1988-71]
Any violation of § 8-102 of this article hereby is declared to be and
constitute a nuisance, and it shall be the duty of the Chief of Police and all
Police Officers of said City to abate and have the same removed.
§ 8-104. [Ch. 8, Sec. 4] Penalty. [Ord. No. 1988-71]
Any person violating § 8-101 or 8-102 of this article shall be fined for the
first offense not less than $10 and not more than $500; for each offense
thereafter occurring within one year after any conviction hereunder not less
than $20 and not more than $500. Each separate day or part of a day that
§ 8-102 hereof is violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 8-105. [Ch. 8, Sec. 5] Cruelty to animals or birds. [Ord. No.
1988-71]
It shall be illegal for any person to be cruel to any animal or bird.
§ 8-106. [Ch. 8, Sec. 6] Killing birds or squirrels - penalty. [Ord. No.
1988-71]
It shall be illegal for any person to kill or wound or attempt to kill or wound
by the use of any firearm, bow and arrow, pelting with stones, or otherwise,
any bird or squirrel within the City or to shoot an arrow or throw a stone or
club or throw or shoot any other missile at any bird or squirrel within any
§ 8-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-106
1:263
private property or any public park, square, or other public property or to
go onto any private property or any public property for the purpose of doing
any act prohibited in this section. Any person violating any of the provisions
of this section shall be fined not less than $10 nor more than $500 for each
offense.
§ 8-107. [Ch. 8, Sec. 7] Feeding birds - penalty. [Ord. No. 1988-71]
It shall be illegal for any person to feed or put food out for any birds not
then held in captivity within the territory in the City bounded on the north
by the north line of Chestnut Street, on the east by the east line of Prairie
Street, on the south by the south line of Oakland Avenue, and on the west
by the west line of Lee Street. Any person violating any of the provisions of
this section shall be fined not less than $10 nor more than $100 for each
offense.
§ 8-108. [Ch. 8, Sec. 8] Noisy animals - penalty.
§ 8-109. [Ch. 8, Sec. 9] Foul smelling animals prohibited. [Ord. No.
1988-71]
No person shall raise or keep any animal or animals of any kind if the
raising or keeping of such animal or animals is the source of any vile, foul,
nauseating or sickening odor and all such acts are illegal.
A. No person shall keep harbor any animal which howls, barks, or emits
audible sounds that are unreasonably loud or disturbing and which are
of such character, intensity and duration as to disturb the peace and
quiet of the neighborhood or such resident or business neighbors as
may be in close proximity to such dog. [Ord. No. 2005-86]
B. Any person who owns, operates or manages or who is employed to work
in a kennel, as defined in § 44-1612 of Chapter 44 of the Bloomington
City Code shall keep all animals on the premises within an enclosed
building that meets the minimum standard for habitable spaces as
provided in Chapter 10 of the Bloomington City Code. No animal shall
be allowed to be outside such building, except for the purpose of
delivery, if the kennel is within 1,000 feet of the lot line of any lot zoned
R-1A, R-1B, R-1C, R-1H, R-2, R-3A, R-3B or R-4, or the lot line of any lot
that is the site of a dwelling. [Ord. No. 2004-56]
C. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be fined
not less than $50 nor more than $500 for each offense. Any kennel, as
defined in § 44-1612 of Chapter 44 of the Bloomington City Code, that is
within 300 feet of the lot line of any lot zoned R-1A, R-1B, R-1C, R-1H,
R-2, R-3A, R-3B or R-4, or the lot line of any lot that is the site of a
dwelling, which is in violation of any part of § 8-108 on more than three
occasions within a sixty-day period shall be deemed to be a chronic
nuisance property subject to the remedies set forth in § 30.5-102 of
Chapter 30.5 of the Bloomington City Code. [Ord. No. 2003-08]
§ 8-106 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 8-110
1:264
§ 8-110. [Ch. 8, Sec. 10] Diseased or injured animals.
§ 8-111. [Ch. 8, Sec. 11] Dead animal - owner or others to remove
on notice - penalty. [Ord. No. 1988-71]
When any dead animal shall be found in any public street, alley or other
public place in the City, it shall be the duty of the person owning or keeping
or harboring such animal at the time of its death or of the person who
caused the death of the animal, immediately to remove said animal, in such
manner as to conceal the same from public view beyond the limits of the
City and bury the same or provide it to a veterinarian who has agreed to
properly dispose of it. It shall be illegal for any such person to not do so
or, on being notified thereof by any Police Officer or other person, after
a reasonable time to refuse or neglect to remove and bury the same as
herein required and such person shall be fined not less than $25 nor more
than $500 for each offense, and shall also pay the expense of removing and
burying the same.
A. It shall be illegal for any person to bring into the City of Bloomington
any diseased or sickly horse, cow (or bull), swine, dog, cat, or other
animal of any kind or nature or any that has been exposed to any
disease that is contagious among such animals.
B. It shall be illegal for any person to keep, retain or allow to be kept or
retained at any place within the City, any horse, ass or colt leaving the
disease known as glanders or farcy.
C. Any animal in any street or public place within the City and appearing
in the estimation of any police officer or representative of the McLean
County Health Department to be injured or diseased past recovery for
any useful purpose, and not being attended and properly cared for by
the owner or some proper person having charge thereof for the owner,
or not having been removed to some private premises or to some place
designated by such officer or representative may be deprived of life by
such officer or representative or as he may direct, and shall thereafter,
unless at once removed by the owner, be treated as any other dead
animal found on a street or place. No person other than Police Officers
or representatives of the Health Department or persons authorized by
contract or other authority shall in any way interfere with such dead,
sick or injured animal in any street or place, and no person shall skin or
wound such animal in such street or public place, unless to terminate
its life as herein authorized, except that the owner or person having
control of such animal may terminate the life thereof in the presence
and with the consent of a Police Officer or representative of the Health
Department. It is illegal for any person to engage in or do any acts
prohibited in this section. [Ord. No. 1988-71]
§ 8-110 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-112
1:265
§ 8-112. [Ch. 8, Sec. 12] Dead animal on private land - owner and/or
occupant to remove - penalty. [Ord. No. 1988-71]
When any dead animal shall be found on any private land in the City of
Bloomington, it shall be the duty of the person owning or occupying such
land to cause the said dead animal to be removed forthwith; and such owner
or occupant of such land, or any other person removing said animal, may
collect the expense of such removal from the person owning or depositing
such dead animal; and it shall be illegal for any such owner or occupant of
any land to fail or neglect to remove such dead animal, and such person
shall pay a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $500 for each violation
of this Ordinance.
§ 8-113. [Ch. 8, Sec. 13] Dead animal - police or health department
to remove. [Ord. No. 1988-71]
When any dead animal shall be found anywhere in the City of Bloomington,
and shall not be removed within a reasonable time, it shall be the duty of
any Police Officer or representative of the Health Department to cause the
same to be removed and buried at the expense of the City.
§ 8-114. [Ch. 8, Sec. 14] Exposing dead animal to view. [Ord. No.
1988-71]
It shall be illegal for any person or persons to haul, drag, transport, or
otherwise remove any dead animal along or upon any street, alley or other
public place within the City unless such dead animal is wholly covered so
as to conceal the same from view; and it shall be illegal for any person
or persons to skin or otherwise mutilate any dead animal within said City,
except at such place or places as may be from time to time designated for
that purpose.
§ 8-115. [Ch. 8, Sec. 15] Dead animals - place and manner of burial
- penalty. [Ord. No. 1988-71]
No dead animals shall be buried within the corporate limits of the City, but
shall be buried at least 1/2 mile outside the said corporate limits or shall be
provided to a veterinarian who has agreed to properly dispose of it. Such
animals when buried shall be buried at least three feet below the surface
of the ground. This section shall apply to all persons, including any licensed
scavenger, and it shall be illegal for any person to violate the terms of this
section, and whoever shall do so shall be fined not less than $15 nor more
than $500 for each offense; and each and every day that this section is
violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 8-112 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 8-115
1:266
ARTICLE II
Dogs and Cats
§ 8-201. [Ch. 8, Sec. 50] Definitions.
ANIMAL SHELTER — A facility operated, owned, or maintained by a duly
incorporated humane society, animal welfare society, or other nonprofit
organization for the purpose of providing for and promoting the welfare,
protection, and humane treatment of animals. "Animal shelter" also means
any veterinary hospital or clinic operated by the veterinarian or
veterinarians licensed under the Veterinary Medicine and Surgery Practice
Act of 200411 which operates for the above mentioned purpose in addition
to its customary purposes.[Ord. No. 2013-38]
BITTEN — Seized with the teeth or jaws so that the person or thing seized
has been nipped or gripped or has been wounded or pierced, and includes
contact of saliva with any break or abrasion of skin.[Ord. No. 2013-38]
CAT — Includes all animals, male and female, of the feline species.[Ord.
No. 2013-38]
DANGEROUS DOG —
DOG — Includes all animals, male and female, of the canine species.[Ord.
No. 2013-38]
DOG SUBJECT TO EUTHANASIA —
Any dog that behaves in a manner that a reasonable person would
believe poses a serious and unjustified threat of physical injury or harm
to a person or a companion animal; or
A.
Any dog that without justification bites a person or other animal,
whether on public or private property, that does not cause injury; or
B.
Any dog that has been declared a dangerous dog by any other
jurisdiction, provided that such finding was not based solely upon the
breed of the dog.
C.
No dog shall be deemed a dangerous dog if it bites, attacks or menaces
a trespasser on the property of its owner, or harms or menaces anyone
who has tormented or abused it, or is performing in the line of duty as
a professionally trained dog for law enforcement. [Ord. No. 2013-38]
D.
A. Any dog which has killed or severely injured any person or dog; or
B. Any dog which has rabies; or
Any dog previously declared a vicious dog which subsequently bites a
person or animal causing injury to that person or animal; or
C.
Any dog previously declared a vicious dog, which, when unmuzzled,
in an aggressive or terrorizing manner approaches any person in an
D.
11.Editor's Note: See 225 ILCS 115/1 et seq.
§ 8-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-201
1:267
ENCLOSURE — A fence or structure capable of preventing the animal from
escaping at any time. It shall be securely locked at all times. If the enclosure
is a room within a residence, it shall not have direct access to common
areas of the building or to outdoors, unless it leads directly to an outdoor
enclosure, capable of preventing the animal from escaping that is securely
locked. An owner or keeper of a vicious dog must have a secure fenced
enclosure in which to exercise the dog.[Ord. No. 2013-38]
IMPOUNDED — Taken into the custody of the Animal Control Center where
City of Bloomington personnel have authority to take animals.[Ord. No.
2013-38]
INJURY — Any wound serious enough to require medical or veterinary
treatment, regardless of whether medical or veterinary treatment is
actually sought, obtained or provided.[Ord. No. 2013-38]
OWNER — Any person having a right of property in an animal, or who keeps
or harbors an animal, or who has it in his care, or acts as its custodian, or
who knowingly permits a dog to remain on any premises occupied by him
or her. In the event that the owner, harborer, or keeper of any dog or cat
is a minor, the parent or guardian of such minor shall be responsible for
ensuring that all provisions of this Ordinance are complied with and it shall
be illegal for such parent or guardian to fail to prohibit any violation of this
Code by a minor.[Ord. No. 2013-38]
PERSON — Any individual, firm, corporation, limited liability company,
partnership, society, association or other legal entity.[Ord. No. 2013-38]
RUNNING AT LARGE — Being off the premises of the owner and not under
restraint or not under physical control of the owner or an authorized person
either by leash, cord or chain. Control referred to as voice control is not
physical control when off the premises of the owner.[Ord. No. 2013-38]
VICIOUS DOG —
apparent attitude of attack on any street, sidewalk, public or private
property other than the property of the owner of the dog; or
Any dog previously declared a vicious dog which subsequently is found
running at large; or
E.
Any dog previously declared a vicious dog which is not kept in the
manner required for keepers of vicious dogs.
F.
Any dog previously declared a vicious dog which is found without
current registration or vaccinations. [Ord. No. 2013-38]
G.
Any dog that when unprovoked bites or attacks a human being or other
animal on either public or private property; or
A.
Any dog with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack
without provocation, to cause injury or to otherwise endanger the
safety of human beings or domestic animals; or
B.
§ 8-201 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 8-201
1:268
§ 8-202. [Ch. 8, Sec. 51] Police Department. [Ord. No. 1988-71]
The Police Department is hereby authorized, empowered and ordered to
exercise all powers and duties necessary to carry out the provisions of this
article.
§ 8-203. [Ch. 8, Sec. 52] Impoundment. [Ord. No. 1983-71]
The Police Department shall impound or shall cause to be impounded any
dog or cat if the dog or cat is not restrained as required by this chapter.
§ 8-204. [Ch. 8, Sec. 53] Reclamation of impounded animal.
§ 8-205. [Ch. 8, Sec. 54] Animals not reclaimed.
Any dog which has been found to be a dangerous dog on three separate
occasions in this or any other jurisdiction provided that such finding
was not based solely upon the breed of the dog; or
C.
Any dog that has been found to be a vicious dog in any other
jurisdiction, provided said declaration is not based solely upon the
breed of the dog.
D.
No dog shall be deemed a vicious dog if it bites, attacks or menaces a
trespasser on the property of its owner, or harms or menaces anyone
who has tormented or abused it, or is performing in the line of duty as
a professionally trained dog for law enforcement. [Ord. No. 2013-38]
E.
A. Any impounded dog or cat may be reclaimed by:
(1) Payment of a City of Bloomington release fee in an amount set forth
in the Schedule of Fees; and
(2) Signing an acknowledgment of ownership of the animal; and
(3) Complying with all applicable rules and regulations and by paying
all charges and fees of pertaining to the impoundment and care of
the animal imposed by McLean County Animal Control. [Ord. No.
2018-89]
B. Any impounded dog or cat which has been placed in the McLean County
Animal Shelter by a representative of the City of Bloomington shall be
subject to all of the rules, regulations and fees that apply to other
similar types of animals that are in or may be placed in the Shelter.
[Ord. No. 2013-38]
A. With the exception of animals impounded for a ten-day quarantine
period as provided in Subsection B of this section, any animal not
reclaimed within seven business days of impoundment shall become the
property of McLean County Animal Control;
§ 8-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-205
1:269
§ 8-206. [Ch. 8, Sec. 81] Permitting dog to run at large.
B. For animals subject to a ten-day quarantine period, any animal not
reclaimed within five business days from the date the quarantine ends
shall become the property of McLean County Animal Control. [Ord. No.
2013-38]
A. It shall be the duty of every owner of any dog or anyone having any dog
in his possession or custody to ensure that the dog is kept under
restraint at all times that the dog is on or off the premises of the owner.
(1) While on the premises - duty to keep dog under restraint. It shall be
illegal for the owner of any dog or anyone having any dog in his
possession or custody not to keep the dog under restraint while it is
on the premises of the owner. For the purposes of this subsection,
under restraint is defined as follows:
(a) Securely and humanely enclosed within a house, building,
fence, pen, or other enclosure out of which it cannot climb, dig,
jump, or otherwise escape on its own volition; and such
enclosure must be securely locked at any time the dog is left
unattended; or
(b) Under physical control of a leash, chain, cord, cable and trolley,
or other tether of sufficient strength and connection to the
animal to prevent escape, and securely established, tied or
connected to an object which prevents the animal from being
closer than 10 feet to the property line of premises of the
owner or to a public sidewalk or public right-of-way; or
(c) On a leash of sufficient strength and connection to the animal
to prevent escape and which is under the control of a capable
person, or if not on a leash the animal must be obedient to that
person's commands and in each case that person must be
present with the animal any time it is not restrained as
provided in (a) or (b) above.
(2) While off of the premises - duty to keep animal under restraint. It
shall be illegal for the owner of any dog or anyone having a dog in
his possession not to keep the dog from running at large and all
dogs shall be kept under restraint and control at all times while the
animal is off of the premises of the owner(s), possessor(s) or
custodian(s). For the purposes of this subsection, a dog is under
restraint and control when:
(a) It is securely confined within a vehicle, parked or in motion; or
(b) It is properly confined within a secure enclosure with the
permission of the owner of the property where the enclosure is
located; or
§ 8-205 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 8-206
1:270
§ 8-207. [Ch. 8, Sec. 82] Permitting cats to run at large.
§ 8-208. [Ch. 8, Sec. 83] Dangerous and vicious dogs; dog subject to
euthanasia.
(c) It is physically controlled at all times by the owner or
authorized person with a chain, cord or leash of sufficient
strength and connection to the animal to prevent escape. [Ord.
No. 1988-71]
B. The penalty for the first violation of the provisions of this section shall
be not less than $50 nor more than $500 and for each subsequent
offense, the penalty shall not be less than $75 nor more than $500. If
the animal is taken to the animal shelter, the owner shall pay the animal
shelter release fee. As indicated in § 8-204, for all subsequent offenses,
the alleged violator hereof shall pay the shelter release fee plus be
charged with a violation of this section. [Ord. No. 1988-71]
A. It shall be illegal for the owner of any cat, or anyone having any cat in
their possession or custody, to allow the cat to leave the premises of the
owner or custodian, unless it is under the physical control of such
person. [Ord. No. 1988-71]
B. The penalties for violation of this section shall be the same as the
penalties established in § 8-206B. [Ord. No. 1988-71]
A. Procedures for Declaring a dog dangerous, vicious or subject to
euthanasia:
(1) Any person may file a complaint with the Police Department
seeking to have a dog declared dangerous, vicious or subject to
euthanasia. The Police Chief or his or her designee shall review and
investigate the complaint and, if the criteria for declaring a dog
dangerous, vicious or subject to euthanasia have been met, shall
make the appropriate declaration and provide written notification
of the declaration to the owner of the dog. Said notification shall
include the basis for the declaration, the declaration, any
restrictions placed on keeping the animal, and notice of the right to
appeal the declaration.
(2) An owner of a dog declared dangerous, vicious or subject to
euthanasia shall have the right to appeal the declaration, provided
that the owner files a written request to appeal said declaration
with the Bloomington Police Department no later than seven days
after receiving notification. If no written request for appeal is made
in the time provided, the owner of the dog subject to the
declaration shall have 14 days from the date of notification within
which to comply with all requirements pertaining to the
declaration. If a written request for an appeal is timely made, a
hearing shall be held on the appeal in an expeditious manner, no
later than 30 days from the date the owner requests an appeal.
§ 8-206 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-208
1:271
(3) The hearing shall be informal and strict rules of evidence shall not
apply. The owner may be represented by counsel, present oral and
written evidence, and may cross-examine witnesses. The hearing
shall be held before an Assistant Police Chief or other hearing
officer duly authorized by the Chief of Police. In making a
determination on any appeal of a declaration, the hearing officer
shall consider the criteria and definitions set forth in § 8-201 of this
chapter. The hearing officer may also consider the following:
(a) The circumstances of the incident or incidents giving rise to
the declaration;
(b) The nature and extent of any injury caused to humans or
animals as the result of the incident or incidents giving rise to
the declaration;
(c) The size of the dog subject to the declaration;
(d) Whether the dog subject to declaration was current on its
registration and vaccinations at the time of the most recent
incident forming the basis for the declaration;
(e) Any previous history of the dog subject to the declaration
involving incidents of threat, attack or injury to human beings
or other animals;
(f) The history of the owner of the dog subject to the declaration,
including prior incidents involving animals owned or kept by
the owner, whether said animals have been current on their
registrations and vaccines, and the conditions under which
they have been kept. [Ord. No. 2013-38]
B. Disposition of appeals.
(1) The hearing officer shall inform the owner in writing of the
disposition of any appeal within five days of the date of the hearing.
If the appeal is denied and the declaration upheld, the owner shall
have 14 days from receipt of the written notification of the
disposition of appeal within which to comply with all requirements
pertaining to the declaration.
(2) Appeal of the determination of the hearing officer shall be as
provided by the Illinois Administrative Procedures Act. [Ord. No.
2013-38]
C. Requirements for keeping dogs declared dangerous.
(1) Any person owning or keeping a dog declared dangerous must be in
compliance with the requirements of this section within 14 days of
the receipt of notification of the declaration or within 14 days of the
receipt of a decision of an appeal upholding the dangerous dog
declaration. Failure to comply with this section may also result in
fines, fees and court costs being assessed against the owner. Each
§ 8-208 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 8-208
1:272
failure to comply with a provision of this section shall constitute
a separate offense. Each day an owner fails to comply with a
provision of this section shall constitute a separate offense.
(2) It is illegal for any person to create a public nuisance by permitting
any dangerous dog to be kept on the owner's property in violation
of § 8-206A of this chapter. Guide dogs for blind or hearing
impaired persons, support dogs for the physically handicapped and
professional guard or police owned dogs are exempt from the
provisions of this section, provided an attack or injury to a person
occurs while the dog is performing duties as expected.
(3) Any dog declared dangerous shall be spayed or neutered.
(4) Any dog declared dangerous shall be micro-chipped and registered
with the micro-chip company in the owner's name with a current
address where the dog is located.
(5) The owner of a dog declared dangerous shall purchase a
"Dangerous Dog Tag" from McLean County Animal Control. The tag
must be affixed to the dog's collar in a manner so that it can be
seen. Said tag shall be worn by the dog at all times. Registration for
the dangerous dog tag must be renewed annually at McLean
County Animal Control.
(6) The owner of a dangerous dog shall be required to immediately
report any biting incidents involving the dog and a person or
animal to the Bloomington Police Department or to McLean County
Animal Control.
(7) The owner of a dog declared dangerous shall notify the United
Stated Postal Service local office and all utility providers in writing
of the dangerous dog declaration within 14 days of receiving the
declaration. The dog owner shall provide proof of said notification
to the Bloomington Police Department.
(8) If the owner of a dog declared dangerous resides at rental property,
said owner shall notify the landlord or property management of the
dangerous dog declaration within 14 days of receiving said
declaration. The dog owner shall provide proof of said notification
to the Bloomington Police Department.
(9) The owner of any dog declared dangerous shall immediately notify
the Bloomington Police Department of any change of address or
location of the dangerous dog. If the dog is removed from the City
of Bloomington, said notification shall also be provided in writing to
authorities of the jurisdiction where the dog is located. [Ord. No.
2013-38]
D. Requirements for keeping dogs declared vicious.
§ 8-208 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-208
1:273
(1) Any person owning or keeping a dog declared vicious must be in
compliance with the requirements of this section within 14 days of
receipt of notification of the declaration or within 14 days of the
receipt of a decision of an appeal upholding the vicious dog
declaration. Any failure to comply with the requirements of this
section pertaining to the keeping of a dog declared vicious shall
result in the impoundment of the dog and the dog being subject to
euthanasia. Failure to comply with this section may also result in
fines, fees and court costs being assessed against the owner. Each
failure to comply with a provision of this section shall constitute a
separate offense. Each day an owner fails to comply with a
provision of this section shall constitute a separate offense.
(2) It shall be illegal for an owner or keeper of a vicious dog to sell,
foster or give away the dog. In the event the dog declared vicious is
being kept at a foster home operating pursuant to a permit
provided by an animal shelter or foster agency licensed by the
Department of Agriculture of the State of Illinois, the dog may be
returned to the animal shelter or foster agency issuing the permit.
The animal shelter or foster agency receiving the dog back from the
foster home shall be bound by and comply with the provisions of
this Subsection D pertaining to the requirements for keeping dogs
declared vicious, and shall not sell, foster or give away the dog.
(3) The owner of a dog declared vicious shall contact the Bloomington
Police Department within 14 days of receipt of the declaration, or
within 14 days of the receipt of a decision of an appeal upholding
the vicious dog declaration, and arrange for an inspection of the
premises where the dog subject to said declaration is kept. It shall
be illegal for any person to keep or maintain any dog which has
been found to be a vicious dog unless such dog is at all times kept
in an enclosure, as defined in § 8-201 of this chapter approved by
the Bloomington Police Department.
(a) The only times that a vicious dog may be allowed out of the
enclosure are:
[1] If it is necessary for the owner or keeper to obtain
veterinary care for the vicious dog; or
[2] To comply with the order of a court of competent
jurisdiction.
(b) When taken out of the enclosure, said vicious dog must be
securely muzzled and restrained with a chain having a tensile
strength of at least 300 pounds and not exceeding three feet in
length, and shall be under the direct control and supervision of
the owner or keeper of the vicious dog.
(c) Any dog which has been found to be a vicious dog and which is
not confined in an enclosure shall be impounded and shall be
subject to euthanasia.
§ 8-208 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 8-208
1:274
(4) The owner of a vicious dog shall notify the United States Post Office
and utility providers in writing of the vicious dog declaration or the
disposition of any appeal of said declaration. The owner shall
provide proof of the notification to the Bloomington Police
Department.
(5) If the owner of a dog declared vicious resides at rental property,
said owner shall notify the landlord or property management of the
vicious dog declaration within 14 days of receiving said
declaration. The dog owner shall provide proof of said notification
to the Bloomington Police Department.
(6) The owner of a vicious dog shall have said dog spayed or neutered.
(7) The owner of any dog declared vicious shall have said dog microchipped
and registered with the micro-chip company in the owner's
name and listing an address where the dog is currently located.
(8) The owner of a dog declared vicious shall purchase a "Vicious Dog
Tag" from McLean County Animal Control. Said tag shall be affixed
to the dog's collar and visible at all times. Registration for the
vicious dog tag must be renewed annually at McLean County
Animal Control.
(9) The owner of a dog that has been declared vicious shall be required
to purchase general liability insurance covering property and
bodily injury with a combined single limit of at least $250,000 per
occurrence and shall show proof of obtaining said insurance to the
Bloomington Police Department. The owner shall notify the
Bloomington Police Department not more than 14 days after the
cancellation of said insurance policy.
(10) The owner of any dog declared vicious shall immediately report to
the Bloomington Police Department any incident involving the
vicious dog and any bite, attack or threat to a person or animal.
(11) The owner of any dog declared vicious shall immediately notify the
Bloomington Police Department of any change of address or
location of the vicious dog. If the dog is removed from the City of
Bloomington, said notification shall also be provided in writing to
authorities of the jurisdiction where the dog is located. [Ord. No.
2013-38]
E. Dogs subject to euthanasia. It shall be the duty of the owner of any dog
declared Subject to Euthanasia by the Police Chief or his designee to
immediately take the dog to an impound facility or veterinarian who
shall euthanize said dog or, in the event of an appeal, shall hold such
animal pending a hearing of an appeal before the Police Chief or his
designee. If the appeal is denied and the declaration upheld, the animal
shall be euthanized in a humane manner no sooner than five days after
the decision denying the appeal, unless the owner consents to an earlier
time. It shall be unlawful for the owner of a dog declared subject to
§ 8-208 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-208
1:275
euthanasia to sell, foster, give away or remove said dog from the
jurisdiction. In the event that an owner does not deliver a dog subject
to euthanasia to an impound facility or veterinarian, the City may seek
a warrant from the Circuit Court of McLean County for the immediate
seizure and euthanasia of the dog. The owner or keeper of a dog subject
to euthanasia must provide to the Bloomington Police Department a
letter or other proof signed by a licensed veterinarian that the dog has
been euthanized within seven days of the declaration that the dog is
subject to euthanasia. Each day upon which the owner or keeper of
a dog subject to euthanasia fails to provide the notice of euthanasia
shall be considered a separate violation of this Ordinance. [Ord. No.
2013-38]
F. Duty to report dangerous or vicious dogs brought into the City. Any
person keeping a dog which has been declared dangerous or vicious in
another jurisdiction shall report that fact to the Bloomington Police
Department within three days of bringing the dog into the City of
Bloomington. All dogs declared dangerous or vicious in another
jurisdiction shall be kept in a manner as if declared dangerous or
vicious in the City of Bloomington. The Bloomington Police Department
shall keep records of all such dogs. The status of a dog declared
dangerous or vicious in another jurisdiction shall not be subject to
appeal. It shall be unlawful to fail to report a dangerous or vicious dog
within three days of bringing the dog into the City of Bloomington.
[Ord. No. 2013-38]
G. The owner of all professional guard dogs shall register their animals
with the Chief of Police. It shall be the duty of the owner of each such
dog to notify the Chief of Police of changes of address and the owner
shall keep the Chief of Police advised of the location where such dog
will be stationed. The Chief of Police shall provide Police and Fire
Departments with a list of such exempted dogs and shall promptly
notify such departments of any changes reported to him. [Ord. No.
2013-38]
H. The State's Attorney, Police or any citizen may file a complaint to enjoin
any person from maintaining, permitting or having a dangerous or
vicious dog or nuisance dog or animal and/or to abate the same, and/or
to enjoin the owner of such dog or other animal from permitting the
same to leave his premises when not under control by leash or other
legal control method. Upon the filing of a complaint in the Circuit Court,
the Court, if satisfied that evidence for an injunction may exist, shall
grant a preliminary injunction with bond in such amount as the Court
may determine to be appropriate, enjoining the defendant from
maintaining, permitting or having such nuisance. If the existence of
evidence in support of an injunction is established, the Court shall enter
an appropriate order and may assess a fine and/or may order that such
dog or other animal be humanely destroyed by lethal injection. [Ord.
No. 2013-38]
§ 8-208 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 8-208
1:276
§ 8-209. [Ch. 8, Sec. 84] Complaints for dogs running at large;
notice and issuance of warrants. [Ord. No. 1988-71]
Whenever a Bloomington Police Officer or another authorized employee of
the City of Bloomington finds a dog(s) running at large, the Police Officer
or other person may complete and serve to one or more of the owners of
the dog(s) a citation or complaint. The citation or complaint may contain a
notice for the Defendant to appear in Court at a specific time and date to
respond to the charges contained therein. If the Defendant does not appear
in Court as specified, a warrant may be issued for the Defendant's arrest to
have the Defendant brought before the Court to respond to the charges in
the citation or complaint.
§ 8-210. [Ch. 8, Sec. 85] Failure to register a dog.
I. Any person who violates this Ordinance shall be fined not less than
$100 nor more than $1,000 for each offense. Each day that an offense
continues shall be considered a separate violation. [Ord. No. 2013-38]
J. Owners of dogs declared dangerous or vicious prior to the enactment of
this Ordinance shall have 90 days from its enactment to comply with its
provisions. [Ord. No. 2013-38]
A. It shall be illegal for any person to own or have in his or her possession
or custody a dog or cat which is not currently registered with McLean
County, Illinois as required by applicable law. Any person owning or
having a dog or cat in his or her possession or custody must have
displayed upon the dog or cat, or in the immediate possession of the
person then in control of the dog, proof that the dog or cat has been
vaccinated by a licensed veterinarian, which must be displayed upon
demand by a City of Bloomington Police Officer or Animal Control
Officer of McLean County, Illinois. A metal tag, commonly called a "dog
tag," showing current vaccination of the dog or cat shall create a
presumption that the dog or cat is registered with the County of
McLean; however, this presumption shall not apply if the police officer
or Animal Control Officer has information that the dog or cat is not in
fact registered. [Ord. No. 2009-40]
B. Police officers of the City of Bloomington and McLean County Animal
Control Officers are authorized to summarily seize as a public nuisance
any dog or cat for which proof of current vaccination is not displayed or
in the immediate possession of the person then in custody or possession
of such dog or cat; police officers and McLean County Animal Control
Officers are similarly authorized to summarily seize as a public
nuisance any dog or cat for which the police officer or Animal Control
Officer has information that the dog or cat is not registered with the
County of McLean. Such officers shall not relinquish such dog or cat
until proof of current registration is supplied by the owner or custodian
of such dog or cat. A dog or cat which is not currently registered as
required by law shall not be released unless payment for such
§ 8-208 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-210
1:277
§ 8-211. [Ch. 8, Sec. 91] Severability. [Ord. No. 1988-71]
It is the intention of the City Council that each separate provision of this
article shall be deemed independent of all other provisions therein, and that
if any provision of this article is declared invalid, all other provisions thereof
shall remain valid and enforceable.
registration is made to the County of McLean. A dog or cat which is
not claimed after seven business days from the date of seizure (not
counting the date the dog or cat is seized) shall become the property of
the County of McLean. [Ord. No. 2009-40]
C. The requirement that a dog or cat be registered with the County of
McLean shall not apply to persons owning or possessing a dog or cat
which is temporarily in the City as an entrant in a public exhibition,
contest or show sponsored by a dog club association or similar
organization held in the City of Bloomington. However, for this
exception to apply the sponsor of the exhibition, contest or show must
have given prior written notice of the public exhibition, contest or show
to the City Clerk of the City of Bloomington and the Health Department
of McLean County, Illinois. [Ord. No. 2009-40]
D. The penalty for violation of this section shall be $250 for a first offense,
$500 for a second offense, and $1000 for third and subsequent offenses.
[Ord. No. 2006-40]
§ 8-210 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 8-211
1:278
Chapter 8.5
ANNEXATIONS
§ 8-211 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-211
1:279

ARTICLE I
Policy and Definitions
§ 8.5-101. [Ch. 8.5, Sec. 101] Policy. [Ord. No. 1976-102]
It is hereby established as the policy of the City of Bloomington that all
property hereafter annexed to the City of Bloomington shall be annexed
in a manner consistent with preserving the ability of other units of local
government to adequately serve the needs of the residents of Bloomington
and the Bloomington-Normal area. All property annexed to the City of
Bloomington after August 9, 1976 shall be annexed pursuant to the
requirements of this chapter.
§ 8.5-102. [Ch. 8.5, Sec. 102] Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meaning shown
in this section:
ANNEXATION — Includes all methods of annexing property to the City of
Bloomington described in Article 7, Division 1, of the Illinois Municipal Code
(Ill. Rev. Stat. ch. 24, Sec. 7-1-1, et seq.)12.
ANNEXATION AGREEMENT — Any agreement described and authorized by
Section 11-15.1-1 et seq. of the Illinois Municipal Code (Ill. Rev. Stat. ch. 24,
Sec. 11-15.1, et seq.)13.
OTHER UNITS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT — The Bloomington-Normal
Airport Authority; the Bloomington and Normal Sanitary District; and the
Board of Education, Bloomington School District No. 87, a Special Charter
District.[Ord. No. 1981-102]
12.Editor's Note: See 65 ILCS 5/7-1-1 et seq.
13.Editor's Note: See 65 ILCS 5/11-15.1-1 et seq.
§ 8.5-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8.5-102
1:281

ARTICLE II
Annexation Requirements and Procedure
§ 8.5-201. [Ch. 8.5, Sec. 201] All annexations by agreement. [Ord.
No. 1981-102]
Except as herein provided, all property annexed to the City of Bloomington
on or after August 9, 1976 shall be annexed pursuant to an Annexation
Agreement which meets the requirements of this chapter.
§ 8.5-202. [Ch. 8.5, Sec. 202] Contents of agreement.
§ 8.5-203. [Ch. 8.5, Sec. 203] Procedure.
A. Each Annexation Agreement shall contain (if the property to be
annexed to the City is not a part of all of the other units of local
government) a provision stating either:
(1) That petitions for annexation will be filed with such other units of
local government and diligently pursued to a final decision; or
(2) Petitions will be filed to annex such property to such other units of
local government and diligently pursued to a final decision within
90 days of the date of notification by such other units of local
government that such property meets the statutory qualifications
for annexation to such other units of local government. [Ord. No.
1976-102]
B. Annexation agreements may contain any other provision not prohibited
by law. [Ord. No. 1976-102]
A. Filing. All annexation agreements must be filed with the City Clerk in
sufficient time to be included on the agenda of the Council Meeting at
which it will be first considered. Each annexation agreement shall be
accompanied by a filing fee as set forth in the Schedule of Fees which
shall be nonrefundable unless said agreement is withdrawn prior to the
time any notices are published or staff meetings held thereon. In
addition to the filing fee cited herein, the applicant shall be responsible
for paying the City for the cost of publishing the public notice of the
public hearing on any annexation agreement filed with the City by such
applicant. The applicant shall pay such cost to the City Clerk prior to
the public hearing on such application. Failure to pay such cost prior to
the public hearing shall result in the cancellations of such hearing. In
addition, an Annexation fee must be paid as set forth in the Schedule of
Fees. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
B. Notices. Notices required to be given by Section 7-1-1 of the Municipal
Code14 shall be given not less than 10 days prior to the City Council
Meeting at which such agreement is first considered. No annexation
14.Editor's Note: See 65 ILCS 5/7-1-1.
§ 8.5-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8.5-203
1:283
agreement will be considered by the City Council unless such notice is
given. [Ord. No. 1976-102]
C. First meeting. The City Clerk shall schedule the first meetings that such
agreement will be considered by the Bloomington Planning Commission
and the City Council as soon as possible after receipt of such agreement
unless such agreement is withdrawn or found by the City Corporation
Counsel to be legally deficient. [Ord. No. 1991-111]
D. Hearings. Both the Planning Commission and City Council shall conduct
public hearings on the agreement. The Planning Commission shall
make its recommendation to the City Council after conducting its
hearing. The Planning Commission shall consider the amendment to the
Official Zoning Map for the City of Bloomington, McLean County and
shall recommend the adoption of such amendment unless the
Commission finds that such amendment is not in the public interest or
is solely for the benefit of the person requesting such amendment. In
making such a finding the Planning Commission may consider:
(1) The suitability of the subject property for uses authorized by the
existing zoning;
(2) The length of time the property has remained vacant as zoned
considered in the context of land development in the area;
(3) The suitability of the subject property for uses authorized by the
proposed zoning;
(4) The existing land uses of nearby property;
(5) Existing zoning of nearby property, relative gain or hardship to the
public as contrasted and compared to the hardship or gain of the
individual property owner resulting from the approval or denial of
the zoning amendment application;
(6) The extent to which adequate streets connected to the arterial
street system are available or can be reasonably supplied to serve
the uses permitted in the proposed zoning classification;
(7) The extent to which the proposed amendment is consistent with the
need to minimize flood damage and whether the development of
the subject property for uses permitted in the proposed zoning
classification would have a substantial detrimental effect on the
drainage patterns in the area;
(8) The extent to which adequate services (including but not limited to
fire and police protection, schools, water supply and sewage
disposal facilities) are available or can be supplied to serve the uses
permitted in the proposed zoning classification; and
(9) The extent to which the proposed amendment is consistent with the
public interest, giving due consideration for the purpose and intent
§ 8.5-203 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 8.5-203
1:284
of Chapter 44, Article I, of the Bloomington City Code - 1960,
including the following specific purposes:
(a) To conserve and protect the taxable value of land and
structures;
(b) To protect the air, water and land resources within the City
from the hazards of pollution and misuse;
(c) To protect land and structures from natural hazards; including
flooding and erosion;
(d) To preserve and protect historic locations, structures and
groups of structures;
(e) To preserve and protect and encourage the development of
structures, groups of structures and neighborhoods of
distinctive architectural character and appearance;
(f) To provide for the orderly and functional arrangement of land
uses and structures;
(g) To establish standards for the orderly development or
redevelopment of geographic areas within the City;
(h) To secure for the public locations for housing, employment,
shopping, education and recreation that are adequate in terms
of health, safety, convenience and number;
(i) To facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water,
sewage disposal, schools, parks and other public facilities; to
conserve and protect natural resources including prime
agricultural land, mineral resources and areas of scientific
interest;
(j) To conserve and protect natural resources including prime
agricultural land, mineral resources and areas of scientific
interest;
(k) To permit public involvement in the planning of private land
uses which have the potential for significant impact on the use
and enjoyment of surrounding property or on the public
resources and facilities of the City of Bloomington; and
(l) To promote the Official Comprehensive Plan adopted by the
City of Bloomington.
E. The City Council, after conducting a public hearing, shall approve or
reject the Agreement on the basis of:
(1) The facts presented at the public hearings; and
(2) The recommendations of the Planning Commission; and
§ 8.5-203 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8.5-203
1:285
§ 8.5-204. [Ch. 8.5, Sec. 204] Material to be furnished to Clerk for
annexation.
§ 8.5-205. [Ch. 8.5, Sec. 205] Fees to be paid as a condition of
annexation to the City.
(3) The recommendations of the City Staff. [Ord. No. 1991-111]
F. Final action. The City Council may approve the agreement as written or
with modifications, or reject it. If modifications are a condition of the
approval of the agreement, such modifications need not be made at that
time. Approval shall be by resolution authorizing the Mayor and City
Clerk to execute the agreement on behalf of the City. Execution of the
agreement may occur at any time after required modifications are
made; such agreement as modified shall be printed in the Minutes of
the first Council Meeting following execution.
A. Persons desiring to annex property to the City of Bloomington shall
furnish to the City Clerk the following:
(1) Completed petition for annexation, including legal description of
the property to be annexed;
(2) Ordinance annexing the property to the City of Bloomington,
including legal description;
(3) Ordinance zoning property upon annexation to the City of
Bloomington, including legal description;
(4) Mylar and 31 copies of annexation plat;
(5) Affidavit of notice to any fire protection district and, if applicable,
to any Township Highway Commissioner and Board of Trustees of
the township from any of which the property is proposed to be
disconnected as required in Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, Sec. 7-1-115;
(6) The real estate index number of the property, area thereof, most
recent equalized assessed valuation of the property to be annexed
and the last year's real property tax levied by the rural township on
the property, both for corporate purposes and for road and bridge
tax.
B. No Annexation Ordinance will be acted upon by the City Council unless
such information is furnished by the Petitioner. [Ord. No. 1988-82]
A. As a condition of annexing property into the corporate limits of the City
of Bloomington, property which is the subject of annexation agreements
entered into after the effective date of this ordinance shall be subject to
the fees as set forth in the Schedule of Fees.
15.Editor's Note: See 65 ILCS 5/7-1-1.
§ 8.5-203 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 8.5-205
1:286
B. The fees constitute the City's estimation of services rendered by the
City of Bloomington for newly annexed property. The fees are
calculated on a per lot basis for R-1A, R-1B, R-1C, R-1H and R-2 lots and
on a square foot basis for R-3A, R-3B, R-4 and C-1, C-2, C-3, B-1, B-2,
B-3, M-1, M-2 and W-1 lots. Parcels submitted as Planned Unit
Developments shall also be calculated on a square foot basis. Lots
zoned for S-1 (University District), S-2 (Public Lands and Institutions
District) and S-5 (Airport District) shall not be subject to the annexation
fees established in this section, unless property in the S-2 or S-5
District is sold or leased by the owner, in which case annexation fees
shall be paid on a square footage basis at the time of the execution of
such sale or lease.
C. In calculating the area subject to annexation fees, areas to be used for
required landscaping or retention/detention basins shall not be used in
such calculation. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
§ 8.5-205 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8.5-205
1:287

ARTICLE III
Water Service Agreements
§ 8.5-301. [Ch. 8.5, Sec. 302] Application.
All agreements whereby the City of Bloomington agrees to furnish water to
unincorporated properties located outside the corporate limits of the City
of Bloomington entered into after August 9, 1976, shall be subject to the
requirements of this chapter.
§ 8.5-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8.5-301
1:289

ARTICLE IV
Exceptions
§ 8.5-401. [Ch. 8.5, Sec. 401] Exceptions.
The requirements of this chapter may be waived by the City Council if:
A. There exists now and will probably exist for the indefinite future, a legal
impediment to annexation to any of the other units of local government,
to the extent necessitated by such impediment; or
B. The property is being annexed without the consent of the owners or
occupant thereof pursuant to any section of Ill. Rev. Stat. ch. 24, Sec.
7-1-1, et seq.16; or
C. A request for a waiver is filed by another unit of local government as
defined herein; or
D. Failure to grant the waiver would impede attainment of the purposes of
this Ordinance, the orderly development and enjoyment of property, or
the welfare of the City of Bloomington; or
E. The property has already been annexed to the other units of local
government. [Ord. No. 1976-102]
16.Editor's Note: See 65 ILCS 5/7-1-1 et seq.
§ 8.5-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8.5-401
1:291
Chapter 9
AUCTIONS AND AUCTIONEERS
§ 8.5-401 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 8.5-401
1:292
ARTICLE I
Auctioneers
§ 9-101. [Ch. 9, Sec. 1] Auctioneers - defined.
For the purpose of this chapter, an auctioneer is any person who, at public
outcry, offers for sale to the highest bidder any goods, wares, or
merchandise or real estate for profit.
§ 9-102. [Ch. 9, Sec. 2] License required.
It shall not be lawful for any person within said City to exercise the
business, trade, or vocation of an auctioneer without first having obtained
from said City a license for that purpose as hereinafter provided; and any
person violating this section shall forfeit and pay not less than $5 nor more
than $100 for each offense.
§ 9-103. [Ch. 9, Sec. 3] License fee. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
The license fee for auctioneers shall be as set forth in the Schedule of Fees
for the period of one year. The license shall expire on December 31st of the
year in which it is issued.
§ 9-104. [Ch. 9, Sec. 4] Bond. [Ord. No. 1974-124]
No person shall receive a license as an auctioneer in said City until he
shall first have executed a surety bond in the penal sum of $5,000 with a
corporate surety to be approved by the Corporation Counsel, conditioned
for the strict observance of all the provisions of the Code respecting
auctions and auctioneers, which bond shall be posted at the time of filing
his application for a license.
§ 9-105. [Ch. 9, Sec. 5] Application.
Any person desiring a license authorized by this article shall make
application therefor to the City Manager. Such application shall be signed
by the applicant and shall contain the following information: name and
age and address of the applicant; if he has a permanent place of business
in which it is proposed to conduct sales by auction, the location of said
premises where he proposes to engage in the business for which the
application is made; whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted
of a felony. Upon compliance with the terms hereof and the payment of
the license fee provided for, the City Manager shall issue a license to the
applicant.
§ 9-106. [Ch. 9, Sec. 6] Auction in streets, etc. - penalty.
It shall be unlawful for any auctioneer or his agent or his crier to sell or
offer for sale at public auction any articles, goods, wares, or merchandise
upon any street, alley, sidewalk or public ground of the City of Bloomington,
§ 9-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-106
1:293
or to hold any auction sale thereon. Any person violating this section shall
be fined not less than $10 nor more than $50 for each offense.
§ 9-107. [Ch. 9, Sec. 7] Prohibited acts by auctioneer.
No auctioneer who has been duly licensed by the City to conduct auction
sales in the City shall do and perform any of the following acts:
§ 9-108. [Ch. 9, Sec. 8] Delegation of authority.
No auctioneer shall have the power to delegate his authority to any Clerk,
partner or person. Only the person named upon a license shall be privileged
to use the power given him.
§ 9-109. [Ch. 9, Sec. 9] Substitution of articles.
Any auctioneer who substitutes an article for that article which was actually
bid upon and purchased by a person shall be punished as provided in
§ 9-203 of this Code.
§ 9-110. [Ch. 9, Sec. 10] False representations.
Any auctioneer or person being present when any real or personal property
is offered for sale, who shall knowingly, with intent to induce any person
to purchase the same or any part thereof, make any false representations
or statement as to the ownership of, the character of the quality of the
property so offered for sale, or as to the poverty or circumstances of the
owner or pretended owner of such property shall be punished as provided
A. Make any false representation as to the character, quality, condition,
value, or ownership of any goods, wares, merchandise or property
offered for sale.
B. Exhibit and offer for sale at auction any article, and induce its purchase
by any bidder, and afterwards secretly substitute any other article for
the one so exhibited with intent to deceive and defraud such bidder.
C. Be guilty of any device, trick, or fraudulent practice with intent thereby
to deceive or defraud any bidder.
D. Use false bidders, cappers, or puffers.
E. Use bells, buzzers, musical instruments, or street criers; provided that
signs or flags may be used to attract attention to the auction.
F. Use false or misleading advertising matter relating to the kind or
quality of goods, wares, merchandise, or personal property to be sold at
the auction.
G. Substitute an unlicensed auctioneer in place of the licensed auctioneer.
H. Fail to exhibit his license at the auction sale upon demand of any police
officer or City official.
§ 9-106 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 9-110
1:294
in § 9-203 of this Code. If such false representation is made by such
auctioneer, or by any other person with such auctioneer's knowledge and
consent or connivance, the license of such auctioneer shall be revoked.
§ 9-111. [Ch. 9, Sec. 11] Terms and conditions to be stated prior to
auction.
Before beginning any auction, the auctioneer shall state the terms and
conditions upon which the sale is to be made.
§ 9-112. [Ch. 9, Sec. 12] Fictitious bids, etc.
Any auctioneer who shall procure any person to make a fictitious bid at any
auction, or who shall conspire with any person to make a fictitious bid at
such sale or any auctioneer who shall himself fictitiously raise any bid at
any such auction sale shall be punished as provided in § 9-203 of this Code,
and the license of such auctioneer may be revoked.
§ 9-110 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-112
1:295

ARTICLE II
Auctions
§ 9-201. [Ch. 9, Sec. 13] Only licensed auctioneers to conduct
auctions.
No person shall dispose of any goods, wares, merchandise or property at
public auction in the City except through the medium of an auctioneer
licensed to conduct such auction by the City; provided, however, that
nothing herein contained shall apply to judicial sales, to sales by executors
or administrators, by trustees or assignees under deed of assignment, by
lienors or by public officers in the manner prescribed by law.
§ 9-202. [Ch. 9, Sec. 14] Time of auctions.
No auctioneer shall sell or offer for sale at public auction any personal
or real property, or any interest therein, or conduct any selling at public
auction after 5:30 p.m. on any day in any district in the City zoned as the
residential district and no auctioneer shall sell or offer for sale at public
auction any personal or real property or any interest therein or conduct any
sale at public auction after 11:00 p.m. on any day in any district zoned as
the Commercial District in the City.
§ 9-203. [Ch. 9, Sec. 15] Penalty.
Every person, firm or corporation violating any of the terms of this chapter
or failing to comply with any of the terms thereof shall be fined in a sum not
less than $25 nor more than $200 for each offense. Each and every day on
which this chapter or any part thereof is violated shall constitute a separate
and distinct offense.
§ 9-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-203
1:297
Chapter 10
BUILDING CODE
§ 9-203 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 9-203
1:298
ARTICLE I
Community Development Department
§ 10-101. [Ch. 10, Sec. 1] Establishment. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
There is hereby created the Community Development Department of the
City. This Department shall consist of the Director of Community
Development and such other officials and employees as may be provided for
by the Council by adoption of the Annual Budget and Salary Ordinance, or
any amendments thereto.
§ 10-102. [Ch. 10, Sec. 2] Functions of Department.
§ 10-103. [Ch. 10, Sec. 3] Director of Community Development -
titles. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
There is hereby established the office of Director of Community
Development who shall be appointed by the City Manager as provided by
law. Subject to the control of the City Manager, the Director of Community
Development shall have control and supervision of all employees of the
Department of Community Development. The Director of Community
Development may also be known as the Building Official, Code Official,
Director of Inspections or Supervisor of Inspections. He shall also act
and be known as the Building Inspector, Electrical Inspector, Plumbing
Inspector, and Plans Examiner in the absence of appointment of other
persons in the Department of Community Development to those positions.
§ 10-104. [Ch. 10, Sec. 4] Director of Community Development -
duties.
A. Enforcement of building laws. The Community Development
Department shall by all appropriate means enforce all laws and
ordinances in the City relating to the condition, construction, repair,
alteration, addition, maintenance or demolition of buildings or
structures, including codes regarding buildings, property maintenance,
plumbing, electrical, and mechanical and other related work.
Department personnel shall make all appropriate inspections and
engage in other related activities in connection therewith. [Ord. No.
2017-96]
B. City Hall building safety. The Department shall be responsible for
maintenance of City Hall.
C. Zoning. The Community Development Department shall enforce the
Zoning Ordinance of the City of Bloomington (Bloomington City Code
Chapter 44). [Ord. No. 2017-96]
D. Prosecution. Personnel of the Community Development Department
shall sign complaints and appear in court to enforce the laws and
ordinances referred to above. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
§ 10-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-104
1:299
§ 10-105. [Ch. 10, Sec. 5] Employees of Department - conflict of
interest.
A. The Director of Community Development shall be responsible for
insuring that the functions and duties of the Department of Community
Development are performed by the employees of said Department.
[Ord. No. 2017-96]
B. The Director of Community Development shall issue or cause to be
issued all permits required for activities and uses of property regulated
by this chapter. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
C. The Director of Community Development shall be the zoning
enforcement officer and shall be charged with the responsibility of
insuring that the Zoning Ordinance (Bloomington City Code Chapter
44) is enforced. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
D. The Director of Community Development shall enforce other
ordinances of the City of Bloomington as provided therein. [Ord. No.
2017-96]
A. No member or employee of the Department of Community Development
shall engage in any occupation or business nor shall any such member
or employee be interested in any manner in any business which is
subject to the regulations of this chapter. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
B. All employees of the Department of Community Development shall be
authorized to act in the capacity of the Code Official for purposes of
performing the functions of the Department of Community
Development as enumerated in § 10-102. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
§ 10-104 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 10-105
1:300
ARTICLE II
Scope Of Chapter
§ 10-201. [Ch. 10, Sec. 11] Citation and scope of chapter.
§ 10-202. [Ch. 10, Sec. 12] Conflicting provisions.
§ 10-203. [Ch. 10, Sec. 13] Adoption of International Building Code
- 2012.
A. This chapter shall constitute and be known as the Bloomington Building
Code and may be cited as such; and all aspects of buildings, including,
but not limited to the erection, construction, enlargement, rebuilding,
alteration, repairing, moving, shoring, removal, demolition, equipment,
use, height, area, conversion of occupancy, and the installation of
plumbing, heating apparatus, boilers, elevators and electrical wiring
and appliances, including mechanical ventilation and natural lighting
and maintenance of all buildings or structures within the corporate
limits of the City, shall be carried out in conformity herewith.
B. The requirements contained in this chapter, covering the maintenance
of buildings, shall apply to all buildings or structures now existing or
hereafter erected. All buildings or structures and all parts thereof shall
be maintained in a safe condition, and all devices or safeguards which
are required by this chapter at the erection, alteration or repair of any
building shall be maintained in good working order.
C. This section shall not be construed as permitting the removal or nonmaintenance
of any previously authorized or required devices or
safeguards unless authorized in writing by the Director of Community
Development. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
A. In the event of any conflict: between or among any Codes adopted in
this article; or between any Code adopted in this article and any other
provision of Bloomington City Code; or between any Code adopted in
this article and any provision of any Code adopted by any other
provision of Bloomington City Code; or between any Code adopted in
this article and any provision of State law, the provision setting the
highest standard for health and safety shall prevail.
B. Decisions of representatives of the Department of Community
Development under this section shall be reviewable by the Board of
Appeals as provided in this chapter. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
A. There is hereby adopted for the purpose of establishing minimum
regulations governing the design, construction, alteration,
enlargement, repair, removal, demolition, equipment installation, use
and occupancy, location, conditions and maintenance of all property,
buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied
utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential
to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and
§ 10-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-203
1:301
§ 10-204. [Ch. 10, Sec. 14] Adoption of the International
Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings - 2012.
use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human
occupancy and use and the demolition of such structures as herein
provided; providing for the issuance of permits, collection of fees and
penalties, a Building Code known as the International Building Code
2012 edition, including Appendix Chapters C and J, as published by
the International Code Council, Inc., and the whole thereof, hereinafter
referred to as the International Building Code, save and except such
portions as are deleted, modified or amended in Article IV of this
chapter, of which Code not less than one copy has been and now is filed
in the office of the Clerk of the City of Bloomington. The provisions of
said Code are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out
at length and the provisions thereof shall be controlling in regard to
all property, buildings and structures within the corporate limits of the
City.
B. In addition to the one copy of the International Building Code 2012,
which has been on file in the office of the City Clerk of the City, for use
and examination by the public, at least one copy of said Code shall be
kept on file in the office of the Community Development Department for
public inspection.
C. All references to the "Board of Appeals" or "Board" in said Code shall be
deemed references to the Building Board of Appeals established in
Bloomington City Code Chapter 2, § 2-302, and § 10-212 of this chapter,
unless a contrary reference is clearly dictated by the context of the
reference. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
A. There is hereby adopted the 2012 edition of the International
Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, including
Appendix Chapters E, F, G, H, I, J, K and O, as published by the
International Code Council Inc. for the purpose of regulating and
governing the construction alteration, movement, enlargement,
replacement, repair, equipment, location, their appurtenances and
accessory structures, or maintenance of building, mechanical, and
electrical systems, removal and demolition of detached one and twofamily
dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not
more than three stories in height with separate means of egress in the
City of Bloomington; providing for the issuance of permits and
collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Residential Code of
which not less than one copy has been and now is filed in the office of
the Clerk of the City of Bloomington, are hereby referred to, adopted,
and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this ordinance, with the
additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, set forth in Article V
of this chapter.
B. In addition to the one copy of the International Residential Code for
One- and Two-Family Dwellings - 2012, on file in the office of the City
§ 10-203 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 10-204
1:302
§ 10-205. [Ch. 10, Sec. 16] Adoption of the International
Mechanical Code - 2012.
Clerk, at least one copy of said Code shall be kept on file in the office of
the Department of Community Development for public inspection.
C. All references to the "Board of Appeals" or "Board" in said Code shall be
deemed references to the Building Board of Appeals established in
Bloomington City Code Chapter 2, § 2-302, and § 10-212 of this chapter,
unless a contrary reference is clearly dictated by the context of the
reference. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
A. There is hereby adopted by the City Council for the purpose of
regulating and controlling the design, construction, quality of
materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation,
replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of mechanical systems,
including heating systems, ventilation systems, cooling systems, steam
and hot water heating systems, hydronic piping, boiler and pressure
vessels, appliances using gas, liquid or solid fuel, chimneys and vents,
mechanical refrigeration systems, fireplaces, solar systems, barbecues,
incinerators, and crematories in the City of Bloomington, the
International Mechanical Code, 2012, as published by the International
Code Council, Inc. Save and except such portions as are deleted,
modified or amended in Article VII of this chapter, of which Code not
less than one copy has been and now is on file in the office of the Clerk
of the City of Bloomington. The provisions of said Code are hereby
adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length and the
provisions thereof shall be controlling in regard to the design,
construction, quality of materials, erection, installation alteration,
repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or
maintenance of mechanical systems, including heating systems,
ventilation systems, cooling systems, steam and hot water heating
systems, hydronic piping, boiler and pressure vessels, appliances using
gas, liquid or solid fuel, chimneys and vents, mechanical refrigeration
systems, fireplaces, solar systems, barbecues, incinerators, and
crematories.
B. In addition to the one copy of the International Mechanical Code, 2012,
which has been on file in the office of the Clerk of the City of
Bloomington, for use and examination by the public, at least one copy of
said Code shall be kept on file in the office of the Community
Development Department for public inspection.
C. All references to the "Mechanical Board of Appeals," "Board of
Appeals," "Board" or similar reference shall be considered as
references to the Building Board of Appeals established in Bloomington
City Code Chapter 2, § 2-302, and § 10-212 of this chapter, unless a
contrary reference is clearly intended by context of the reference.
[Ord. No. 2017-96]
§ 10-204 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-206
1:303
§ 10-206. [Ch. 10, Sec. 17] Adoption of the International Fuel Gas
Code - 2012.
§ 10-207. [Ch. 10, Sec. 18] Adoption of the International Fire Code -
2012.
A. There is hereby adopted the 2012 edition of the International Fuel Gas
Code, regulating and governing fuel gas systems and gas-fired
appliances in the City of Bloomington; providing for the issuance of
permits and collection of fees therefor; That a certain document, one
copy of which is on file in the office of the City of Clerk of the City of
Bloomington, being marked and designated as the International Fuel
Gas Code, 2012 edition, including Appendix Chapters A, B, C and D, as
published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted
as the Fuel Gas Code of the City of Bloomington, and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Fuel Gas
Code on file in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Bloomington are
hereby referred to, adopted, and made a pert hereof, as if fully set out in
this ordinance, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes,
prescribed in Article VIII of this chapter.
B. All references to the "Mechanical Board of Appeals," "Board of
Appeals," "Board" or similar reference shall be considered as
references to the Building Board of Appeals established in Bloomington
City Code Chapter 2, § 2-302, and § 10-212 of this chapter, unless a
contrary reference is clearly intended by context of the reference.
[Ord. No. 2014-07]
A. There is hereby adopted the 2012 edition of the International Fire
Code, at least one copy of which is on file in the office of the City Clerk
of the City of Bloomington, being marked and designated as the
International Fire Code, including Appendix Chapters B, C, D, E, F and
G, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby
adopted as the code of the City of Bloomington for regulating and
governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion
hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous
substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to
life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises in the City of
Bloomington and providing for the issuance of permits for hazardous
uses or operations; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
conditions and terms of such International Fire Code, 2012 edition,
published by the International Code Council, on file in the office of the
City Clerk are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if
fully set out in this ordinance, with the additions, insertions, deletions
and changes, if any, prescribed in Article IX of this chapter.
B. All references to the "Board of Appeals" or "Board" in said Code shall be
deemed references to the Building Board of Appeals established in
Bloomington City Code Chapter 2, § 2-302, and § 10-212 of this chapter,
unless a contrary reference is clearly dictated by the context of the
reference. [Ord. No. 2014-07]
§ 10-206 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 10-208
1:304
§ 10-208. [Ch. 10, Sec. 19] Adoption of the International Existing
Building Code - 2012.
§ 10-209. [Ch. 10, Sec. 20] Adoption of the International Energy
Conservation Code - 2012.
A. There is hereby adopted the 2012 edition of the International Existing
Building Code, regulating and governing the repair, alteration, change
of occupancy, addition, and relocation of existing buildings, including
historic buildings, in the City of Bloomington; providing for the issuance
of permits and collection of fees therefor, at least one copy of which is
on file in the office of the City Clerk of City of Bloomington, being
marked and designated as the International Existing Code, 2012
edition, including Appendix A, B and C as published by the International
Code Council, and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and term of said Existing Building code on file in the office of
the City Clerk are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof,
as if fully set out in this ordinance, with the additions, insertions,
deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in Article X of this chapter.
B. All references to the "Board of Appeals" or "Board" in said Code shall be
deemed references to the Building Board of Appeals established in
Bloomington City Code Chapter 2, § 2-302, and § 10-212 of this chapter,
unless a contrary reference is clearly dictated by the context of the
reference. [Ord. No. 2014-07]
A. There is hereby adopted for the purpose of establishing minimum
regulations governing energy efficient building envelopes and
installation of energy efficient mechanical, lighting and power systems;
providing for the issuance of permits, collection of fees and penalties,
an energy code by the name of the International Energy Conservation
Code, 2012 edition, as published by the International Code Council,
Inc., and the whole thereof, hereinafter referred to as International
Energy Conservation Code, save and except such portions as are
deleted, modified or amended in Article IV of this chapter, of which
Code not less than one copy has been and is now filed in the office of
Clerk of the City of Bloomington. The provisions of said Code are hereby
adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length and provisions
thereof shall be controlling in regard to all property, buildings and
structures within the corporate limits of the City.
B. All references to the "Board of Appeals" or "Board" in said Code shall be
deemed references to the Building Board of Appeals established in
Bloomington City Code Chapter 2, § 2-302, and § 10-212 of this chapter,
unless a contrary reference is clearly dictated by the context of the
reference. [Ord. No. 2014-07]
§ 10-208 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-210
1:305
§ 10-210. [Ch. 10, Sec. 21] Supplements/amendments/addenda to
adopted codes. [Ord. No. 2011-58]
Whenever any Code adopted by this Article II includes a supplement,
amendments or addenda which has also been adopted by this Article II, all
subsequent references to said Code in this Chapter 10 shall be deemed to
refer to the supplement, amendments or addenda of said Code as well.
§ 10-211. [Ch. 10, Sec. 22] Violation - penalties. [Ord. No. 2011-58]
The penalty for violating any provision of any of the Codes adopted by
reference into this chapter shall be as provided in the Code violated; if the
Code violated fails to specify a penalty, the penalty shall be a fine not to
exceed $500. The penalty for violating any other provision of this chapter
shall be a fine not to exceed $500. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed each day that a violation exists or continues.
§ 10-212. [Ch. 10, Sec. 23] Building Board of Appeals.
A. There is hereby created a Building Board of Appeals consisting of nine
members. The members of the Board shall be individuals who are
qualified by experience and training to decide upon matters pertaining
to building construction and shall have the specific qualifications of
each discipline set forth in this section. Three members shall represent
general construction, and two members each shall represent the
disciplines of mechanical construction, electrical construction and
plumbing.
(1) General construction. A general construction representative must
be a licensed architect, licensed structural engineer, an individual
having a minimum of a Master's degree in construction technology
or related field, or an individual having a minimum of five years of
experience in general construction.
(2) Mechanical construction. A mechanical construction
representative must be a licensed mechanical engineer or a
licensed HVAC contractor with a minimum of five years of
experience in HVAC installation and maintenance.
(3) Electrical construction. An electrical construction representative
must be a licensed electrical engineer or a licensed electrical
contractor with a minimum of five years of experience in electrical
installation and maintenance.
(4) Plumbing construction. A plumbing construction representative
must be a licensed plumber with a minimum of five years of
experience in plumbing or an individual with a minimum of a
Bachelor's Degree in environmental science.
B. The Mayor, with the consent of the City Council, shall make
appointments to the Building Board of Appeals. The initial board shall
consist of representatives appointed for staggered terms with three
§ 10-210 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 10-212
1:306
representatives each appointed to serve a two, three, or four-year term.
Effective May 1, 2014, a person appointed to the Board shall serve a
term of three years. This term may be extended after the three years for
no more than two additional three-year terms. Members of the Board
shall serve no more than three consecutive three-year terms (a total of
nine years). The Board shall designate one of its members to serve as
Chairperson. The Chairperson shall serve a one-year term and may be
reappointed. The Director of Community Development or his designee
shall serve as an advisor to the Board and may act as its Secretary.
Vacancies among Board members shall be filled for the unexpired term
in the same manner as original appointments. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
C. The Building Board of Appeals shall have the following functions:
(1) To hear and decide all appeals from rulings or determinations made
by the Director of Community Development or department staff
pursuant to this chapter, Chapter 15, (the Electrical Code), or
Chapter 34, (the Plumbing Code). In any appeal pertaining to
general, mechanical, electrical or plumbing construction, at least
one board member representing the discipline at issue must attend
and participate in the appeal hearing and deliberations, unless
such participation would be prohibited by law. In the event a board
member from the discipline at issue is unavailable, the appeal shall
be continued in an expeditious manner to a date upon which a
representative from the discipline at issue and quorum of the Board
can be present. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
(2) To hear appeals related to applications for HVAC and electrical
contractor licenses. In any such appeal, at least one board member
representing electrical construction must attend and participate in
the appeal hearing and deliberations.
(3) To conduct hearings on revocation or suspension of licenses, or the
levying of fines against licensees.
(4) To serve as the "Board of Appeals" as that term is used in the
various International construction codes adopted by the City of
Bloomington. All appeals of decisions and determinations made
under the International Property Maintenance Code or Chapter 45
of this Code shall be heard and reviewed by the Property
Maintenance Board of Review as provided in that Chapter.
(5) To examine and review background, general practical knowledge,
prerequisites and qualifications required to sit for the practical
examinations for electricians and mechanical contractors as
required in this chapter and Chapter 15 of this Code.
(6) To recommend to the City Council reasonable rules and regulations
governing the issuance of permits by the Director of Community
Development Department under this chapter. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
§ 10-212 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-212
1:307
(7) To recommend to the City Council reasonable fees to be paid for the
inspections performed by personnel of the Community
Development Department of the City of Bloomington under this
chapter. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
(8) To perform such other duties as may be given or assigned by the
City Council.
(9) The Building Board of Appeals, in concurrence with the Director of
Community Development, shall have the authority to provide for
experimental programs or pilot studies, including studies which
would allow for the installation of materials or methods which are
otherwise prohibited by City of Bloomington ordinance. In
determining whether to approve such studies or pilot programs,
the Building Board shall consider the health and safety of the
residents of the City of Bloomington, the likely future use of the
product or method sought to be used, and the expected benefit of
the intended material or method. Any program or study approved
shall be limited in duration and scope such that a reasonable
assessment can be made of the material or method. The Director of
Community Development shall report regularly to the Building
Board of Appeals on the effectiveness of such material or method
approved for a pilot program or study. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
D. Quorum. Five members of the Board shall constitute a quorum. All
decisions shall require an affirmative vote of a simple majority of the
Board members present. No member of the Board shall consider or vote
on any question in which he, or any corporation, limited liability
company, or other legal entity in which he is a shareholder, is financially
interested to an extent greater than other persons, firms or
corporations performing or in business to perform comparable work.
E. Meetings and records. Meetings of the Board shall be held bi-annually,
or at the call of the Chairperson or such other times as the Board may
determine. All hearings before the Board shall be open to the public.
The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of
each member on every question. If a member is absent or fails to vote,
the minutes shall so indicate. The Board shall also keep records of its
other official actions. Such minutes and such records shall be public
records.
F. Appeal procedure.
(1) Application for appeal. Any application for appeal shall be made
within 10 days from the date of the decision appealed from, by
filing with the Director of Community Development a Notice of
Appeal specifying the grounds for the appeal. The Director of
Community Development shall transmit to the Board of Appeals the
Notice of Appeal and all papers or documents on which the matter
appealed from was based.
§ 10-212 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 10-212
1:308
(2) Any petition for a variance/interpretation from the Building Board
of Appeals shall be filed with the Community Development
Department, accompanied by a fee as set forth in the Schedule of
Fees, payable to the City of Bloomington. Each additional petition
in a multiple petition shall be charged a fee as set forth in the
Schedule of Fees. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
(3) Decision of the Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals shall in
every case reach a decision without unreasonable or unnecessary
delay. Every decision of the Board shall be in writing and shall
promptly be filed in the office of the Director of Community
Development and served either by personal delivery or regular mail
on the party initiating the appeal.
(4) If a decision of the Board of Appeals reverses or modifies a decision
of the Director of Community Development, the Director of
Community Development shall take action immediately in
accordance with such decision. The decision of the Board shall be
final, subject only to judicial review.
G. Rules and regulations. The Board may establish rules and regulations
for its own procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of this
chapter. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
§ 10-212 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-212
1:309

ARTICLE III
Unsafe Or Abandoned Buildings
DIVISION 1
Demolition or Repair
§ 10-301. [Ch. 10, Sec. 30] Definitions.
ABANDONED BUILDING — Includes any building, shed, fence or other
man-made structure whether completed or not which:
UNSAFE BUILDING — Includes:
§ 10-302. [Ch. 10, Sec. 31] Reports of violations of article. [Ord. No.
2017-96]
The Director of Community Development or his authorized representative
shall make or cause to be made an inspection of any structure in response
Has not been occupied for a continuous period of one year. The period
during which a building has not been occupied includes but is not
limited to all time during which the building was vacant as a result
of a "No Occupancy" order issued by the Community Development
Department of the City of Bloomington or the McLean County Health
Department; and
A.
Fails to comply with Building, Housing, Electrical, Fire and Plumbing
Codes applicable to buildings used for permitted uses in the zone in
which the building is located. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
B.
Any building, shed, fence or other man-made structure which is
dangerous to public health because of its construction or condition, or
which may cause or aid in the spread of disease or cause injury to the
health of the occupants of it or of neighboring structures;
A.
Any building, shed, fence, or other man-made structure which, because
of faulty construction, age, lack of proper repair or any other cause, is
especially liable to fire and constitutes or creates a fire hazard;
B.
Any building, shed, fence or other man-made structure which, by
reason of faulty construction, lack of proper repair or any other cause,
is liable to cause injury or damage by a total or partial collapse;
C.
Any building, shed, fence or other man-made structure which, because
of its condition or because of lack of doors or windows is available to
persons who are not owners or lessees of such structure;
D.
Any building, shed, fence or other man-made structure which, by
reason of its condition, poses a threat to the physical integrity of
adjacent structures;
E.
Any building, shed, fence or other man-made structure which harbors
rats or other pests.
F.
§ 10-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-302
1:311
to any report of an unsafe or abandoned building and, if found to be unsafe
or abandoned, to cause all violations to be eliminated; or to refer the matter
to the Legal Department for action pursuant to this Division.
§ 10-303. [Ch. 10, Sec. 32] Application for demolition order.
Upon referral the Legal Department shall apply to the Circuit Court of
McLean County for an Order authorizing the repair or demolition of any
unsafe or abandoned building as defined in § 10-301. At least 15 days prior
to the filing of such suit, the Legal Department shall notify the owner or
owners of said property including lienholders of record, to put such building
in a safe condition or to demolish it. If no action is taken within said fifteenday
period, the Legal Department may apply to the Circuit Court for a
repair or demolition order. Where, upon diligent search, the identity or
whereabouts of the owner or owners of any such building including the
lienholders of record, is not ascertainable, notice mailed to the person or
persons in whose name such real estate was last assessed is sufficient
notice under this section.
§ 10-304. [Ch. 10, Sec. 33] Repair or demolition order.
The hearing on such application to the Circuit Court shall be expedited
by the Court and shall be given precedence over all other suits. Upon a
showing that a building or structure is unsafe or abandoned, the Court shall
grant relief as herein provided:
§ 10-305. [Ch. 10, Sec. 34] Responsibility for cost of repairing.
A. The Court shall authorize the City of Bloomington to demolish any
unsafe or abandoned building or building or building or structure upon
a showing that:
(1) The probable cost of repairs required to bring the building into
compliance with applicable Codes exceeds 50% of the appraised
value of the structure at the time the suit is filed; or
(2) The owner of the building or structure has failed to comply with a
court order entered pursuant to Subsection B of this section to
bring the building into compliance with applicable Codes; or
(3) The City presents a Consent to Demolish signed by the owner of
such building or structure.
B. The Court may order the owner of such building or structure to make
such repairs as are required to bring such building or structure into
compliance with applicable Codes and shall specify a date by which
such repairs must be completed;
C. Upon request by the City, the Court may authorize the City to make
such repairs as are required to bring such building or structure into
compliance with applicable Codes.
§ 10-302 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 10-305
1:312
§ 10-306. [Ch. 10, Sec. 35] Foreclosure.
The aforesaid lien may be enforced by proceedings to foreclose as in case
of mortgages or mechanics liens. Said foreclosure suit must be commenced
within three years after the date of filing Notice of Lien.
§ 10-307. through § 10-320. (Reserved)
A. The cost of such repair or demolition incurred by the City or by a
lienholder of record is recoverable from the owner or owners of such
real estate and is a lien thereon, which lien is superior to all prior
existing liens and encumbrances except taxes. Within 60 days after
repair or demolition, the City or the lienholder of record who incurred
the cost and expense of such demolition or repair of such building shall
file a Notice of Lien of cost and expense in the office of the Recorder of
Deeds of McLean County. The Notice shall consist of a sworn statement
containing:
(1) A description of the real estate sufficient for identification thereof;
(2) The amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred;
(3) The date or dates when the cost and expense was incurred by the
municipality or by the lienholder of record. For purposes of this
section, the cost of repair or demolition shall be deemed to have
been incurred by the City of Bloomington at the time the City of
Bloomington pays any person with whom it has contracted to do the
repair or demolition work, or the date of the last payment to said
person if there is more than one payment. Upon payment of the
cost and expense by the owner of or the persons interested in the
property after a Notice of Lien has been filed, the lien shall be
released by the City or the person in whose name the lien has been
filed and the release may be filed of record as in the case of filing a
Notice of Lien. Costs and expenses for which a lien may be filed
shall include any costs incurred in determining ownership or
interest of parties in the property, attorneys' fees, court costs, costs
incurred in proving the cost of improvements required on said
building or structure and all costs incidental to or required for
repair or demolition. [Ord. No. 1981-33]
§ 10-305 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-307
1:313

DIVISION 2
Authority of Director of Community Development
§ 10-321. [Ch. 10, Sec. 36] Deciding upon questions arising under
article. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
The Director of Community Development shall have full power to pass
upon any question arising under the provisions of this article subject to the
condition, modifications and limitations contained in this chapter.
§ 10-322. [Ch. 10, Sec. 37] Notice to remedy immediately unsafe
condition of buildings; failure to obey notice. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
If the Director of Community Development shall find in the City any building
or structure or part thereof in such an unsafe condition as to cause
imminent danger to life or property but that the immediate application of
precautionary measures may avert such danger, he shall have authority,
and it shall be his duty forthwith to notify in writing the owner, agent,
contractor or person in possession, charge or control of such buildings or
structures or part thereof to adopt and put into effect such precautionary
measures as may be necessary or advisable in order to place such building
or structure or part thereof in a safe condition. Such notice shall state
briefly the nature of the work required to be done, and the Director of
Community Development shall specify in such notice the time within which
the work required to be done shall be completed by the person notified,
upon taking into consideration the condition of such building or structure,
or part thereof, and the danger to life or property which may result from its
unsafe condition.
§ 10-323. [Ch. 10, Sec. 38] Authority of Director of Community
Development to compel compliance with chapter; action generally
upon failure to comply.
A. If it shall be found that any building or structure, or part thereof, is
being or shall have been, worked on in violation of any of the provisions
of this chapter, the Director of Community Development shall forthwith
notify the owner, agent, contractor, superintendent or architect
engaged in working on such building or structure, or part thereof, of
the fact that such building or structure, or part thereof, has been or is
being worked on contrary to the provisions of this chapter and shall
specify briefly in such notice in what manner the provisions of this
chapter have been violated and shall require the person so notified to
forthwith make such building or structure, or part thereof, conform
with the provisions of this chapter specifying in such notice the time
within which such work shall be done.
B. If at the expiration of the time set forth in such notice the person so
notified shall have refused, neglected, or failed to comply with the
request made in such notice and to have such building, structure, or
part thereof, concerning which notice was sent, changed so as to
§ 10-321 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-323
1:315
§ 10-324. [Ch. 10, Sec. 39] Maintenance, occupancy, etc., unlawful.
It shall be unlawful to maintain or permit the existence of any dangerous
building in the City, and it shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant or
person in custody of any dangerous building to permit the same to remain in
a dangerous condition or to occupy such building or permit it to be occupied
while it is or remains in a dangerous condition.
conform to and comply with the provisions of this chapter, the Director
of Community Development shall have the authority, and it shall be his
duty to request the Legal Department to institute proceedings in the
Circuit Court for an order compelling such person to conform to the
provisions of this chapter, or authorizing demolition of such building
or structure, or part thereof, as shall or may have been worked on in
violation of the provisions or any of the provisions of this chapter, and
the cost of such work shall be charged to and recovered from the owner
of such building or structure or from the person for whom such building
or structure is being worked on, in the manner provided in this article.
[Ord. No. 2017-96]
§ 10-323 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 10-324
1:316
ARTICLE IV
Additions, Completions, Modification, And Amendments To
International Building Code - 2012
§ 10-401. [Sec. 101.1 through Sec. 3302.2] Modifications. [Ord. No.
2014-07]
The numbered subsections of this section correspond to sections of the
International Building Code - 2012 or correspond to the Sections of said
Code which are added to, completed, modified, amended or deleted as
shown in the Sections herein.
SEC. 101.1 TITLE.
These regulations shall be known as the Building Code of the City of
Bloomington, hereinafter referred to as "this Code." [Ord. No. 1993-79]
SEC. 103.1 CREATION OF ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. [Ord. No.
2003-54]
The Department of Community Development of the City of Bloomington
(referred to herein as the Department of Building Inspection) is hereby
created and the executive official in charge thereof shall be known as the
Code Official and/or Building Official. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
SEC. 105.8 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT - OCCUPANCY PROHIBITED
STRUCTURE. [Ord. No. 2003-54]
No building permit shall be issued for any building which the City of
Bloomington Community Development Division has posted "No
Occupancy" (hereafter referred to as "posted building") except in
conformity with the provisions of this section. [Ord. No. 1998-51]
(a) Scope of Permit. A building permit for a posted building shall
cover all work needed to bring the building into conformity with
all relevant Codes of the City of Bloomington without regard to
whether a building permit would otherwise be requested for such
work. [Ord. No. 1998-51]
(b) Application for Permit. An application for a building permit for a
posted building shall include the following information:
(1) Sufficient plans and/or drawings showing how the building will be
brought into conformity with applicable Codes;
(2) A realistic cost estimate of material needed to bring the building
into compliance with applicable Codes and a cost estimate from a
licensed contractor if the contractor is to perform the work;
(3) A reasonable timetable for completion of repairs;
(4) Evidence of financial capacity and ability to make repairs approved
by the Community Development Department. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
(c) Processing Application. The Building Safety Division shall issue
a building permit for the posted house if, but only if, it has
determined:
§ 10-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-401
1:317
(1) The plans and drawings show repairs which, if made, would bring
the building into compliance with applicable Codes;
(2) The Community Development Division has determined that:
(a) Cost estimates reasonably reflect the likely cost of materials and
labor necessary to bring the building into compliance with
applicable Codes; and
(b) The applicant has purchased or has immediate access to sufficient
funds to pay for necessary materials and labor; and
(c) If the applicant intends to make the repairs himself, he possesses
the necessary skills to complete the job in conformity with
applicable Codes; and
(d) The timetable presented for completion of repairs is reasonable.
[Ord. No. 1998-51]
SEC. 105.9 REPAIR OR DEMOLISH LITIGATION - MORATORIUM
ON PERMITS. [Ord. No. 2003-54]
Whenever the City of Bloomington has issued fifteen-day notices to repair
or demolish pursuant to Section 11-31-1 et seq. of the Illinois Municipal
Code (Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 24, § 11-31-1 et seq.17) with respect to any property,
the Building Safety Division shall not issue any building permit for work
on any such property. In any case where the Community Development
Department has issued a building permit for work on such property, the
Director or his designee shall inspect the progress of work done under
the permit and if the work has not proceeded on schedule, the Director
or his designee shall suspend the building permit and order all work on
the property under the permit stopped. Permits suspended or not issued
under this section shall not be issued until the Community Development
Division removes the property from its list of buildings to be repaired
or demolished, or as may be provided in an order of Court. [Ord. No.
2017-96]
SEC. 105.10 DEMOLITION PERMITS. [Ord. No. 2011-48]
SEC. 105.10.1 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
The City Council finds that prolonged demolition operations can be unsafe,
unsightly and can have a deleterious effect on surrounding areas and
neighborhoods. The Council therefore finds that it is in the public interest
that ordinances be enacted providing for demolitions to be accomplished
in a safe and expeditious manner. To accomplish this goal, the City Council
finds it is necessary to require demolition permits establishing timelines for
completion of demolition operations and remedies in the event deadlines
are not met. [Ord. No. 2011-48]
SEC. 105.10.2 DEMOLITION PERMIT REQUIRED.
A demolition permit shall be required before any person proceeds with any
of the following work:
17.Editor's Note: See 65 ILCS 5/11-31-1 et seq.
§ 10-401 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 10-401
1:318
(a) Demolition or removal of 50% or more of the floor area of any
building (or buildings on the same lot); or
(b) Demolition or removal of 50% or more of the structural elements
or the walls or facade of a building (or buildings on the same lot).
[Ord. No. 2011-48]
SEC. 105.10.3 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; SCHEDULE FOR
DEMOLITION REQUIRED.
(1) Every application for a demolition permit shall contain a proposed
schedule for demolition indicating, at a minimum, the date upon
which demolition activities will commence and a date by which the
demolition will be completed. Said schedule shall be reviewed by
the Director of Community Development, who may approve, reject
or propose modifications thereto. The Director's determination
shall be in writing and, in the event the schedule is rejected or
modifications are proposed, shall state the reasons for the
determination. No permit for demolition shall issue without
containing a schedule for demolition approved by the Director
of Community Development and the signature of the demolition
contractor or an authorized representative agreeing to perform the
demolition in accordance with the dates stated in the schedule.
(2) In determining an appropriate schedule for demolition, the
following factors shall be considered:
(a) The composition and size of the structure or structures to be
demolished;
(b) The location of the demolition site;
(c) The presence of site contaminants, such as asbestos, lead-based
paint or stored underground fuel;
(d) Environmental considerations involved in the demolition or
disposal of wastes therefrom, including efforts made to recycle
materials;
(e) The effect demolition, or an extended period of demolition, will
have on the surrounding area.
(3) Extension of time. For good cause shown, and with consideration
of the factors specified in Paragraph 2 of this section, the Director
of Community Development may extend the demolition permit.
All permit extensions shall be in writing, shall state the reason
or reasons for the extension, shall specify a date by which the
demolition will be completed and the permit will expire, and shall
bear the signatures of the Director of Community Development and
the demolition contractor or an authorized representative thereof.
[Ord. No. 2017-96]
SEC. 105.10.4 DEMOLITION WORK BOND.
§ 10-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-401
1:319
(1) Requirement. Before any permit required by this article is issued
granting authority to demolish a building or structure, the
demolition contractor or the owner of the property shall file with
the Department of Community Development a copy of a
performance bond or an irrevocable letter of credit naming the
City of Bloomington as obligee, guaranteeing faithful and timely
performance of the terms and conditions of the permit, as well as
compliance with all applicable federal, state and local laws and
providing for the paying of the amount of said bond or irrevocable
letter of credit to the City of Bloomington in the event the
demolition is not completed within the time specified in the
demolition permit, or any extension of said permit allowed by the
Director of Community Development. Such bond or irrevocable
letter of credit shall be in an amount of not less than 100% of the
amount of the demolition contract.
(2) Permit. No permit shall be issued for any demolition work until such
bond or irrevocable letter of credit is filed. Upon the filing of such
bond or irrevocable letter of credit and certificate of insurance, as
provided in Section 110.5 of this chapter, the person engaged in
the work of demolition of such buildings and other structures shall
obtain permits for such demolition operations as are authorized
under the bond or irrevocable letter of credit. In case of an accident
or casualty in the progress of any demolition operations carried on
under any permit issued or the happening of any circumstances
which might, in the opinion of the Director of Community
Development, render such bond or irrevocable letter of credit
inadequate, the Director may in his discretion require such
additional bond or irrevocable letter of credit as he may deem
necessary to fully insure satisfactory completion of the project
before he allows the work to proceed or before any additional
permits are issued by him.
(3) Waiver. The foregoing requirement of bond may be waived at the
discretion of the Code Official/Building Official where:
(a) The estimated cost of demolition of a structure, including removal
of the debris and clearing the site, is less than $25,000;
(b) No extra hazardous conditions exist; and
(c) The demolition permit is being sought by the owner of the
structure.
(4) Certified or cashier's check. In lieu of the a bond or irrevocable
letter of credit required under this section, a certified or cashier's
check in the amount of the required bond or irrevocable letter of
credit payable to the City of Bloomington may be deposited with
the City at the time of application for the demolition permit. Such
amount of said check as is not required for satisfactory completion
of the project will be refunded to the applicant upon completion.
[Ord. No. 2017-96]
SEC. 105.10.5 UNFINISHED DEMOLITION; PENALTIES.
§ 10-401 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 10-401
1:320
(1) Whenever the Director of Community Development determines that
a demolition remains incomplete following expiration of a
demolition permit, or any extension thereof, he shall send notice
by first class mail to the demolition contractor, the owner of the
property and any surety for the performance of the demolition
that said permit has expired and that the demolition is incomplete.
Said notice shall briefly describe the parts of the demolition that
remain unfinished and shall give the contractor and the owner
of the property 21 days from the date of the notice to complete
the demolition, including all site cleanup. The notice shall further
advise that if the demolition remains unfinished 21 days after the
date of said notice, the City of Bloomington shall declare a failure
of performance and shall seek funds from any surety holding a
performance or irrevocable letter of credit.
(2) If the demolition remains uncompleted after 21 days from the date
of the notice required in Paragraph 1 of this section, the contractor
and/or property owner may be fined in the amount of no less
than $250 and no greater than $1,000 for each day the demolition
remains unfinished. After expiration of the period stated in said
notice, the Director of Community Development shall declare a
failure of performance and shall seek funds from any surety holding
a performance or irrevocable letter of credit necessary to complete
the demolition project. The Legal Department shall file an action in
Circuit Court seeking an Order requiring the owner of the property
to complete demolition or allowing the City to complete demolition
and place a lien upon the premises for the costs of said demolition
as provided by law, in the event said costs exceed those provided
by any surety or a performance bond or irrevocable letter of credit.
[Ord. No. 2017-96]
SEC. 105.11 INSURANCE. [Ord. No. 2003-54]
(a) Requirement. Before any permit required by this article is issued
granting authority to demolish a building or structure, the person
engaged in the work of demolishing the same shall file with the
Director of Community Development a certificate of liability
insurance with the City of Bloomington as a named insured showing
coverage is not less than the following amounts:
Bodily Injury:
Each
Occurrence
$500,000
Each Person $500,000
Property Damage:
Each
Occurrence
$100,000
Aggregate $100,000
§ 10-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-401
1:321
Where any structure to be demolished exceeds three stories in height,
the Code Official/Building Official may, in his discretion, require additional
insurance in an amount not to exceed double the amounts shown herein.
[Ord. No. 2017-96]
(b) Waiver. The foregoing insurance requirement may be waived at the
discretion of the Code Official/Building Official where:
(1) The estimated cost of demolition of a structure, including removal
of the debris and clearing the site, is less than $500;
(2) No extra hazardous conditions exist; and
(3) The demolition permit is being sought by the owner of the
structure. [Ord. No. 2000-41]
SEC. 108.5 RELATED FEES.
The payment of the fee for the construction, alteration, removal or
demolition and for all work done in connection with or concurrently with
the work contemplated or authorized by a building permit, shall not relieve
the applicant or holder of the permit from the payment of other fees that
may be prescribed by law or ordinance for water taps, sewer connections,
electrical permits, HVAC permits, plumbing permits, erection of signs
and display structures, marquees or other appurtenant structures or fees
of inspections, certificates of use and occupancy or other privileges or
requirements, both within and without the jurisdiction of the Department
of Community Development; including, but not limited to, sewer
connection charges imposed pursuant to Ordinance Nos. 547 and 548 of
the Bloomington/Normal Water Reclamation District. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
SEC. 108.6 REFUNDS.
In the case of a revocation of a permit or abandonment or discontinuance
of a work project, no fees shall be subject for refund. [Ord. No. 2003-54]
SEC. 108.7 FEE SCHEDULES.
(a) General. The fee for permits for work regulated by any Code
adopted by reference into Bloomington City Code Chapter 10 shall
be set forth in the Schedule of Fees. The fee for a permit shall be
based on the reasonable cost/value of the improvement, including
material and labor. If the Code Official/Building Official determines
that the applicant's estimate of the cost of the improvement is
unreasonable, the permit fee shall be established according to the
provisions of Subsection (c) of this section. One and Two-family
dwellings shall be calculated per Subsection (d) of this section. The
Code Official's/Building Official's determination of reasonability of
the applicant's estimate shall be appealable as provided in Sections
121.1 and 121.1.1 of this Code. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
(b) (Reserved)
§ 10-401 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 10-401
1:322
(c) Alternate Method of Establishing Cost of Improvement or
Valuation. Should the declared estimated value of improvements,
which is the basis of permit fee calculation, be deemed
unreasonable by the Code Official/Building Official, the most recent
Building Valuation Data Report of the International Code Council
Inc., or equal will be used in establishing the correct valuation.
[Ord. No. 2003-54]
NOTE:
(1) The applicable Schedule of Fees is applicable to each building on a
lot considered separately as independent fire areas. For purposes
of this section, any structure under one roof shall be considered one
building. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
(2) The Director of Community Development may waive or adjust the
amount of the fee for any permit required by this chapter. [Ord.
No. 2017-96]
(d) Fees for new one and two family homes shall be calculated on the
gross area of the dwelling based on the Schedule of Fees. [Ord.
No. 2018-89]
(e) Definitions. For clarity, the following definitions and guidelines are
herein incorporated: [Ord. No. 2003-54]
(1) Estimated cost/value include all cost of labor and material given
a fair market value. A contractor-owner contract or letter of
acceptance, certified architect-engineer estimate or accepted bid,
or equivalent shall be acceptable as estimated cost adjusted only as
allowed by other provisions of this section. [Ord. No. 1998-51]
(2) Allowed exclusions from the estimated cost for fee consideration
are the costs of the following:
a. Painting;
b. Nonstructural embellishments;
c. Permanent cabinetry or shelving not affecting area, exiting or fire
rating requirements of the Code;
d. Except in residential occupancy/use, fixtures not basic to the
occupancy or use of the building/structure, except lighting fixtures;
e. Fixtures, devices, equipment, and appliances covered by a separate
permit;
f. Landscaping not required by statute. [Ord. No. 1992-69]
(3) For the purposes of clarification, the following costs are included in
the estimated cost:
a. Excavation work for foundations and subgrade structures;
b. Rough grading for drainage;
c. Dust proofing of parking lots/spaces including drainage facilities
as approved and endorsed to the department by the Public Works
Department;
§ 10-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-401
1:323
d. Work required by zoning, rezoning, or annexation conditions under
the department's supervisory jurisdiction. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
(4) The estimated cost for permit and fee considerations of temporary
buildings/structures shall be the labor cost of assembling,
disassembling, and disposal or moving without affecting regular
street traffic. [Ord. No. 1985-107]
(f) Fee Surcharge. Any work undertaken without a permit shall be
subject to a surcharge of 100% of the regular charge or $50,
whichever is greater, upon issuance of a valid permit. This shall
be construed as a supplemental penalty accruing regardless of any
imposition provided for in Section 116.4 of this Code. [Ord. No.
2003-54]
(g) A fee will be required for the review of construction documents/
plans, other than 1 and 2 family dwellings, for work regulated
by any code adopted or by referenced by Bloomington City Code
Chapter 10. The fee for this review shall be of the reasonable value/
cost of each separate project shall be as set forth in the Schedule
of Fees. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
If the Code Official/Building Official determines that the applicant's
estimate of the value/cost for the project is unreasonable, the value of the
project shall be as established according to the provisions of Subsection (c)
of this section. Appeals shall be provided for in Sections 121.1 and 121.1.1
of this Code. [Ord. No. 2011-58]
SEC. 108.8 MOVING OF BUILDINGS. [Ord. No. 2003-54]
A permit to move a building or structure shall be issued by the Code
Official/Building Official only after clearances are obtained from the Police
Department and the Public Works Department of the City, as required
by Bloomington City Code Chapter 38, Article VII. Issuance of a moving
permit does not relieve the permittee from any obligation of complying
with all other City Codes insofar as they may be applicable. The moving
permit shall not be construed as a building permit. The moving permit fee
shall be calculated on the estimated cost of moving including loading and/
or unloading within the City limits. If unloading is related to a building
permit, the same will be excluded from the estimated moving cost. The fee
to be charged for such permit shall be as set forth in the Schedule of Fees.
[Ord. No. 2018-93]
SEC. 108.9 DEMOLITION FEES. [Ord. No. 2003-54]
The fee for a demolition permit shall be based on the estimated cost
of demolition per building/structure including work on filling, grading,
cleaning or safeguarding of the site. A permit shall be issued only after
clearance from the utility companies has been obtained. The fee scales as
set forth in the Schedule of Fees shall apply for each building/structure to
be demolished. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
SEC. 108.11 MECHANICAL WORK (HVAC) AND FEES.
§ 10-401 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 10-401
1:324
The permit fee for all work covered by provisions of the International
Mechanical Code and/or International Fuel Gas Code of the City shall be
calculated based on estimated cost/value and nature of the work proposed.
"Estimated Costs" shall be calculated by totaling the cost/value of all
services, labor, materials, equipment and any other appliances or devices
entering into and necessary to the execution and completion of the
installation or the work in an amount as set forth in the Schedule of Fees.
[Ord. No. 2018-89]
COMMERCIAL KITCHEN HOODS FIRE SUPPRESSION SYSTEM
FEE.
The fee for a permit for commercial kitchen hoods fire suppression systems
shall be based on the reasonable cost/value of the installation, including
material and labor, in an amount as set forth in the Schedule of Fees. [Ord.
No. 2018-89]
SEC. 108.13 ELECTRICAL PERMIT FEES. [Ord. No. 2003-54]
The electrical permit fees are those provided for in Bloomington City Code
Chapter 15. [Ord. No. 1993-79]
SEC. 108.14 PLUMBING PERMIT FEES. [Ord. No. 2003-54]
The plumbing permit fees are those provided for in Bloomington City Code
Chapter 34. [Ord. No. 1993-79]
SEC. 108.15 ROOFING PERMITS. [Ord. No. 2003-54]
A permit for roofing work done by a roofing contractor as defined in
the Illinois Roofing Industry Licensing Act18 shall be issued by the Code
Official/Building Official upon ascertaining that the contractor to do the
work is duly and currently certified as a roofing contractor by the State of
Illinois. The permit fee shall be based on the cost of the work/improvement
using the fee schedule in Section 112.3.1. [Ord. No. 2000-41]
SEC. 108.16 AMUSEMENT DEVICE PERMITS. [Ord. No. 2003-54]
Amusement devices, i.e. carnival rides, shall be inspected. A satisfactory
compliance with safety regulations shall allow a permit to be issued for
their operation. The fee for said permit shall be $50 per location. [Ord. No.
1998-51]
SEC. 108.17 REINSPECTION FEE. [Ord. No. 2003-54]
If a contractor/owner/agent notifies the City that a project is ready for final
inspection and, upon inspection the City finds the project not complete,
then the City shall charge a fee of $15 per inspector or 50% of the permit
fee, whichever is greater, for each reinspection required. The fee shall be
paid prior to reinspection. [Ord. No. 1998-51]
SEC. 108.20 CONTRACTOR REGISTRATION, FEES, LIABILITY
INSURANCE AND RESPONSIBILITY. [Ord. No. 2008-45]
18.Editor's Note: See 225 ILCS 335/1 et seq.
§ 10-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-401
1:325
1. Purpose: The section is intended safeguard the public safety, health
and general welfare of the citizens by establishing minimum
standards for contractor registration, insurance and performance.
[Ord. No. 2008-45]
2. Definitions: Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words
and terms shall, for the purposes of this section, be interpreted as
herein defined:
(a) "Construction" means any constructing, altering, reconstructing,
repairing, rehabilitating, refinishing, refurbishing, remodeling,
remediation, renovating, custom fabricating, maintenance,
improving, wrecking, demolishing, and adding to or subtracting
from any building, structure, parking facility, or any other structure
to such an extent a permit is required to be issued by the
Department of Community Development. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
(b) "Construction Documents" - Written, graphic and pictorial
documents prepared or assembled for describing the design,
location and physical characteristics of the elements of a project
necessary for obtaining a building permit. Construction documents
shall be drawn to an appropriate scale. [Ord. No. 2008-45]
(c) "Contractor" means any sole proprietor, partnership, firm,
corporation, Limited Liability Company, association or other legal
entity permitted by law to do business within the State of Illinois
who engages in construction as defined herein. [Ord. No.
2008-45]
3. Certificate of Registration. Every person who shall desire to
practice the business of a Contractor, shall first obtain a Certificate
of Registration to do so as provided by this chapter. This
registration is required for any contractor doing work in the City
of Bloomington for which a building permit is required. [Ord. No.
2008-45]
(a) The registration fee and annual renewal shall be in an amount as
set forth in the Schedule of Fees. All registrations and renewals of
the same shall expire on the 31st day of December of each year,
and a renewal shall be obtained on or before January 31st of the
following year. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
(b) Any Certificate of Registration forfeited for nonpayment of the
renewal fee may be reinstated upon the payment of the annual
renewal fee, in an amount as set forth in the Schedule of Fees, plus
$25. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
§ 10-401 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 10-401
1:326
(c) Liability Insurance Required of Registrant. Contractor registrants
shall provide a satisfactory certificate of liability insurance against
any form of liability to a minimum amount of $100,000 for property
damage and $300,000 for personal injury. The insurance shall be
maintained in full force and effect during the term of the
registration and said insurance policy, or certificate of insurance,
shall provide that the City of Bloomington be notified of any
cancellation or termination of the insurance 10 days prior to the
date of cancellation or termination. Contractor registrants are
responsible for notifying the City of said cancellation or termination
as required herein and may be sanctioned, as provided in
Paragraph 4(d) this section, and as provided elsewhere in the
Bloomington City Code, for, failure to provide said notification.
[Ord. No. 2008-45]
(d) An owner/occupant of a single-family residence shall be permitted,
without registration, to obtain a permit to perform construction at
or on said residence, including accessories thereto; however said
owner/occupant is subject to all other provisions of this Code. [Ord.
No. 2008-45]
(e) Construction by a building owner may be undertaken with the
appropriate permits, provided the work does not include work
whose performance requires a license, such as plumbing, electrical,
and HVAC. [Ord. No. 2008-45]
4. Contractor Responsibility: To ensure construction is meeting the
minimum standards set forth in this chapter and other City, State
or Federal regulations, persons conducting business as a contractor
shall be responsible for the following:
(a) Registration: Contractors shall be responsible for maintaining their
registration and associated liability insurance current and up to
date. [Ord. No. 2008-45]
(b) Construction Documents: Contractors shall be responsible for
providing the appropriate construction documents as needed to
obtain required permits. [Ord. No. 2008-45]
(c) Permits: Contractors shall be responsible for obtaining appropriate
permits prior to the start of any construction work. [Ord. No.
2008-45]
(d) Violations: Contractors who fail to comply with the requirements of
this section shall be subject to fines of not less than $250 nor more
than $1000, irrespective of charges or fines that may be included
in Sections 108.7(f) or 113.4 of this Code. Each day that a violation
continues shall be deemed a separate violation and shall subject the
violator to an additional penalty within the parameters of the fines
set forth in the preceding sentence. [Ord. No. 2008-45]
SEC. 108.21 MANUFACTURED HOME PARK FEES.
§ 10-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-401
1:327
As per § 43-108G of Chapter 43, Bloomington City Code, the Schedule
of Fees will be followed for required permits in regards to manufactured
homes in manufactured home parks. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
SEC. 108.22 CONSTRUCTION TRAILER TIE-DOWN FEE. [Ord. No.
2003-54]
Any time a construction trailer is located on a construction site, a tiedown
permit fee of $30 will be charged the general contractor and/or
subcontractor meeting the tie-down guidelines as identified in Chapter 43.
[Ord. No. 2011-58]
SEC. 108.23 FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS (SPRINKLERS)
PERMITS AND FEES.
The permit fee for all fire protection work (sprinkler systems) shall be
on the reasonable cost/value of the work to be performed or the system
components based on the Schedule of Fees. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
SEC. 108.24 ACCOUNTING. [Ord. No. 2003-54]
The Code Official/Building Official shall keep an accurate account of all
fees collected; and such collected fees shall be deposited regularly in the
jurisdiction treasury or otherwise disposed of as required by law. [Ord. No.
2000-41]
SEC. 112.4 FEE FOR APPEALS.
Any petition for a variance/interpretation from the Construction Board
of Appeals shall be filed with the Community Development Department,
accompanied by a fee in an amount as set forth in the Schedule of Fees
payable to the City of Bloomington. Each extra petition in a multiple
petition shall be charged a fee in an amount as set forth in the Schedule
of Fees. Any variance involved with Property Maintenance Code will be
charged an amount as set forth in the Schedule of Fees per initial variance
with an amount as set forth in the Schedule of Fees charged for each
additional variance. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
Any application for a variance/interpretation to this Code provided by the
City Council, Zoning Board of Appeals, Construction Board of Appeals,
Building Code Review Board, Plumbing Board of Appeals, Electrical
Commission, HVAC Board, City staff or Regional Planning Commission
staff shall be exempted from the requirements of this section. [Ord. No.
2003-54]
SEC. 113.4 VIOLATION PENALTIES. [Ord. No. 2003-54]
Any person who shall violate a provision of the Code or shall fail to comply
with any of the requirements therefor or who shall erect, construct, alter,
add to, or repair a building or structure in violation of an approved plan
or directive of the Code Official, or of a permit or certificate under the
provisions of this Code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a
fine of not more than $500 or by imprisonment not exceeding six months,
or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues
shall be deemed a separate offense. [Ord. No. 1998-51]
SEC. 114.3 UNLAWFUL CONTINUANCE. [Ord. No. 2003-54]
§ 10-401 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 10-401
1:328
Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure or
building after having been served with a stop order, except such work as
he is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe conditions, shall
be liable to a fine of not less than $100 or more than $500. [Ord. No.
2007-27]
SEC. 1608.2.1 SNOW LOADS.
The basic ground snow loads to be assumed in the design of buildings or
other structures shall be 30 pounds per square foot. [Ord. No. 2000-41]
SEC. 1612.3 ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOOD HAZARD AREAS.
Insert the following information into the second sentence:
The Flood Insurance Study for the "City of Bloomington," dated "February
9, 2001," as amended or revised with the ....."
Remainder of section unchanged. [Ord. No. 2003-54]
SEC. 1809.5 FROST PROTECTION.
Modify 1 as follows:
1. Extending below the frost line of 40 inches; [Ord. No. 2014-07]
SEC. 2901.1 SCOPE - PLUMBING.
The design and installation of plumbing systems, including sanitary and
storm drainage, sanitary facilities, water supplies and stormwater and
sewage disposal in buildings shall comply with the requirements of this
article and the Illinois State Plumbing Code currently adopted by the City.
[Ord. No. 1998-51]
SEC. 3302.2 WASTE MATERIALS.
Waste materials shall be removed in a manner which prevents injury
or damage to persons, adjoining properties, and public rights-of-way. All
construction debris shall be placed in an approved container, and provided
with a cover, which shall be closed except when actively being filled. Any
person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be fined not less
than $100 nor more than $500 for each offense. [Ord. No. 2004-62]
§ 10-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-401
1:329

ARTICLE V
Additions, Completions, Modifications, Amendments To The
International Residential Code For One- And Two-Family Dwellings -
2012 Edition
§ 10-501. [Sec. R 101.1 through Sec. R313.3] Modifications. [Ord.
No. 2014-07]
The numbered subsections of this section correspond to sections of the
International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings - 2012
Edition which are completed, modified, amended or deleted thereby.
SEC. R101.1 TITLE.
These provisions shall be known as the Residential Code for One- and Two-
Family Dwellings of the City of Bloomington, shall be cited as such and
shall be referred to herein as "this Code." [Ord. No. 2014-07]
TABLE R301.2(1)
Insert the following into the Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria Table
R 301.2(1)
Ground snow load (pounds per square foot) = 30
Wind Design speed (mph) = 90 mph
Wind Design Topographical Effects - No
Seismic Design Category = B
Subject to damage from:
Weathering = Severe
Frost line depth = minimum depth of 40 inches below finish grade
Termite = Moderate to Heavy
Winter design temp. = -4° F.
Ice shield under-layment required = Yes
Flood Hazards = The Flood Insurance Study for the "City of
Bloomington," dated "February 9, 2001," as amended or revised.
Air Freezing Index = 1,500
Mean Annual Temp. = 52 [Ord. No. 2014-07]
Part VII - PLUMBING. Chapters 25 through 32
The design and installation of plumbing systems, including sanitary and
storm drainage, sanitary facilities, water supplies and stormwater and
sewage disposal in buildings shall comply with the requirements of the
Illinois State Plumbing Code currently adopted by the City.
SEC. R105.2 WORK EXEMPT FROM PERMIT.
Modify the section by deleting Subsections 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 10. [Ord. No.
2014-07]
SEC. R112 BOARD OF APPEALS.
§ 10-501 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-501
1:331
Modify by deleting the section in its entirety. [Ord. No. 2014-07]
SEC. R313 AUTOMATIC FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS.
Modify by deleting the section in its entirety. [Ord. No. 2014-07]
SEC. R313.1 TOWNHOUSE AUTOMATIC FIRE SPRINKLER
SYSTEMS.
Modify by deleting the section in its entirety. [Ord. No. 2014-07]
SEC. R313.1.1 DESIGN AND INSTALLATION.
Modify by deleting the section in its entirety. [Ord. No. 2014-07]
SEC. R313.2 ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY DWELLINGS AUTOMATIC
FIRE SYSTEMS.
Modify by deleting the section in its entirety. [Ord. No. 2014-07]
SEC. R313.2.1 DESIGN AND INSTALLATION.
Modify the language to read as follows:
When provided, automatic residential fire sprinkler systems shall be
designed and installed in accordance with Section P2904 or NFPA 13D/
2010. [Ord. No. 2014-07]
SEC. R313.3 AUTOMATIC FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS;
MANDATORY OFFER REQUIRED.
A contractor or builder of a one- or two-family dwelling subject to the
International Residential Code shall:
(a) Offer to the prospective purchaser or buyer the option to install, at
the buyer's expense, an automatic fire sprinkler system in the
building or dwelling unit designed and installed in accordance with
the provisions of Section R313.2.1 (relating to design and installation
of automatic fire sprinkler systems) of the International Residential
Code (2012 edition). [Ord. No. 2014-07]
(b) Provide the prospective purchaser or buyer with information
explaining the costs and benefits of installing and maintaining an
automatic fire sprinkler system in the building or dwelling unit. The
information provided shall include the following publications from
the Home Fire Sprinkler Coalition:
(i) Protect What You Value Most
(ii)The Future of Fire Safety Here Today
(iii)Now That You're Living With Sprinklers
§ 10-501 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 10-501
1:332
(c) Before issuance of a building permit for any one- or two-family
residence, the contractor/applicant shall provide to the Community
Development Department a document signed by both the contractor
and prospective purchaser or buyer (or in the case of one or twofamily
dwellings built prior to having an identified buyer (commonly
known as "spec homes"), signed by the contractor in place of the
prospective purchaser or buyer) stating that the contractor has
provided to the prospective purchaser or buyer the information
required by Section 1(b) of this ordinance. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
Said document shall be in the following form:
Mandatory Offer for Residential Fire Protection
Property Address:
Contractor:
Address:
Phone:
Prospective Purchaser/Buyer:
Address: Phone:
We, the undersigned, confirm and agree that Contractor has provided
Buyer with information regarding the installation of a residential fire
protection system. Buyer has been provided with the following
publications:
Protect What You Value Most
The Future of Fire Safety Here Today
Now That You're Living with Sprinklers
Contractor offers to install a fire protection system in accordance with
NFPA 13D and applicable City of Bloomington ordinances at the subject
property for the amount of $__________.
Buyer has been informed that one- or two-family homes not provided with
a fire protection system shall have the floors protected as required by
Chapter 10, Article V, Section R313.3(2) of the Bloomington City Code.
Buyer hereby _____ accepts _____ declines the offer to install a residential
fire suppression system at the subject property.
I hereby state that the information contained in this form is true and
correct.
Date: Date:
Buyer Contractor
Received by:
____________________
Date: _____
Community Development Department
§ 10-501 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-501
1:333

ARTICLE VI
(Reserved)
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-501
1:335

ARTICLE VII
Additions, Completions, Modifications, Amendment To International
Mechanical Code - 2012
§ 10-701. [Sec. 101.1 through Sec. M-130.5] Modifications. [Ord.
No. 2014-07]
The numbered subsections of this section represent additions to the
International Mechanical Code 2012 or correspond to Sections of said Code
which are completed, modified, amended or deleted thereby.
SEC. 101.1 TITLE.
These regulations shall be known as the Mechanical Code of the City of
Bloomington hereinafter referred to as the Mechanical Code or "this Code."
[Ord. No. 1998-51]
SEC. 106.5.2 FEE SCHEDULE.
The fees for all mechanical work shall be as shown in Article IV, Section
108.11. [Ord. No. 2003-54]
SEC. 106.5.3 FEE REFUNDS.
The Building Official is authorized to establish a refund policy. In the case
of a revocation of a permit or abandonment or discontinuance of a work
project, no fees shall be subject for refund. [Ord. No. 2003-54]
SEC. 108.4 VIOLATION PENALTIES.
Any person who shall violate a provision of this Code or shall fail to
comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install,
construct, alter or repair mechanical equipment or systems in violation
of the approved construction documents or directive of the Code Official/
Building Official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of
this Code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more
than $500 or by imprisonment not exceeding six months, or both such fine
and imprisonment. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day
that a violation continues. [Ord. No. 2003-54]
SEC. 108.5 STOP-WORK ORDERS.
Upon notice from the Code Official/Building Official that mechanical work
is being done contrary to the provisions of this Code or in a dangerous or
unsafe manner, such work shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in
writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to the owner's
agent, or to the person doing the work. The notice shall state the conditions
under which work is authorized to resume. Where an emergency exists,
the Code Official/Building Official shall not be required to give a written
notice prior to stopping the work. Any person who shall continue any work
on the system after having been served with a stop-work order, except such
work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe
condition, shall be liable to a fine not less than $100 or more than $500.
[Ord. No. 2003-54]
SEC. M-130.0 LICENSING OF MECHANICAL CONTRACTORS.
§ 10-701 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-701
1:337
SEC. M-130.1 MECHANICAL WORK; LICENSE REQUIRED.
It shall be illegal for any person to do work pertaining to any heating,
cooling, ventilating, refrigeration systems, or gas piping systems without
being a licensed mechanical contractor.
A building-occupant of a single-family residence can install or do
mechanical work in his own house, including accessories of the same
without a license but is subject to all other provisions of this Code.
To qualify as a builder-occupant, the single-family residence to be worked
on must be resided in by the builder-occupant for a period of at least
one year from the date an occupancy certificate is issued and/or a final
inspection is completed. [Ord. No. 2014-07]
SEC. M-130.2 MECHANICAL BUSINESS; LICENSE REQUIRED.
(a) Except as provided in Subsection (b) below, every person who
shall desire to practice the business of a mechanical contractor
shall first obtain a license to do so as provided by this chapter.
[Ord. No. 2014-07]
(b) All manufacturing and commercial establishments that have a
qualified maintenance staff to do the mechanical work must secure
a premises-only license to do mechanical work on their own
premises. The application must be filed by the authorized
representative of such manufacturing or commercial
establishment, and the license must be in the company, the firm,
limited liability company or corporation's name. No bond is
required in connection with such premises-only license. Permits
must be taken out on all installations and major repairs, and
inspection of the same requested upon completion. [Ord. No.
2013-68]
SEC. M-130.3 EXAMINATION PREREQUISITE TO ISSUANCE.
Every applicant for any license required by this Mechanical Code must
pass the N29 National Standard Master Mechanical examination,
proctored by the International Code Council's (ICC) Contractor/Trades
examination program. The exam shall be based on the most recent editions
of the codes available. The cost of the exam shall be responsibility of the
applicant.
(a) Application for License. Application for a license as a mechanical
contractor, shall be made to the Community Development
Department upon forms provided by the department. The
application shall state the type of contracting in which the
applicant is engaged; that he, or the partnership of which he is a
member or a corporation of which he is an officer or
representative, is a party directly interested in the license; if a
nonresident, the address of his place of business; and if the
application is for a license to be issued in the name of the
partnership or corporation, the correct name thereof, the location
of its principal office, and the length of time such partnership or
corporation has been in existence.
§ 10-701 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 10-701
1:338
(b) Applicant's Qualifications. An applicant for a license as a
mechanical contractor as defined in this Mechanical Code shall be
at least 21 years of age and shall have had at least four years'
practical experience in the field or class in which a license is
desired, or shall have satisfactorily completed a course in the
subject for which the license is sought given by a recognized
school, plus one year practical experience in the same, or shall be
a registered professional engineer. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
SEC. M-130.4 BONDS, EXAMINATION, INSURANCE AND LICENSE
FEES.
(a) Bond Required of Applicant.
(1) Any person applying for a new or renewed license required by this
Mechanical Code shall execute and deliver to the City Clerk a
bond in the penal sum of $2,000 payable to the City or a
continuation certificate for the same. Such bond shall be made for
the use and benefit of the owner of, or any party in interest in the
property where the Licensee furnishes any material furnished in
violation of the requirements of any law of the State or Code of the
City governing such work. The Secretary of the Board shall report
to the Board as to the existence and sufficiency of such bond. The
bond will be used to correct or complete a project in accordance to
the laws and Codes of the City when the contractor fails or is
unable to do the same upon written notice from the City. [Ord.
No. 1993-79]
(2) The requirements of Subsection (1) above shall not preclude the
Building Official from requiring, at his discretion, additional bond
commensurate with the size of a project if he deems it necessary.
(b) Renewals; Expiration of License. Any person holding a valid
license as a Mechanical Contractor from the City of Bloomington
on the effective date of this Ordinance shall have the right, without
further examination, to obtain a License from the Building Board
of Appeals and a license each year thereafter from the City Clerk
upon the payment to the City Clerk of a license fee, certificate of
liability insurance, and the execution of a bond as required by this
chapter.
The license fee for an annual renewal of a license shall be $75. All licenses
and renewals of the same shall expire on the 31st day of December of each
year, and a renewal shall be obtained on or before January 31st of the
following year.
Any license forfeited for nonpayment of the renewal fee may be reinstated
upon the payment of the annual renewal fee, plus $25 for each month,
or portion of a month that such delinquency has continued; provided,
however, that after the same has been delinquent and not in force on
March 1st of any year, then the same shall be null and void and shall not be
renewed. [Ord. No. 2013-68]
§ 10-701 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-701
1:339
(c) Licenses for Partnerships, Limited Liability Companies, and
Corporations. No partnership, limited liability company, or
corporation shall practice or engage in the business of a
Contractor, unless a member of the partnership, or an officer or
duly authorized representative of such corporation shall obtain a
license to be issued to him in behalf of and for the benefit of such
partnership, limited liability company, or corporation, which shall
be so named in such license, the license shall be issued only if
such member of such firm, or officer or representative of such
corporation, is personally qualified and complies with all of the
provisions of this chapter. [Ord. No. 2013-68]
(d) Reciprocal Provisions. Any person, firm, limited liability company,
or corporation who is registered or licensed for the current year in
any jurisdiction where the requirements of registration or license
were at the date of such registration or license substantially equal
to the requirements in force in this City and such jurisdiction
extends a similar privilege to the persons registered and licensed
under this Mechanical Code, they shall not be required to take an
examination, but shall pay a registration fee of $75 as provided in
this chapter, to engage in mechanical contracting for such year in
this City, and shall file a copy of his registration or license with the
Secretary of the Building Board of Appeals. [Ord. No. 2013-68]
(e) Liability Insurance Required of Applicant. A satisfactory certificate
of liability insurance against any form of liability with a minimum
of $100,000 for property damage and $300,000 for personal injury.
The insurance shall be maintained in full force and effect during
the term of the registration and said insurance or certificate
provide that the City be notified of any cancellation of the
insurance 10 days prior to the date of cancellation. [Ord. No.
2014-07]
SEC. M-130.5 LICENSE SUSPENSION, REVOCATION AND/OR
MONETARY PENALTY.
(a) Following a hearing as set forth in § 10-212 of this chapter, the
Board may suspend, revoke, or fine a licensee for any of the
following reasons:
(1) Failure to obtain a permit as required under this chapter or any
other provision of the Bloomington City Code, State or Federal
law;
(2) Taking out or obtaining a permit required by this chapter for work
to be done by another person, firm or other legal entity not
employed or otherwise under the supervision and control of the
permitted;
(3) Abandonment without reasonable cause of any project or
operation engaged in or undertaken by the licensee as a
contractor as defined in this chapter;
(4) Conviction of fraud in the furnishing of mechanical work;
§ 10-701 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 10-701
1:340
(5) Deliberate disregard of the Mechanical Code, the safety or the
labor laws of the State or any subdivision thereof;
(6) The refusal to correct work which has been installed improperly
when directed to do so by the Director of Community Development
or the Director's designee;
(7) Repeated failure to properly perform mechanical work; or
(8) Failure to pay any fine when due owed to the City of Bloomington
assessed by the Building Board of Appeals, McLean County Circuit
Court or other administrative or judicial authority. [Ord. No.
2017-96]
(b) The Building Board of Appeals may fine a licensee not less than
$50 nor more than $500 for doing any prohibited act or failing to
do any required or specified act referred to herein. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed for each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues. Each fine shall be paid on or
before the payment date set by the Board of Appeals, court or
administrative agency and, if an order does not specify a payment
date, each fine shall be due and payable in full on or before the
fourteenth-day following the date the order is entered by the
Board, court or agency. In the event any fine is not so paid, it shall
be a debt to the City of Bloomington which shall be collectible in
the small claims court or in any other court in which debts to the
City may be sued for and collected. [Ord. No. 2013-68]
(c) The term "licensee" and/or "person" shall mean any person,
partnership, limited liability company, corporation or other legal
entity as the context of applying the facts of a particular case to
these provisions indicates is proper. Every act or omission of any
nature constituting a violation of any of the provisions of this act
by, for or on behalf of any licensee or any director, manager, agent,
or employee of any licensee shall be deemed to be the act of such
licensee, and shall be punishable in the same manner as if such
acts or omission had been done, or not done by the licensee
personally. [Ord. No. 2013-68]
§ 10-701 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-701
1:341

ARTICLE VIII
Additions, Completions, Modifications, Amendments To
International Fuel Gas Code - 2009
§ 10-801. [Sec. 101.1 through 108.5] Modifications. [Ord. No.
2011-58]
The numbered subsections of this section represent additions to the
International Fuel Gas Code 2009 or correspond to Sections of said Code
which are completed, modified, amended or deleted thereby.
SEC. 101.1 TITLE.
These regulations shall be known as the Fuel Gas Code of the City of
Bloomington hereinafter referred to as the Fuel Gas Code or "this Code."
[Ord. No. 2003-54]
SEC. 106.5.2 FEE SCHEDULE.
The fees for all work shall be as shown in Article IV, Section 112.3.5. [Ord.
No. 2003-54]
SEC. 106.5.3 FEE REFUNDS.
See Article VII, Section 106.5.3. [Ord. No. 2003-54]
SEC. 108.4 VIOLATION PENALTIES.
Any person who shall violate a provision of this Code or shall fail to comply
with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, construct,
alter or repair work or systems in violation of the approved construction
documents or directive of the Code Official/Building Official, or of a permit
or certificate issued under the provisions of this Code shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than $100 and not more than
$500. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served
shall be deemed a separate offense. [Ord. No. 2007-27]
SEC. 108.5 STOP-WORK ORDERS.
Upon notice from the Code Official/Building Official that work is being
done contrary to the provisions of this Code or in a dangerous or unsafe
manner, such work shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing
and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to the owner's agent,
or to the person doing the work. The notice shall state the conditions
under which work is authorized to resume. Where an emergency exists,
the Code Official/Building Official shall not be required to give a written
notice prior to stopping the work. Any person who shall continue any work
on the system after having been served with a stop-work order, except such
work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe
condition, shall be liable to a fine not less than $100 or more than $500.
[Ord. No. 2003-54]
§ 10-801 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-801
1:343

ARTICLE IX
Additions, Completions, Modifications, Amendments To
Intern[aOtriodn. aNlo F. i2re0 1C1o-d5e8 ]- 2009
§ 10-901. [Sec. 101.1 through Sec. 3406.2.4.4] Modifications.
SEC. 101.1 TITLE.
These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of the City of
Bloomington, hereinafter referred to as "this Code." [Ord. No. 2003-54]
SEC. 109.3 VIOLATION PENALTIES.
Any person who shall violate a provision of this the Code or shall fails
to comply with any of the requirements therefor or who shall erects,
constructs, alters, add to, or repairs a building or structure in violation
of an approved construction documents/plans or directive of the Code
Official/Building Official, or of a permit or certificate under the provisions
of this Code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not
less than $100 and not more than $500. Each day that a violation continues
shall be deemed a separate offense. [Ord. No. 2007-27]
SEC. 111.4 FAILURE TO COMPLY.
Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure or
building after having been served with a stop order, except such work as
he is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe conditions, shall
be liable to a fine of not less than $100 or more than $500. [Ord. No.
2007-27]
SEC. 3204.3.1.1 LOCATION.
Insert the following into the last sentence of Section 3204.3.1.1 to read as
follows:
..." in which such storage is prohibited, except as permitted by applicable
zoning and hazardous material codes and ordinances." [Ord. No.
2003-54]
SEC. 3404.2.9.5.1 LOCATIONS WHERE ABOVE-GROUND TANKS
ARE PROHIBITED.
Insert the following into the last sentence of Section 3404.2.9.5.1 to read
as follows:
..."in which such storage is prohibited, except as permitted by applicable
zoning and hazardous material codes and ordinances." [Ord. No.
2003-54]
SEC. 3406.2.4.4 LOCATIONS WHERE ABOVE-GROUND TANKS ARE
PROHIBITED.
Insert the following into the last sentence of Section 3406.2.4.4 to read as
follows:
..." in which such storage is prohibited, except as permitted by applicable
zoning and hazardous material codes and ordinances." [Ord. No.
2003-54]
§ 10-901 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-901
1:345
SEC. 3804.2 MAXIMUM CAPACITY WITHIN ESTABLISHED LIMITS.
Within the limits established by law restricting the storage of liquefied
petroleum gas for the protection of heavily populated or congested areas,
the aggregate capacity of any one installation shall not exceed a water
capacity of 2,000 gallons (7,570 L). [Ord. No. 2007-27]
§ 10-901 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 10-901
1:346
ARTICLE X
Additions, Completions, Modifications, Amendments To
Internationa[l OErxdis. tNinog. 2B0u1i1ld-5in8g] Code - 2009
§ 10-1001. [Sec. 101.1 through 1201.2] Modifications.
The following sections are hereby revised:
SEC. 101.1 TITLE.
These regulations shall be known as the Existing Building Code of the City
of Bloomington, hereinafter referred to as "this code." [Ord. No. 2003-54]
SEC. 1301.2 APPLICABILITY.
Insert the following into the first sentence of Section 1301.2 to read as
follows:
"Structures existing prior to January 1, 1955," ......
Remainder of section unchanged. [Ord. No. 2007-27]
§ 10-1001 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-1001
1:347

ARTICLE XI
General Provisions
§ 10-1101. [Ch. 10, Sec. 11] Saving clause.
A. Nothing in this Ordinance or in the Codes hereby adopted shall be
construed to affect any suit or proceeding pending in any Court, or any
rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action
accrued or existing under any act of any Ordinance hereby repealed;
nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost,
impaired or affected by this Ordinance.
B. That if any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this
ordinance is, for any reason, held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such
decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
ordinance. The City of Bloomington hereby declares that it would have
passed this ordinance, and each section, subsection, clause or phrase
thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections,
subsections, sentences, clause and phrases be declared invalid or
unconstitutional.
§ 10-1101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-1101
1:349

ARTICLE XII
Security Of Buildings And Structures
DIVISION 1
General Provisions
§ 10-1201. [Ch. 10, Sec. S-100] Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide minimum standards to safeguard life
and property by regulating and controlling the design, construction, quality
of materials and certain equipment related to the securing of buildings and
structures from unauthorized entry.
§ 10-1202. [Ch. 10, Sec. S-110] Scope.
The provisions of this article shall apply to new buildings and structures,
and any modifications, alterations, repairs or additions to a building or
structure:
§ 10-1203. [Ch. 10, Sec. S-120] Alternate materials and methods of
construction - intention of article. [Ord. No. 1976-78]
The provisions of this article are not intended to prevent the use of any
material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by this
article, provided any such alternate has been approved by the Director, nor
is it the intention of this article to exclude any sound method of structural
design or analysis not specifically provided for in this article. Exceptions
hereto may be made if substantiated by calculation or other suitable
evidence prepared by the local authority which has the jurisdiction to
enforce this article.
§ 10-1204. [Ch. 10, Sec. S-121] Approval of alternate material or
method. [Ord. No. 1976-78]
The Director may approve any such alternate material or method of
construction provided he finds the proposed design is satisfactory and
the material ore method of work offered is, for the purpose intended,
at least equivalent of that prescribed in this article in quality, strength,
effectiveness, burglary resistance, durability and safety.
NOTE: This article effective January 1, 1977.
A. For which the provisions of this chapter require a building permit; and
B. For which modifications, alterations, repairs or additions this article
establishes standards. [Ord. No. 1976-78]
§ 10-1201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-1205
1:351
§ 10-1205. [Ch. 10, Sec. S-122] Test of alternate material or
method. [Ord. No. 1976-78]
Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions
of the Article or evidence that any material or any construction does not
conform to the requirements of this article, or in order to substantiate
claims for alternate materials or methods of construction, the Director may
require tests as proof of compliance to be made at the expense of the owner
or his agent by an approved agency.
§ 10-1206. through § 10-1210. (Reserved)
§ 10-1205 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 10-1206
1:352
DIVISION 2
Responsibility for Security; Violations; Right of Entry
§ 10-1211. [Ch. 10, Sec. S-200] Responsibility of property subject to
this article. [Ord. No. 1976-78]
The owner or his designated agent shall be responsible for compliance with
the specifications set forth in this article.
§ 10-1212. [Ch. 10, Sec. S-210] Violations of article unlawful. [Ord.
No. 1976-78]
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair,
move, improve., remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or
maintain any building or structure in the City, or cause the same to be done,
contrary to, or in violation of any of the provisions of this article.
§ 10-1213. [Ch. 10, Sec. S-220] Inspections. [Ord. No. 1976-78]
Whenever necessary and with the consent of the owner, his agent, the
tenant, or person in charge, the Director may make an inspection to enforce
any of the provisions of this article. The Director shall present credentials
which establish and provide evidence of identity and authority.
§ 10-1214. [Ch. 10, Sec. S-230] Conflicting provisions. [Ord. No.
1976-78]
Whenever any portion of this article necessarily conflicts with any local,
state or federal law, regulations or codes dealing with life safety factors, the
provisions of this Code shall be subordinate to such other provisions.
§ 10-1215. [Ch. 10, Sec. S-240] Appeals.
§ 10-1216. through § 10-1220. (Reserved)
A. Appeals from decisions of the Director may be taken to the
Construction Board of Appeals whenever:
(1) Strict compliance with this article would work an undue hardship
on the person taking such appeal;
(2) A person challenges the correctness of an interpretation of the
Director;
(3) A person challenges the correctness of the Director's
determination of the suitability of alternate materials and methods.
[Ord. No. 1976-78]
B. All appeals shall be governed by the procedure provided in this chapter.
[Ord. No. 1976-78]
§ 10-1211 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-1216
1:353

DIVISION 3
Definitions
§ 10-1221. [Ch. 10, Sec. S-300] Definitions.
ACCESS POINT — Any opening in the exterior of a building or structure
which has a clear cross section of 96 square inches or more and which has
as its smallest dimension a span in excess of 5 1/2 inches; access points
include, but are not limited to, doors and windows.
ACTIVATE — To engage a locking device to make it effective in preventing
unauthorized entry through a door, window or other access points to which
the device is attached.
BUSINESS/COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment which
uses or occupies any building or structure or portion thereof for the purpose
of manufacture, storage, warehousing, transfer, sale, display or purchase of
goods, wares, merchandise or services.
COMBINATION DEAD LATCH AND DEADLOCK — A device combining a
dead latch operable by knobs from inside and outside and a deadlock
operable from inside by a thumb turn or key and from outside by a key, both
of which can be retracted from inside by turning the knob and the outside
by a key.
CONTROL DEVICE — A key or similar mechanical implement that is
normally used by authorized persons to activate or deactivate a locking
device.
CYLINDER — The part of a lockset that has an entrance for the key which
thereby activates the locking mechanism.
CYLINDER GUARD — A hardened ring surrounding the exposed portion
of the lock cylinder or other device which is so fastened as to protect the
cylinder from wrenching, prying, cutting or pulling by attack tools.
DEADLOCK LOCK — A locking device with the bolt that has no automatic
spring action and, therefore, must be operated manually by a key cylinder,
thumb turn or lever, and is positively held fast when in the projected
position (also known as a deadlock).
DEADLOCK, DOUBLE CYLINDER — A deadlock that can be activated only
by a key from the inside and the outside.
DEADLOCK, SINGLE CYLINDER — A deadlock that is activated from the
outside by a key and from the inside of a knob, thumb turn, lever or
similar mechanism. A deadlock single cylinder may also be the type which
is activated on the outside by a key and on the inside the area of the lock
is covered by a face plate which cannot activate or deactivate the locking
device.
DEADLOCKING LATCH — (also known as a spring bolt with an anti-shim
pin.) A latch in which the latch bolt is positively held in the projected
position by a guard bolt, plunger, or auxiliary mechanism.
§ 10-1221 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-1221
1:355
DIRECTOR — The Director of Community Development of the City of
Bloomington or his authorized representative.[Ord. No. 2017-96]
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY — A building or portion thereof designed
for occupancy by more than two families living independently of other
families, including hotels and motels.
DWELLING, ONE OR TWO FAMILY — A building designed exclusively for
occupancy by one or two families.
EXTERIOR — That portion of a building or structure that provides access
from the outside of the building or structure, or a part thereof. Exterior
includes but is not limited to those portions of individual business
establishments housed in a common building or structure which are
accessible to the public, e.g., as in a shopping center, mall, hotel or motel
or apartment complex. This definition also relates to doors leading from
garage areas to single and multifamily dwellings.
FLUSH BOLT — A deadlock normally used on inactive door(s) that is
attached to the top and bottom and/or side of the door and engages in the
frame and/or base of the door.
HARDENED STEEL — Heat tempered steel (e.g. the steel is heated to
predetermined temperature and then quenched in oil or water for rapid
cooling).
KEY — A key is an instrument for operating a lock by setting the tumblers
in the proper position. It can be removed for carrying, but must be inserted
and used in the lock for both unlocking and locking the locking mechanism.
LATCH — A device for automatically retaining the door in a closed position
upon its closing.
LOCKING DEVICE — A mechanical implement or combination of
mechanical implements attached to the door, window or other access points
of a building or structure which is designed to prevent unauthorized
persons from entering the building or structure through the door, window,
or other access point on which the locking device is activated.
ONE WAY SCREWS — A screw specifically designed to resist being removed
once installed.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind or variety without limitation.
SAFETY STUD (HINGES) — A stud which is a part of or separates part of a
door's hinge. The stud is mounted so it protrudes from the jamb and enters
the door's edge when the door is closed to prevent the door from being
removed.
THROW — This term describes the outward movement of a bolt or spring
bolt and is the distance such a bolt or spring bolt travels. When the bolt
or spring bolt is moved from the open position to the locked position
(extended) it is said to have been thrown.[Ord. No. 1976-78]
§ 10-1222. through § 10-1230. (Reserved)
§ 10-1221 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 10-1222
1:356
DIVISION 4
Commercial Security Standards
§ 10-1231. [Sec. S-400 through Sec. S-440] Doors, windows and
other openings.
A. All exterior doors shall meet the standards provided in Subsections B
through P of this section. [Ord. No. 1976-78]
B. A single door shall be secured with either a double cylinder dead bolt or
a single cylinder dead bolt without a turn piece with a minimum throw
of 3/4 inch. A hook or expanding bolt shall have a throw of 3/4 inch. Any
dead bolt must contain hardened steel material to repel attempts at
cutting through the bolt. [Ord. No. 1976-78]
C. On pairs of doors the active leaf of the door shall be secured with the
type lock required for single door(s) in Subsection A of this section. The
inactive leaf shall be equipped with flush or surface bolts, protected by
hardened steel material with a minimum throw of 3/4 inch. Multiple
point locks, cylinder activated from the active leaf and satisfying
requirements of Subsection A may be used in lieu of flush bolts and/or
surface bolts. [Ord. No. 1976-78]
D. Any single or pair of doors requiring locking at the bottom or top shall
have locks with a minimum 3/4 inch throw bolt at both the top and
bottom.
E. Cylinders shall be so designed or protected so they cannot be gripped
by pliers or other wrenching devices. [Ord. No. 1976-78]
F. Exterior sliding commercial entrances shall be secured as required in
Subsections A, B and C of this section. [Ord. No. 1976-78]
G. Rolling overhead doors, solid overhead swinging doors, sliding doors,
or accordion type doors shall be secured with a dead bolt lock, cylinder
lock, or a padlock when not otherwise controlled or locked by electrical
power operation. If a padlock is used, it shall be of hardened steel
shackle, with a minimum five pin tumbler operation. [Ord. No.
1976-78]
H. Metal accordion grate, grill type and sliding doors shall be equipped
with metal track at top and bottom, and a cylinder lock and/or padlock
with hardened steel shackle and minimum five pin tumbler operation.
The bottom track shall be so designed that the door is in a locked
position. [Ord. No. 1976-78]
I. Where a door(s) is locked by electric power operation, the circuit
controlling the door shall be locked by an electrical disconnect switch
or by a single locking device. The locking device shall also be
constructed and installed so that when the door is closed the device
cannot be made inactive through the removal of mounting screws or
bolts. [Ord. No. 1976-78]
§ 10-1231 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-1231
1:357
J. Exterior doors with outside pin type hinges shall have a minimum of two
hinges; one above and one below the center of the door's activating
device, required in this Division and shall be secured by either a nonremovable
hinge pin or a safety stud. [Ord. No. 1976-78]
K. In-swinging doors shall have rabbeted jambs. [Ord. No. 1976-78]
L. Firmly secured metal striker plates are required on the jambs of all
doors and are to be located at the point where the required lock
engages the lamb. [Ord. No. 1976-78]
M. All exterior doors, excluding front doors, shall have a minimum of a 20
watt bulb over the outside of the door. Such bulb shall be protected with
a vapor cover or cover of equal breaking resistant material. [Ord. No.
1976-78]
N. Locking devices or parts of locking devices shall not be used if they
bear any numbers or letters which would reveal a combination from
which a key or similar control device could be fashioned or selected
which could be used to deactivate the locking device. [Ord. No.
1976-78]
O. When a padlock type locking device is used, the slide bolt or hasp and
shackle to which the padlock is attached shall be constructed of
hardened steel and shall be installed so that it cannot be removed when
the door is closed and the padlock is activated. [Ord. No. 1976-78]
P. All metal doors shall be constructed of a minimum of 18 gauge material
or its equal and shall be a minimum thickness of 1 3/4 inches. [Ord. No.
1976-78]
Q. All glass windows shall comply with the requirements of Subsections R
through U. [Ord. No. 1976-78]
R. Outside hinges on all accessible side and rear glass windows shall be
provided with nonremovable pins. If the hinge screws are accessible,
the screws shall be of the non-removable type. [Ord. No. 1976-78]
S. Windows shall be so constructed that when the window is locked, it
cannot be lifted from the frame. [Ord. No. 1976-78]
T. All windows shall be equipped with a locking device, and said locking
device shall be capable of withstanding force of 150 pounds applied in
any direction; all locks shall fully engage. [Ord. No. 1976-78]
U. Louvered windows shall not be used within 12 feet of ground level, or
adjacent to any structure or fire escape. [Ord. No. 1976-78]
V. All roof openings shall be secured as follows:
(1) If the hatchway is of wooden material, it shall be covered on the
inside with at least 20 gauge sheet steel or its equivalent attached
with non-removable screws.
§ 10-1231 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 10-1231
1:358
§ 10-1232. [Sec. S-401] Address identification.
Numbers revealing the location of an occupancy shall be required at the
front and rear entrance. These numbers shall be illuminated at night as
required in § 10-1233 of this article.
§ 10-1233. [Sec. S-402] Lighting. [Ord. No. 1976-78]
All exterior doors of all commercial structures shall be illuminated by a 20
watt bulb, minimum, so the door(s) is easily visible at all time. All bulbs shall
be protected by a weatherproof and break resistant cover.
(2) The hatchway shall be secured from the inside with a slide bar of
not less than two inches by 1/2 inch flat steel material, or not less
than two inches by four inches wooden material, or slide bolts
which have a throw of not less than one inch.
(3) Outside hinges on all hatchway openings shall be provided with
nonremovable pins when using pin type hinges. The hinge shall be
mounted with one way non-removable screws.
(4) All air duct or air vent openings exceeding eight inches by 14
inches on the roof or exterior walls below 12 feet of any building or
premises used for business purposes shall be secured by covering
the same with any of the following:
(a) Iron bars of at least 1/2 inch round or one inch by 1/4 inch flat
steel material spaced no more than five inches apart and
securely fastened.
(b) A steel grill of at least 1/8 inch material of two-inch mesh and
securely fastened.
(c) If the barrier is on the outside, it shall be secured with rounded
head flush bolts. [Ord. No. 1976-78]
W. In all office buildings designed or used for multiple office occupancy, all
entrance doors to individual office suites shall be secured as required in
Subsections L and N through P. [Ord. No. 1976-78]
A. Numbers on front entrances shall be large enough so they are visible
from the street, but not less than three inches in height.
B. All numbers shall be of reflective material and shall be colored so as to
contrast with the color of the building. [Ord. No. 1976-78]
A. Lights located at front and/or rear entrances which have numbers
revealing the location of an occupancy shall be mounted in such a
manner as to afford light to the door and the numbers.
B. Front doors may be excluded from this section if an acceptable method
of lighting is provided. Acceptable methods of lighting can include, but
§ 10-1231 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-1233
1:359
§ 10-1234. through § 10-1240. (Reserved)
are not limited to, streetlighting, interior store lighting, exterior store
front lighting, etc. [Ord. No. 1976-78]
§ 10-1233 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 10-1234
1:360
DIVISION 5
One and Two Family Dwelling Security Standards
§ 10-1241. [Sec. S-500 through Sec. S-530] Doors, windows and
other openings.
A. All exterior doors shall comply with the requirements of Subsections B
through J of this section. [Ord. No. 1976-78]
B. Exterior doors and doors leading from garage areas into private family
dwellings shall be secured as follows:
(1) Wood doors of solid core construction with a minimum thickness of
1 3/8 inches shall be secured with a minimum of a single cylinder
dead bolt equipped with a turn piece on the inside and a minimum
throw of one inch. A hook or expanding bolt may have a throw of 3/
4 inch. Any dead bolt must contain hardened material to repel
attempts at cutting through the bolt. If the door contains glass
within 40 inches of the locking mechanism, then one of the
following alternatives is required:
(a) The locking mechanism shall be a double cylinder dead bolt or;
(b) An iron work grating installed on the inside, whose design is so
constructed as to disallow the reaching through it to deactivate
the locking mechanism or;
(c) The glass shall be of polycarbonite (non-breakable) material;
(d) Single cylinder dead bolt which is only activated from the
outside by a key and the inside is covered by a face plate.
(2) Hollow core doors shall not be used or installed as exterior doors.
(3) All other doors, (excluding patio type doors) including but not
limited to doors with wood panels having a thickness of less than
1 3/8 inches, doors with vision panels that are within 40 inches of
an inside activating device and that are not equipped with an
approved burglary resistant material, and doors with other glass
panels, either in or adjoining the door within 40 inches of the
locking device, shall be equipped with a double cylinder dead bolt
without a turn piece, with a minimum throw of one inch, or said
door may be equipped in the manner listed herein under
Subsection B(1) if said doors are completely covered on the outside
with at least 20 gauge sheet steel, or its equivalent attached with
non-removable screws on a maximum of six inch centers.
(4) Any exterior door, or inside garage door leading to the residence,
having outside hinge pins, shall be equipped with non-removable
hinge pins or safety hinge studs. If studs are used, a minimum of
two is required; one in the top hinge and one in the bottom hinge.
[Ord. No. 1976-78]
§ 10-1241 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-1241
1:361
C. On pairs of doors, the active leaf shall be secured with the type lock
required for single doors in Subsection B of this section. The inactive
leaf shall be equipped with flush or surface bolts protected by hardened
material, with minimum throw of 3/4 of an inch at the top and bottom of
the door. Multiple point locks, cylinder activated from the active leaf
and satisfying Section S-501 and requirements herein, may be used in
lieu of flush bolts. [Ord. No. 1976-78]
D. Cylinders shall be so designed or protected so they cannot be gripped
by pliers or other wrenching devices. [Ord. No. 1976-78]
E. Outside pin type hinges on exterior doors and doors leading from
garage areas into private family dwellings shall be secured by a
minimum of two hinges; one above and one below the center of the
locking device required in this Division will be secured by either a nonremovable
hinge pin or safety stud. [Ord. No. 1976-78]
F. In-swinging doors and doors leading from garage areas into private
family dwellings shall have rabbeted jambs. [Ord. No. 1976-78]
G. Firmly secured metal striker plates shall be installed on the jambs of all
doors and are to be located at the point where the required lock
engages the jambs. [Ord. No. 1976-78]
H. Locking devices and parts of locking devices shall not be used if they
bear any numbers or letters which would reveal a combination from
which a key or similar control device could be fashioned or selected
which could be used to deactivate the locking device. [Ord. No.
1976-78]
I. When a padlock type locking device is used, the slide bolt or hasp and
shackle to which the padlock is attached shall be constructed of
hardened steel and shall be installed so that it cannot be removed when
the door is closed and the padlock is activated. [Ord. No. 1976-78]
J. Sliding patio-type doors opening onto patios or balconies which are less
than one story above grade or are otherwise accessible from the outside
shall comply with standards of Sections S-510 through S-513 of this
Division. [Ord. No. 1976-78]
K. All single sliding patio doors shall have the movable section of the door
sliding on the inside of the fixed portion of the door except as provided
in Subsection N hereof. [Ord. No. 1976-78]
L. Deadlocks shall be provided on all single sliding patio doors. If the lock
is operable from the outside, it shall be activated by a key utilizing a
bored lock cylinder or pin tumbler construction. Mounting screws for
the lock case shall be inaccessible from the outside. Lock bolts shall be
of hardened steel or have hardened steel or have hardened steel inserts
and shall be capable of withstanding a force of 300 pounds applied in
any direction; or the door shall be equipped with a flush or surface bolt
with minimum throw of 3/4 of an inch at the top of the door. The lock
§ 10-1241 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 10-1241
1:362
§ 10-1242. [Sec. S-540] Address identification.
The numbers revealing the address of a residential unit under this article
shall be:
§ 10-1243. through § 10-1250. (Reserved)
bolt shall engage the strike sufficiently to prevent its being disengaged
by any possible movement of the door within the space or clearances
provided for installation and operation. The strike area shall be
reinforced to maintain effectiveness of bolt strength. [Ord. No.
1976-78]
M. Double sliding patio doors must be locked at the meeting rail and meet
the locking requirements as specified in Subsection L. [Ord. No.
1976-78]
N. Alternate method for securing doors with the movable section of the
door sliding on the outside of the fixed portion of the door must be
approved by the Director. [Ord. No. 1976-78]
O. All windows shall comply with the requirements of Subsections P
through R of this section. [Ord. No. 1976-78]
P. Windows shall be so constructed that when the window is locked, it
cannot be lifted from the frame. [Ord. No. 1976-78]
Q. Window locking devices shall be capable of withstanding a force of 150
pounds applied in any direction, and all locks shall fully engage. [Ord.
No. 1976-78]
R. Above ground level louvered windows shall not be used as exterior
windows. [Ord. No. 1976-78]
S. All garage doors shall comply with the following requirements. Each
metal, wooden, or composition garage door whether it be overhead,
roller-type, swing or sliding shall be so equipped that it is capable of
being locked. Specific locking devices to be employed shall be of one or
more of the following types: throw bolt or flush bolt; dead bolt; cylindertype
lock; pad-lock and hasp; or an electronic power operated
mechanism with automatic locking capabilities. [Ord. No. 1976-78]
A. Large enough so they are visible from the street, but not less than three
inches in height;
B. All numbers shall be of reflective material and shall be colored so as to
contrast with the color of its background. [Ord. No. 1976-78]
§ 10-1241 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-1243
1:363

DIVISION 6
Multiple-Family Dwelling Security Standards
§ 10-1251. [Sec. S-600 through Sec. S-632] Doors, windows and
other openings.
A. All garage doors shall comply with the following standards: Whenever
parking facilities are provided, either under or within the confines of
the perimeter walls of any multiple dwelling, such facility shall be fully
enclosed, well lighted and provided with a locking device. [Ord. No.
1976-78]
B. All swinging doors to living or rooming units in motels, hotels and
multifamily dwellings shall comply with the requirements of
Subsections C through K of this section. [Ord. No. 1976-78]
C. Entrance doors to individual units shall comply with the following:
(1) Wood doors of solid core construction with a minimum thickness of
1 3/8 inches shall be secured with a minimum of a single cylinder
dead bolt equipped with a turn piece on the inside and a minimum
throw of one inch. A hook or expanding bolt may have a throw of 3/
4 inch. Any dead bolt must contain hardened material to repel
attempts at cutting through the bolt. If the door contains glass
within 40 inches of the locking mechanism, then one of the
following alternatives is required.
(a) The locking mechanism shall be a double cylinder dead bolt or;
(b) An iron work grating installed on the inside, whose design is so
constructed as to disallow the reaching through it to deactivate
the locking mechanism or;
(c) The glass shall be of a polycarbonite (unbreakable) material;
(d) Single cylinder dead bolt which is only activated from the
outside by a key and the inside is covered by a face plate.
(2) Hollow core doors shall not be used or installed, as an exterior
door.
(3) All other doors (excluding patio type doors), including but not
limited to doors with wood panels having a thickness of less than
1 3/8 inches, doors with vision panels that are within 40 inches of
an inside activating device and that are not equipped with an
approved burglary resistant material, and doors with other glass
panels, either in or adjoining the door within 40 inches of the
locking device, shall be equipped with a double cylinder dead bolt
without a turn piece, with a minimum throw of one inch or said
door may be equipped in the manner listed herein under
Subsection C(1) if said doors completely covered on the outside
§ 10-1251 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-1251
1:365
with at least 20 gauge sheet steel, or its equivalent attached with
non-removable screws on a maximum of six-inch centers.
(4) Any exterior, or inside garage door leading to the residence having
outside hinge pins, shall be equipped with non-removable hinge
pins or safety hinge studs. If studs are used, a minimum of two is
required; one in the top hinge and one in the bottom hinge. [Ord.
No. 1976-78]
D. On pairs of doors, the active leaf shall be secured with the type lock
required for single doors in Subsection C. The inactive leaf shall be
equipped with flush or surface bolts protected by hardened material
with a minimum throw of 3/4 inch at the head and foot of the door.
Multiple point locks, cylinder activated from the active leaf and
complying with Section S-611 and the requirements herein my be used
in lieu of flush bolts. [Ord. No. 1976-78]
E. Cylinders shall be so designed or protected so they cannot be gripped
by pliers or other wrenching devices. [Ord. No. 1976-78]
F. Entrance doors to individual units shall have rabbeted jambs. [Ord. No.
1976-78]
G. Firmly secured metal striker plates are required on the jambs of all
doors and are to be located at the point where the required lock
engages the jamb. [Ord. No. 1976-78]
H. Keys to exterior doors (i.e. garage, stairwell, lobby, etc.) shall not be
capable of activating the locking device of any individual residential
units locking device within the complex. [Ord. No. 1976-78]
I. Locking devices and parts of locking devices shall not be used if they
bear any numbers or letters which would reveal a combination from
which a key or similar control device could be fashioned or selected
which could be used to deactivate the locking device. [Ord. No.
1976-78]
J. When a padlock type locking device is used, the slide bolt or hasp and
shackle to which the padlock is attached shall be constructed of
hardened steel and shall be installed so that it cannot be removed when
the door is closed and the padlock is activated. [Ord. No. 1976-78]
K. Patio type doors opening onto patios or balconies which are less than
one story above ground level or otherwise accessible from the outside,
shall comply with the requirements of Subsections L through O of this
section. [Ord. No. 1976-78]
L. All single sliding patio doors shall have the movable section of the door
sliding on the inside of the fixed portion of the door, except as provided
in Subsection O. [Ord. No. 1976-78]
M. Deadlocks shall be provided on all single sliding patio doors. If the lock
is operable from the outside it shall be activated by a key utilizing a
§ 10-1251 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 10-1251
1:366
§ 10-1252. [Sec. S-640] Lighting. [Ord. No. 1976-78]
When there are more than four units, the address and the exterior door(s)
of all dwelling unit(s) shall each be illuminated by a 20 watt bulb, minimum,
so as to be easily visible at all times, such lights shall not be switched
except by a timer or light sensing device. All bulbs shall be protected by a
weatherproof and break resistant cover. In lieu of the foregoing, the exterior
shall be equipped with numbers not less than three inches in height and
made of reflective material and colored so as to contrast with the color of
its background.
§ 10-1253. [Sec. S-650] Address identification. [Ord. No. 1976-78]
All building and structures governed in this Division 6 shall be numbered
and identified according to the requirements of §§ 10-1254 and 10-1255.
§ 10-1254. [Sec. S-651] Complex diagram and identification.
bore cylinder or pin tumbler construction. Mounting screws for the
lock case shall be inaccessible from the outside. Lock bolts shall be
of hardened steel or have hardened steel inserts and shall be capable
of withstanding a force of 300 pounds applied in any direction; or the
door shall be equipped with a flush or surface bolt with a minimum
throw of 3/4 inch at top of door. The lock bolt shall engage the strike
sufficiently to prevent its being disengaged by any possible movement
of the door within the space or clearances provided for installation and
operation. The strike area shall be reinforced to maintain effectiveness
of bolt strength. [Ord. No. 1976-78]
N. Double sliding patio doors must be locked at the meeting rail and meet
the locking requirements as specified in Subsection M. [Ord. No.
1976-78]
O. Alternate methods for securing doors with movable sections of the door
sliding on the outside of the fixed portion of the door must be approved
by the Director. [Ord. No. 1976-78]
P. Windows shall comply with the requirements of Subsections Q and R.
[Ord. No. 1976-78]
Q. Windows shall be so constructed that when the window is locked it
cannot be lifted from the frame. [Ord. No. 1976-78]
R. All windows shall be equipped with a locking device and said device
shall be capable of withstanding a force of 150 pounds applied in any
direction and all locks should fully engage. [Ord. No. 1976-78]
A. When there are more than four units, at least one diagrammatic
representation of the complex shall be positioned at a conspicuous and
accessible location at each dwelling complex and shall indicate by
address each unit or group of units. At least one of said representation
shall be lighted and shall not be switched except by a timer or a light
§ 10-1251 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-1254
1:367
§ 10-1255. through § 10-1260. (Reserved)
sensing device. Where multiple units have the same address, the
descriptive number or letter assigned to each unit shall be displayed in
addition to the address above. [Ord. No. 1976-78]
B. Where units are grouped under one address, the descriptive number or
letter assigned to each unit shall be reflective and shall be located near,
but not on, all entrance doors to individual units. The recommended
location of said reflective numbers on the door frame above the door.
[Ord. No. 1976-78]
§ 10-1254 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 10-1255
1:368
DIVISION 7
Construction
§ 10-1261. [Sec. S-700] Severability. [Ord. No. 1976-78]
If any provision of this article shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional,
the remainder of this article shall continue in full force and effect the
same as if such invalid or unconstitutional provision had never been a part
thereof.
§ 10-1261 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-1261
1:369

ARTICLE XIII
Fireworks
§ 10-1301. [Ch. 10, Sec. 1] Citation and scope. [Ord. No. 2006-59]
This chapter shall constitute and be know as the Bloomington Fireworks
Code and may be cited as such. This code shall govern the qualifications,
location, sale and display of pyrotechnics (fireworks) in the City of
Bloomington.
§ 10-1302. [Ch. 10, Sec. 2] Conflicting provisions. [Ord. No.
2006-59]
In the event of any conflict: between or among any codes adopted in this
article: or between any Code adopted in this article and any other provision
of Bloomington City Code: or between any Code adopted in this article and
any provision of any Code adopted by any other provision of Bloomington
City Code; or between any Code adopted in this article and any provision of
State Law, the provision setting the highest standard for health and safety
shall prevail.
§ 10-1303. [Ch. 10, Sec. 3] Definitions.
CONSUMER DISTRIBUTOR — Any person who distributes, offers for sale,
sells, or exchanges for consideration consumer fireworks in Illinois to
another distributor or directly to any retailer or person for resale.
CONSUMER FIREWORKS — Those fireworks that must comply with the
construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations of the U.S.
Consumer Products Safety Commission, as set forth in 16 C.F.R. parts 1500
and 1507, and classified as fireworks UN0336 or UN0337 by the United
States Department of Transportation under 49 C.F.R. 172.101. "Consumer
Fireworks" shall not include snake or blow worm pellets; smoke devices;
trick noisemakers known as "party poppers:, "booby traps," "snappers,"
"trick matches," "cigarette loads," and "auto burglar alarms"; sparklers; toy
pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other devices in which paper or plastic caps
containing twenty-five hundredths grains or less of explosive compound
are used, provided they are so constructed that the hand cannot come in
contact with the cap when in place for the explosion; and toy pistol paper
or plastic caps that contain less than twenty hundredths grains of explosive
mixture; the sale and use of which shall be permitted at all times.
CONSUMER FIREWORKS DISPLAY or CONSUMER DISPLAY — The
detonation, ignition, or deflagration of consumer fireworks to produce a
visual or audible effect.
DISPLAY FIREWORKS — 1.3G or special effects fireworks or as further
defined in the Pyrotechnic Operator Licensing Act of the State of Illinois
(225 ILCS 227/).
§ 10-1301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-1303
1:371
FIREWORKS — Those fireworks used for professional outdoor displays and
classified as fireworks UN0333, UN0334, or UN0335 by the United States
Transportation under 49 C.F.R. 172.101
FLAME EFFECT — The detonation, ignition, or deflagration of flammable
gases, liquids, or special materials to produce a thermal, physical, visual,
or audible effect before the public, invitees, or licensees, regardless of
whether admission is charged, in accordance with National Fire Protection
Association 160 guidelines, and as may be further defined in the
Pyrotechnic Operator Licensing Act.
LEAD PYROTECHNIC OPERATOR — An individual who is responsible for
the safety, setup, and discharge of the pyrotechnic display and who is
licensed pursuant to the Pyrotechnic Distributor and Operator Licensing
Act of the State of Illinois.
PERSON — An individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership,
company, consortium, joint venture, or commercial entity.
PYROTECHNIC DISPLAY or DISPLAY — The detonation, ignition, or
deflagration of display fireworks or flame effects to produce visual or
audible effects of a exhibition nature before the public, invitee, or licensees,
regardless of whether admission is charged, and as may be further defined
in the Pyrotechnic Distributor and Operator Licensing Act.
PYROTECHNIC DISTRIBUTOR — Any person, company, association, group
of persons, or corporation who distributes display fireworks for sale in the
State of Illinois or provides them as part of a pyrotechnic display service in
the State of Illinois or provides only pyrotechnic services.
SPECIAL EFFECTS FIREWORKS — Pyrotechnic devices used for special
effects by professionals in the performing arts in conjunction with
theatrical, musical or other productions that are similar to consumer
fireworks in chemical compositions and construction, but are not intended
for consumer use and are not labeled as such or "intended for indoor
use." "Special effects fireworks" are classified as fireworks UN0431 or
UN0432 by the United States Department of Transportation under 49 C.F.R.
172.101.[Ord. No. 2017-96]
§ 10-1304. [Ch. 10, Sec. 4] Possession, use and sale of fireworks.
[Ord. No. 2006-59]
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm,
copartnership, or corporation to knowingly possess, offer for sale, expose
for sale sell at retail, or use or explode any display fireworks, flame effects,
or consumer fireworks in the City of Bloomington.
§ 10-1305. [Ch. 10, Sec. 4.1] Pyrotechnic displays; permits
required.
A. No person may act as a pyrotechnic distributor or lead pyrotechnic
operator, or advertise or use any title implying that the person is a
pyrotechnic distributor or lead pyrotechnic operator, or apply for a
§ 10-1303 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 10-1305
1:372
§ 10-1306. [Ch. 10, Sec. 4.2] Inspection of the site. [Ord. No.
2017-96]
pyrotechnic display permit in the City of Bloomington unless licensed
by the (225 ILCA 227/) Pyrotechnic Distributor and Operator Licensing
Act.
B. Application for a pyrotechnic display permit shall be made in writing at
least 15 business days in advance of the date of the pyrotechnic display,
unless agreed to otherwise by the Director of Community Development.
After a permit has been granted, possession, use and display fireworks
for the display shall be lawful for that purpose only. The lead
pyrotechnic operator shall keep a copy of the permit in his/her
possession during the active presentation of the display. No permit
granted hereunder shall be transferable.
C. The applicant seeking the pyrotechnic display permit must provide
proof of liability insurance in a sum not less than $1,000,000 prior to
issuance of a permit.
D. The applicants for a permit hereunder shall jointly file with their
application a cash, personal or commercial bond in the amount of
$5,000 conditioned upon compliance with the provisions of all
applicable state and local laws and all state and Director of Community
Development and other applicable regulations by all persons involved
in any aspect of the display preparation, presentation and
conclusionary activities except that no municipality shall be required to
file such bond.
E. The applicant for a permit hereunder shall also file with their
application a site and/or floor plan of the area where the fire works will
be ignited. Such drawings will be drawn to scale and may be developed
on copies of real estate plat books of the area in which the display will
be held. Inspection and approval of the site shall be conducted prior to
issuance of a permit.
F. The applicant shall provide a list of the types and amounts of
pyrotechnic materials to be used in the event/s.
G. Fees for a pyrotechnic display shall be $250 for the first event and $25
per subsequent event in the same location, within a six-month time
period.
H. Upon the issuance of a permit hereunder, one copy shall be kept on file
by the issuing officer, one copy shall be forwarded by the issuing officer
to the State Fire Marshal's office, one copy at the option of the issuing
officer shall be mailed to the fireworks supplier or shall be given to the
applicants for delivery to the fireworks supplier, and one copy shall be
delivered to the display supervisor. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
A. All permits shall be issued only after the fireworks display site has been
inspected by the issuing officer or another authorized representative of
§ 10-1305 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-1306
1:373
§ 10-1307. [Ch. 10, Sec. 4.3] Supervision of the display. [Ord. No.
2006-59]
The lead pyrotechnic operator will be the active supervisor of the igniting
and presentation of the display materials. The supervisor must actively
participate in, help control, and be responsible for the control of the ignition
of the fireworks and of the area where the fireworks are ignited and
explode or otherwise function. The lead pyrotechnic operator of the display
shall keep a copy of the permit in his/her possession during the active
presentation of the display.
§ 10-1308. [Ch. 10, Sec. 4.4] Spectators and participants in the area
of the display. [Ord. No. 2006-59]
Only persons authorized by the supervisor of the display, including those in
actual charge of preparing and igniting the fireworks, shall be allowed in
the area in which the fireworks are ignited during the period of the display.
Spectators shall be kept at a distance which is reasonably far away from the
location where the fireworks are ignited to provide reasonable safety to the
spectators.
§ 10-1309. [Ch. 10, Sec. 4.5] Safety search of the display area. [Ord.
No. 2006-59]
The debris from discharged fireworks that remains in the area after the
display is concluded shall be properly disposed of by the supervisor of the
display and those working with him before they leave the premises. Upon
the conclusion of the display, the supervisor and those working with him
shall make a complete and thorough search for any unfired fireworks and
Community Development to determine that the proposed display
reasonably appears that it will not be hazardous to any property and
will not endanger any person or persons who may be in the area at
the time of the presentation of the display. Such inspection shall be
made and action shall be taken on each application within five regular
working days after each such application is filed.
B. All indoor pyrotechnic displays shall be conducted in buildings
protected by automatic sprinkler systems and meeting the
requirements of the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshall and the
City of Bloomington.
C. Pyrotechnic displays shall be conducted in compliance with the
following standards as modified by the State of Illinois:
NFPA 160, Standard for the Use of Flame Effects Before and Audience/
2006;
NFPA 1123, Code for Fireworks Display/2006;
NFPA 1126, Standard for the Use of Pyrotechnics Before a Proximate
Audience.
§ 10-1306 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 10-1309
1:374
pieces of other fireworks, fuses or any other items which have failed to fire
or function or which in any manner pose a danger for any person and shall
dispose of them promptly in safe manner. Such search shall be instituted
at the earliest possible time following the conclusion of the display but in
no event later than during the early morning hours of the day following the
presentation of the display.
§ 10-1310. [Ch. 10, Sec. 5] Violations; penalty. [Ord. No. 2006-59]
It shall be illegal for any person to fail to comply with any of the provisions
of this Act and each such person who is guilty of a violation hereof shall be
fined not less than $50 nor more than $500 for each such offense.
§ 10-1309 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-1310
1:375
Chapter 11
BUSINESS LICENSES, REGISTRATION AND REGULATIONS
§ 10-1310 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 10-1310
1:376
ARTICLE I
Window Cleaning Business
§ 11-101. [Ch. 11, Sec. 1] License required definition.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to conduct or
carry on the business of window cleaning without first having obtained
a license as hereinafter provided. For the purpose of this Ordinance the
business of window cleaning hereby is defined as one in which the principal
occupation of the person or their employees is contracting or engaging for
hire, otherwise than as employees of the persons contracting with or hiring
them, in the work of washing windows in any building or buildings that
shall immediately adjoin a public street, alley or other public place and have
windows that face thereon.
§ 11-102. [Ch. 11, Sec. 2] Application bond.
Any person, firm, or corporation desiring to carry on the business of window
cleaning shall file with the City Manager an application in writing, giving
the name of the person, corporation or partnership applying for said license,
and if a partnership, the names of each individual partner, the location of
the principal place of business in said City, the number of persons engaged
or employed in the work, and such other information as the City Manager
may require. Such applicant also shall execute and enter into the bond
hereinafter provided for and pay the fee herein prescribed, before any such
license shall issue, to the Director of Finance.
§ 11-103. [Ch. 11, Sec. 3] License fee. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
The annual license fee shall be as set forth in the Schedule of Fees, and
upon payment of the proper fee, and the execution of the bond hereinafter
provided for, the City Manager may issue, or cause to be issued, the license
herein required. Every such license shall expire on the 31st day of
December following the date of its issuance, and may be issued for an
unexpired portion of a year upon payment of a sum bearing the same ratio
to the sum required for the whole year as the remaining number of quarters
and parts thereof of the term for which the license is granted, inclusive of
quarter in which application is made bears to the whole number of quarters
in the year. Said license may be revoked by the City Manager for cause at
any time, and by the acceptance of said license the applicant agrees and
contracts that said license may be so revoked by the City Manager. Said
license shall state upon its face the number of persons permitted to engage
in said business.
§ 11-104. [Ch. 11, Sec. 4] Bond. [Ord. No. 1974-124]
Before such license shall be issued, the applicant shall execute and file
with the City Clerk a bond, with a corporate surety to be approved by the
Corporation Counsel in the penal sum of $1,000 conditioned to indemnity,
save and keep harmless the City of Bloomington from any and all loss,
§ 11-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-104
1:377
damage, cost, expense or liability of any kind whatsoever which said City
may suffer or be put to, or which may be recovered from it, from or by
reason of the issuance of such license, or from or by reason of any act or
thing done or neglected to be done by the licensee or any of his employees
under or by virtue of such licensee or his employees to observe and comply
with the Ordinances of the City relating to window cleaning.
§ 11-105. [Ch. 11, Sec. 5] Safety device to be provided.
Every person, firm or corporation licensed to conduct or carry on the
business of window cleaning shall supply each person actually engaged in
the work of washing windows with a safety device approved by the Chief
of the Fire Department, consisting of a belt and rope with terminals so
designed that they shall fit in and become part of the safety devices on
windows for which they are to be used.
§ 11-106. [Ch. 11, Sec. 6] Use of appliances.
It shall be unlawful for any person who shall be connected with the licensee
hereunder and actually engaged in the work of washing windows to use any
appliance of a loose nature which is not attached to his person while at
work, except a sponge, a squeegee, brush and rag, or other devices which
are of light weight, and it shall be unlawful to place any receptacle for water
on the outer edge of any window unless such receptacle is firmly hooked to
the belt or safety device on the window frame.
§ 11-107. [Ch. 11, Sec. 7] Changes which affect bond, must be
reported and approved.
If after the issuance of a license hereunder the place of business of the
licensee shall be changed, or there shall be any change in the business
which affects the bond filed hereunder, such facts shall at once be reported
to the City Manager, and the license so granted shall not be operative until
the change so made has been approved by the City Manager and a note
to that effect endorsed on the license. In case the number of employees of
the licensee is increased after the issuance of the license, such fact shall be
reported to the City Manager before such additional employees commence
work, and an additional license fee shall be paid according to the terms of
this Ordinance.
§ 11-108. [Ch. 11, Sec. 8] License nontransferable.
No license granted hereunder shall be assigned or transferred by or to any
person, firm or corporation.
§ 11-109. [Ch. 11, Sec. 9] Penalty.
Any person, firm or corporation violating or failing to comply with any of the
provisions of this chapter, shall be fined not less than $10, nor more than
$100 for each offense, and each day that the violation shall continue shall
be deemed to constitute a distinct and separate offense.
§ 11-104 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 11-109
1:378
ARTICLE II
Coin-Operated Dry Cleaning Equipment
§ 11-201. [Ch. 11, Sec. 10] License required - definitions.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to conduct or
carry on the business of a coin-operated dry cleaning establishment without
first having obtained a license as hereinafter provided. For the purpose of
this Ordinance, "dry cleaning machine" is defined as any machine having
as its purpose the cleaning of clothing and using as a solvent or liquid,
any substance other than water. A coin-operated dry cleaning business
establishment is defined as any place of business open to the general public
having one or more of such dry cleaning machines in use with a coinoperated
device attached.
§ 11-202. [Ch. 11, Sec. 11] Application and license fee. [Ord. No.
2018-89]
Any person, firm or corporation desiring to carry on the business of coinoperated
dry cleaning establishments shall file with the City Manager,
an application in writing giving the name of the person, corporation or
partnership applying for said license and if a partnership, the names of each
individual partner, the location of the proposed place of business in said City
and such other information as the City Manager may require. The annual
license fee shall be as set forth in the Schedule of Fees per year for each
machine used in the operation of the business. Such license shall expire
on the 31st day of December following the date of its issuance and may be
issued for an unexpired quarter of the year upon payment of a sum prorated
on the basis of the number of quarters or parts thereof remaining in the
year. Said license may be revoked by the City Manager at any time for cause
and by the acceptance of said license, the applicant agrees and contracts
that said license may be so revoked by the City Manager.
§ 11-203. [Ch. 11, Sec. 12] License nontransferable.
No license granted hereunder shall be assigned or transferred by or to any
person, firm or corporation.
§ 11-204. [Ch. 11, Sec. 13] Bond required of licensee. [Ord. No.
1974-124]
A prerequisite to issuing a license herein shall be the filing of a bond in
the penal sum of $3,000 payable to the City of Bloomington or any party
in interest, conditioned upon the faithful adherence to all provisions of this
Ordinance as to operation and installation of equipment and as security for
the payment of any penalties for the violation thereof.
§ 11-205. [Ch. 11, Sec. 14] Penalty.
Any person, firm or corporation violating or failing to comply with any of the
provisions of this chapter, shall be fined not less than $10, nor more than
§ 11-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-205
1:379
$100 for each offense, and each day that the violation shall continue shall
be deemed to constitute a distinct and separate offense.
§ 11-206. [Ch. 11, Sec. 15] Equipment.
No equipment shall be operated unless the same shall meet the following
minimum requirements:
§ 11-207. [Ch. 11, Sec. 16] Installation.
Installation of any equipment from and after the effective date of this
Ordinance shall comply with the following minimum requirements:
A. The machines shall be completely enclosed by a cabinet. The cabinet
shall be provided with vents at or near its bottom and connected to
exhaust ventilation adequate to prevent the escape of vapor to the
surrounding atmosphere. The exhaust vent connection shall be located
at or near the top of the cabinet.
B. The cleaning equipment must be provided with an exhaust system
capable of maintaining a minimum of 100 feet per minute face velocity
through the loading door whenever the door is open. The duct work
connections from this system must be sealed (soldered or taped) and
the discharge stack extended to outside of the building to a point
sufficiently distant above the roof line and sufficiently distant from any
intake ventilation to avoid recirculation.
C. An interlock system must be provided on the machine to prevent the
loading door from being opened during the normal cycle. This system
may be either electrical and/or mechanical and so connected that in the
event of a power failure the machine fails safe. A system depending
upon air pressure is not considered satisfactory due to the possibility of
accidental loss of pressure.
D. The cleaning cycle controls shall be such that there will be no odor of
solvent or solvent vapor in the material being cleaned when it is
removed from the machine at the end of the cycle. This will require
temperature or vapor sensitive controls.
E. The machines shall be equipped with transparent doors or ports to
allow visual inspection and determination of the status of the cleaning
cycle.
F. If the machine is connected to a potable water supply it shall be
equipped with an air gap or properly installed vacuum breaker in the
water supply line upstream from the condenser. There shall be no
control valves downstream from the vacuum breaker. The wastewater
shall discharge through an air gap.
G. The entire cycle shall be self-contained and completed in one machine.
§ 11-205 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 11-207
1:380
§ 11-208. [Ch. 11, Sec. 17] Operation.
No machines may be operated without meeting the following minimum
requirements:
§ 11-209. [Ch. 11, Sec. 18] Servicing.
No machines may be serviced by the licensee, his agent, or service man
without complying with the following.
A. The equipment shall be installed such that only the front of the machine
shall be exposed in the customer area. The working or maintenance
portion of the equipment should be separated from the front of the
machine by a partition. As a means of minimizing any solvent buildup in
the customer area and also to control any minor solvent leakage, it is
required that the manufacturer's specifications be complied with as to
minimum flow rate from the customer area through the partition and
also shall be followed as to minimum fresh air intakes, grille area, and
other details essential to the adequate ventilation of the customer area.
B. A satisfactory means of preventing liquid leaks from escaping the
enclosure must be provided. This should include some method of
"diking" the floor of the enclosure or machine base to hold a liquid
volume equal to the maximum quantity of solvent which might possibly
escape from the system. Some means must be provided for draining
solvent in the event of a leak and containment. This can be done by
gravity flow with the solvent transferred to a standby holding tank. This
tank shall be vented to the outside, or in lieu of the diking herein
defined, the integral pan and piping system is satisfactory provided that
the piping system is connected to a properly sized and vented holding
tank as described above.
C. Equipment shall not be installed in a building occupied as dwelling
place.
D. All exhausts for the machines and the area occupied by the machines
shall have a separate duct system and discharge to the outside with
minimum requirements as set forth for room ventilation.
A. No machine may be operated at any time unless there is a fully qualified
attendant or operator employed by the licensee on duty.
B. Complete operating instructions shall be posted near the machines.
These instructions shall include a warning to the effect that garments
or materials bearing the odor of the solvent are dangerous if enclosed
in an automobile or other tightly enclosed place.
C. Warning signs shall be posted requesting evacuation of the
establishment in the presence of noticeable vapor odor or in presence
of such symptoms as irritation of the eyes, nose, or throat, lacrimation,
or dizziness, and shall be enforced.
§ 11-207 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-209
1:381
A. Servicing of the machines shall be done only during operation of all the
exhaust ventilation required herein.
B. The solvent shall be stored in closed containers, and should be
transferred from the containers in a line free of leaks. All storage
facilities for solvent, external from the equipment, must be adequately
and properly labeled.
C. Filter residue and other residues containing solvent shall be disposed of
so as not to create a health hazard or nuisance. A covered metal
container should be used for temporary storage outside the building.
D. Respiratory protective equipment shall be provided for maintenance
personnel and must be kept in good repair and available for immediate
use. Chemical cartridge respirators are approved for light solvent
concentrations and the wearer should replace the cartridges
immediately upon noting odor.
E. Safety goggles, rubber gloves, and rubber safety apron shall be
provided for the use of the service personnel.
§ 11-209 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 11-209
1:382
ARTICLE III
Asphaltic Concrete Plants
§ 11-301. [Ch. 11, Sec. 21] Permit. [Ord. No. 1982-63]
No person, firm, or entity of any kind or description shall operate an
asphaltic concrete plant within the corporate limits of the City of
Bloomington without a permit therefor issued from the Director of Building
Safety of the City of Bloomington.
§ 11-302. [Ch. 11, Sec. 22] Application procedure. [Ord. No.
1982-63]
Applications for a license shall be made upon forms supplied by the City
Clerk's Office and shall be accompanied by the first year's license fee.
If the Director of Building Safety determines that the plant meets the
air and water pollution regulations issued pursuant to the Environmental
Protection Act and meets the requirements of Bloomington City Code
Chapter 44 for a special use permit, then he shall issue a license which will
permit the operation of said plant for the remainder of that calendar year;
otherwise, except as provided in § 11-306 below, he shall refuse to issue said
license.
§ 11-303. [Ch. 11, Sec. 23] Fees. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
The license fee shall be as set forth in the Schedule of Fees for each
calendar year or part thereof and shall be nonrefundable and shall be
prorated, plus reimbursement of the City for costs incurred in determining
whether such plant meets the technical standards for licensing.
§ 11-304. [Ch. 11, Sec. 24] Standards of operation - infection.
A. Each asphaltic concrete plant licensed hereunder shall be operated in
conformity with air and water pollution regulations issued pursuant to
the Environmental Protection Act and the requirements of Bloomington
City Code Chapter 44, Section 7.30(k)19.
B. It shall be the duty and responsibility of any asphaltic concrete plant
annually to cause such asphaltic concrete plant to be inspected either
by the Environmental Protection Agency of the State of Illinois or a
reputable Engineer or Mechanic acceptable to the Director of Building
Safety engaged in or holding himself or the business concern by which
he is employed to be a specialist in the construction maintenance and
repair of asphaltic concrete plants, such inspection to be made to
determine if the asphaltic concrete plant meets the requirements of this
article. A written report of inspection stating that the same does comply
with said requirements shall be submitted to the Director of Building
Safety of the City on or before renewal of said license each year. If the
result of such inspection or tests shall show any asphaltic concrete
19.Editor's Note: See now § 44-1006.
§ 11-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-304
1:383
§ 11-305. [Ch. 11, Sec. 25] Revocation-suspension. [Ord. No.
1982-63]
The Director of Building Safety shall be and he is hereby authorized and
directed to revoke or suspend the license of any asphaltic concrete plant
if he determines that the standards of this article have not been or are
not being complied with. Prior to entering any order of suspension or
revocation, the Director shall afford the operator of such plant an
opportunity to review tile basis for the suspension or revocation and to
present evidence at such hearing.
§ 11-306. [Ch. 11, Sec. 26] Existing plants. [Ord. No. 1982-63]
Any asphaltic concrete plant lawfully existing as of August 22, 1982 shall be
issued an initial license by the Director of Building Safety. It shall, however,
be operated in accordance with the requirements of this article in order to
obtain a renewal license.
§ 11-307. [Ch. 11, Sec. 27] Violations. [Ord. No. 1982-63]
The penalty for violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be a
fine of not less than $50 nor more than $500 for each offense. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed on every day that a violation exists or
continues. In addition or instead, operation of asphaltic concrete plants in
violation of the requirements of this Ordinance may be enjoined by the
Circuit Court of McLean County upon an application to do so by the Legal
Department of the City of Bloomington.
plant not to be operating in compliance with said standards, the
inspection shall so state and the Director of Building Safety shall
suspend or refuse to renew a license for said plant until such alterations
are made as to render said plant in compliance with the standards of
this article.
C. The Director of Building Safety upon receipt of an inspection report and
within 10 days thereafter shall issue a renewal license or state in
writing his objections to said renewal on the basis of the inspection
report. [Ord. No. 1982-63]
§ 11-304 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 11-307
1:384
ARTICLE IV
Business Registration
§ 11-401. [Ch. 11, Sec. 30] Temporary suspension of requirements.
[Ord. No. 2019-07]
The City's business registration requirements are temporarily suspended
until further action of the City Council.
§ 11-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-401
1:385

ARTICLE V
Department of Economic Development
§ 11-501. [Ch. 11, Sec. 40] Establishment. [Ord. No. 2019-13]
There is hereby created the Department of Economic Development of the
City. This Department shall consist of the Director of Economic
Development and such other officials and employees as may be provided for
by the Council by adoption of the Annual Budget and Salary Ordinance, or
any amendments thereto.
§ 11-502. [Ch. 11, Sec. 41] Functions of Department. [Ord. No.
2019-13]
The Department of Economic Development shall provide assistance in the
generation of new business within the City, including expanding the City's
tax base, increasing the level of economic activity within the City and
revitalizing the City's downtown areas. The Department shall assist in the
retention and expansion of existing businesses within the City.
§ 11-503. [Ch. 11, Sec. 42] Director of Economic Development -
titles. [Ord. No. 2019-13]
There is hereby established the office of Director of Economic Development
who shall be appointed by the City Manager as provided by law. Subject
to the control of the City Manager, the Director of Economic Development
shall have control and supervision of all employees of the Department of
Economic Development.
§ 11-504. [Ch. 11, Sec. 43] Employees of Department - conflict of
interest. [Ord. No. 2019-13]
No member or employee of the Department of Economic Development
shall engage in any occupation or business nor shall any such member or
employee be interested in any manner in any matter under its jurisdiction.
§ 11-501 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-504
1:387
Chapter 12
CIVIL DEFENSE
§ 12-101. [Ch. 12, Sec. 1] Establishment and purpose.
§ 12-102. [Ch. 12, Sec. 2] Director/Coordinator.
§ 12-103. [Ch. 12, Sec. 3] Functions.
Bloomington E.S.D.A. shall perform such functions within the City as shall
be prescribed by State Emergency Services and Disaster Agency plan and
program prepared by the Governor of the State of Illinois, and such orders,
rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the Governor, and in
addition shall perform such duties outside the corporate limits as may be
required pursuant to any Mutual Aid Agreement with any other political
subdivision, municipalities or quasi-municipality entered into as provided by
the State E.S.D.A. Act of 1975.
§ 12-104. [Ch. 12, Sec. 4] Service as mobile support team.
A. The purpose of this Ordinance is to create the City of Bloomington
Emergency Services and Disaster Agency to be known as Bloomington
E.S.D.A. There is thus hereby created the Bloomington Emergency
Services and Disaster Agency whose purpose is to prevent, minimize,
repair, and alleviate any injury or damage resulting from disaster
caused by enemy attack, sabotage, or other hostile action, or from any
natural or man-made disaster as defined in and in accordance with "The
Illinois Emergency Services and Disaster Act of 1975."
B. Bloomington E.S.D.A. shall consist of the Director/Coordinator and such
additional members as may be appointed by the Mayor of Bloomington
and approved by a majority vote of the City Council. [Ord. No.
1981-48]
A. The Director/Coordinator of Bloomington E.S.D.A. shall be appointed by
the City Manager. The Director/Coordinator shall have direct
responsibility for the organization, administration, training and
operation of the Bloomington E.S.D.A. subject to the direction and
control of the City Manager as provided by statute.
B. In the event of the absence, resignation, death, or inability of the
Director/Coordinator to serve in this function, the City Manager or any
person designated by him shall be and act as Director/Coordinator until
a new appointment is made. The Director/Coordinator shall prepare a
Comprehensive Plan and program for disaster preparedness,
emergency response, utilization of resources, and recovery of
Bloomington from any disaster emergency. This Comprehensive Plan
shall be tested, revised, and coordinated with the State and Federal
government as required.
§ 11-504 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 12-104
1:388
§ 12-105. [Ch. 12, Sec. 5] Agreements with other political
subdivisions.
The Director/Coordinator of E.S.D.A. may negotiate Mutual Aid Agreements
with other counties or political subdivisions of the State, but no such
Agreement shall be effective until it has been approved by the City Council
and by the State Director of E.S.D.A.
§ 12-106. [Ch. 12, Sec. 6] Communications.
The Bloomington Emergency Services and Disaster Agency shall ascertain
what means exist for rapid and efficient communications and shall
coordinate all available communications resources in times of Disaster
Emergencies. The Agency shall consider the desirability of supplementing
those communication resources with available State resources or of
integrating them into a comprehensive State or State-Federal
Communications System or Network.
§ 12-107. [Ch. 12, Sec. 7] Emergency action.
If the Governor proclaims that a disaster or emergency exists or in the event
of an actual enemy attack upon the United States, it shall be the duty of
the City E.S.D.A. to cooperate fully with the County E.S.D.A. and with the
Governor in the exercise of emergency powers as provided by law.
§ 12-108. [Ch. 12, Sec. 8] Compensation.
Members of the Emergency Services and Disaster Agency who are paid
employees or Officers of the City, if called for training by the State Director
of E.S.D.A., shall receive for the time spent in such training the same
rate of pay as is attached to the position held; members who are not
such City employees or officers shall receive for such training time such
compensation as may be established by the City Council.
A. All or any members of the City organization may be designated as
members of a Mobile Support Team created by the Director of the State
E.S.D.A. as provided by law.
B. The leader of such Mobile Support Team shall be designated by the
Director/Coordinator of the Bloomington E.S.D.A. organization.
C. Any member of a Mobile Support Team who is a City employee or officer
while serving on call to duty to the Governor, or the State Director, shall
receive the compensation and have the powers, duties, rights and
immunities incident to such employment or office. Any such member
who is not a paid officer or employee of the City, while so serving, shall
receive from the State reasonable compensation provided by law. [Ord.
No. 1981-48]
§ 12-104 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-109
1:389
§ 12-109. [Ch. 12, Sec. 9] Reimbursement by state.
The State Treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund any
reimbursement by the State to the City for expenses incident to training
members of the E.S.D.A. prescribed by the State Director of E.S.D.A.,
compensation for services and expenses of members of the mobile support
team while serving outside Bloomington, and any other reimbursement
made by the State incident to E.S.D.A. activities as provided by law.
§ 12-110. [Ch. 12, Sec. 10] Purchases and expenditures.
§ 12-111. [Ch. 12, Sec. 11] Declaration of local disaster emergency.
A. The Director/Coordinator of E.S.D.A. is authorized to make purchases
or enter into contracts necessary to place the City in a position to
combat effectively any disaster resulting from the explosion of any
nuclear or other bomb or missile and to protect public health and safety,
protect property, and provide emergency assistance to victims in the
case of any disaster. Said purchases or entry into contracts can only be
done upon the approval of a majority of the Bloomington City Council.
B. In the event of enemy-caused, man-made or other natural disaster, the
City Director/Coordinator of E.S.D.A. is authorized on behalf of the City
to procure such services, supplies, equipment or material as may be
necessary for such purposes in view of the exigency without regard to
the statutory procedures or formalities normally prescribed by law
pertaining to City contracts or obligations as authorized by "The State
E.S.D.A. Act of 1975" provided that if the City Council is meeting at the
time of such disaster, he shall act subject to the directions and
restrictions imposed by that body. [Ord. No. 1981-48]
A. Whenever a local disaster emergency exists, the Mayor, or Acting
Mayor, may declare its existence by means of a written declaration
setting forth the facts which constitute the emergency and shall
perform the duties and obligations of Mayor prescribed in this Division.
In the absence of the Mayor, the Acting Mayor may declare its existence
by means of a written declaration setting forth the facts which
constitute the emergency and shall otherwise perform the duties and
obligations of the Mayor until the Mayor returns to the position of
Mayor. Any order or proclamation shall be given prompt and general
publicity and shall be filed promptly with the Bloomington City Clerk.
(1) Curfew. After proclamation of a local disaster emergency by the
Mayor or Acting Mayor, he may order a general curfew applicable
to such geographical areas of the City or to the City as a whole as
he deems advisable and applicable during such hours of the day or
night as he deems necessary in the interest of the public safety and
welfare. [Ord. No. 1981-48]
(2) Other prohibitions. After the proclamation of a local disaster
emergency, the Mayor or Acting Mayor of the City of Bloomington
§ 12-109 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 12-111
1:390
§ 12-112. [Ch. 12, Sec. 12] Oath.
Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the City E.S.D.A.
organization shall before, entering upon his duties, subscribe the following
oath which shall be filed with the Director/Coordinator:
"I, __________, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and defend
and bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United States
and the Constitution of the State of Illinois and the territory, institutions,
and facilities thereof, both public and private, against all enemies, foreign
may also in the interest of the public safety and welfare, make any
or all of the following orders:
(a) Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, or giving
away gasoline or other liquid flammable or combustible
products in any container whatsoever or in other than a
gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle or in any
other manner related to locations or containers thereof;
(b) Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing,
or giving away of any firearms or ammunition of any particular
type or of all types whatsoever;
(c) Issue such other orders as are necessary for the protection of
life and property;
(d) Prohibiting the selling of alcoholic liquor. [Ord. No. 1981-48]
(3) Effective period. Each proclamation herein authorized shall be
effective for a period of 48 hours unless sooner terminated by a
proclamation of the Mayor indicating that the local disaster
emergency no longer exists. The Mayor shall have the power to
reproclaim the existence of a local disaster emergency at the end of
each forty-eight-hour period during the time the said emergency
exists. The Mayor may make no more than two consecutive
proclamations after the initial proclamation without the consent of
the City Council. [Ord. No. 1981-48]
(4) Public notice. Upon issuing any proclamation herein authorized,
the Fire Chief or any other authorized representative of the City
shall notify local news media and shall cause three copies of the
proclamation declaring the existence of the emergency to be
posted at the following places within the City of Bloomington: City
Hall, Bloomington Public Library, and the Post Office. [Ord. No.
1981-48]
(5) The effect of a declaration of a local disaster emergency is to
activate the response and recovery aspects of any and all
applicable local or inter-jurisdictional disaster emergency plans
and authorize the furnishing of aid and assistance thereunder.
[Ord. No. 1981-48]
§ 12-111 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-112
1:391
and domestic; that I take this obligation freely, without any mental
reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully
discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter. And I do further swear
(or affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I nor have I been a member
of a political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the
government of the United States or of this State by force or violence;
that during such time as I am affiliated with the Bloomington Emergency
Services and Disaster Agency, I will not advocate nor become a member
of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the
government of the United States or of this State by force or violence."
§ 12-113. [Ch. 12, Sec. 13] Office.
The Mayor of Bloomington is authorized to designate space in a City
building or elsewhere as may be provided for by the City Council for the
Bloomington Emergency Services and Disaster Agency as its office.
§ 12-114. [Ch. 12, Sec. 14] Appropriation - levy of taxes. [Ord. No.
1976-115]
The City Council may make an appropriation for E.S.D.A. purposes in the
manner provided by law, and may levy an additional for E.S.D.A. purposes
only, a tax not to exceed $0.05 per $100 of assessed value of all taxable
property in addition to all other taxes, as provided by "The State E.S.D.A.
Act of 1975" However, that amount collectible under such levy shall in no
event exceed $0.25 per capita.
Chapter 13
CONCEALED WEAPONS
§ 13-101. [Ch. 13, Sec. 1] Concealed weapons - prohibition of -
penalty. [Ord. No. 2014-31]
Other than as provided in § 13-102, it shall be unlawful for any person
within the limits of the City to carry, wear under his clothes or conceal
about his person any firearm, sling shot, cross knuckles or knuckles of lead,
brass or metal, bowie knife, dirk, razor, dagger, bludgeon, black jack, sand
club, sand bag, switchblade, stun gun, TASER, ballistic knife or any other
dangerous or deadly weapon; or to display or flourish any such weapon in a
boisterous or threatening manner. Every person guilty of a violation of this
section shall be fined no less than $250 nor more than $2,000.
§ 13-102. [Ch. 13, Sec. 2] Concealed weapons - exception to
prohibition.
The provisions of § 13-101 of this chapter shall not be held to apply to the
following:
§ 12-112 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 13-102
1:392
§ 13-103. [Ch. 13, Sec. 3] Confiscation of weapons. [Ord. No.
2014-31]
Any weapon or weapons duly adjudged to have been worn or carried by
any person in violation of § 13-101 of this chapter shall be forfeited and
confiscated by the City of Bloomington.
Chapter 14
TELECOMMUNICATIONS
A. Any policeman or other law enforcement officer in possession of a
weapon as authorized by law;
B. Any person in possession of a handgun and also possessing a valid,
current Concealed Carry License issued by the Department of State
Police for concealed carry of a firearm as that term is defined in the
Firearm Concealed Carry Act, 430 ILCS 66/5, provided that said person
is not in an area where the carrying of a concealed firearm is prohibited
by that Act, or by other State or Federal law. [Ord. No. 2014-31]
§ 13-102 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-103
1:393

ARTICLE I
Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee
§ 14-101. [Ch. 14, Sec. 1] Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
GROSS CHARGES — The amount paid to a telecommunications retailer for
the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications within
the City, and for all services rendered in connection therewith, valued
in money whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits,
services, and property of every kind or nature, and shall be determined
without any deduction on account of the cost of such telecommunications,
the cost of the materials used, labor or service costs, or any other expense
whatsoever. In case credit is extended, the amount thereof shall be included
only as and when paid. "Gross charges" for private line service shall include
charges imposed at each channel point within the City, charges for the
channel mileage between each channel point within the City, and charges
for that portion of the interstate inter-office channel provided within the
City. However, "gross charges" shall not include:
Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made
under:
(1) The fee imposed by this section;
Additional charges added to a purchaser's bill under Section 9-221
or 9-222 of the Public Utilities Act (220 ILCS 5/9-221 or 220 ILCS
5/9-222);
(2)
Amounts collected under Section 8-11-17 of the Illinois Municipal
Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-2);
(3)
The tax imposed by the Telecommunications Excise Tax Act (35
ILCS 630/1 et seq.);
(4)
(5) 911 surcharges; or
The tax imposed by Section 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code (26
U.S.C. § 4251);
(6)
A.
B. Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside the City;
Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of
data or information or subsequent retrieval or the processing of data
or information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment
includes, but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data
processing equipment, tabulating equipment, or accounting equipment
and also includes the usage of computers under a time-sharing
agreement;
C.
§ 14-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-101
1:395
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any municipal street, alley, water or public rightof-
way dedicated or commonly used for utility purposes, including utility
easements wherein the City has acquired the right and authority to locate or
permit the location of utilities consistent with telecommunications facilities.
"Public Right-of-Way" shall not include any real or personal City property
that is not specifically described in the previous sentence and shall not
include City buildings and other structures or improvements, regardless of
whether they are situated in the public right-of-way.[Ord. No. 1997-96]
RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE —
Includes any retailer having or maintaining within the State of Illinois,
directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities, transmission
facilities, sales office, warehouse, or other place of business, or any agent
or other representative operating within this State under the authority of
the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of business
or agent or other representative is located here permanently or temporarily,
or whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in this
State.[Ord. No. 1997-96]
Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is
leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such
charges are disaggregated and separately identified from other
charges;
D.
Charges to business enterprises certified under Section 9-222.1 of the
Public Utilities Act (220 ILCS 5/9-222.1) to the extent of such exemption
and during the period of time specified by the City;
E.
Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment
provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, and
only to the extent that the charges between the parent corporation
and wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries
represent expense allocation between the corporations and not the
generation of profit other than a regulatory required profit for the
corporation rendering such services;
F.
Bad debts ("bad debt" means any portion of a debt that is related to a
sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or
excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined
under applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt
deemed to be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and
pay the tax on that portion during the reporting period in which the
payment is made);
G.
Charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated telecommunications
devices; or
H.
Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment
provided to the City. [Ord. No. 1997-96]
I.
§ 14-101 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 14-101
1:396
SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL — The transmitting,
supplying, or furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered
in connection therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent
corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned
subsidiaries, when the gross charge made by one such corporation to
another such corporation is not greater than the gross charge paid to the
retailer for their use or consumption and not for sale.[Ord. No. 1997-96]
SERVICE ADDRESS — The location of telecommunications equipment from
which telecommunications services are originated or at which
telecommunications services are received. If this is not a defined location,
as in the case of wireless telecommunications, paging systems, maritime
systems, air-to-ground systems, and the like, "service address" shall mean
the location of the customer's primary use of the telecommunications
equipment as defined by the location in Illinois where bills are sent.[Ord.
No. 1997-96]
TELECOMMUNICATIONS — Includes, but is not limited to, messages or
information transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone
service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service,
computer exchange services, private line services, specialized mobile radio
services, or any other transmission of messages or information by electronic
or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics,
laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. Unless the context
clearly requires otherwise, "telecommunications" shall also include wireless
telecommunications as hereinafter defined. "Telecommunications" shall not
include value added services in which computer processing applications are
used to act on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for
purposes other than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include
purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider
for use as a component part of the service provided by him or her to
the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the end-to-end
communications. Retailer access charges, right of access charges, charges
for use of intercompany facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the
subsequent provision and used as a component of, or integrated into, endto-
end telecommunications service shall not be included in gross charges
as sales for resale. "Telecommunications" shall not include the provision
of cable services through a cable system as defined in the Cable
Communications Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C. § 521 and following) as now or
hereafter amended or cable or other programming services subject to an
open video system fee payable to the City through an open video system as
defined in the Rules of the Federal Communications Commission (47 C.D.F.
76.1550 and following) as now or hereafter amended.[Ord. No. 1997-96]
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER —
A. Any telecommunications retailer; and
Any person that is not a telecommunications retailer that installs, owns,
operates or controls equipment in the public right-of-way that is used or
designed to be used to transmit telecommunications in any form. [Ord.
No. 1997-96]
B.
§ 14-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-101
1:397
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER or RETAILER or CARRIER — Includes
every person engaged in the business of making sales of
telecommunications at retail as defined in this section. The City may, in
its discretion, upon application, authorize the collection of the fee hereby
imposed by any retailer not maintaining a place of business within this
State, who, to the satisfaction of the City, furnishes adequate security to
ensure collection and payment of the fee. When so authorized, it shall
be the duty of such retailer to pay the fee upon all of the gross charges
for telecommunications in the same manner and subject to the same
requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of business within the
City.[Ord. No. 1997-96]
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS — Includes cellular mobile telephone
services, personal wireless services as defined in Section 704(C) of the
Telecommunications Act of 1996 (Public Law No. 104-104), 42 U.S.C.
§ 332(c)(7), as now or hereafter amended, including all commercial mobile
radio services, and paging services.[Ord. No. 1997-96]
§ 14-102. [Ch. 14, Sec. 2] Registration of telecommunications
providers.
§ 14-103. [Ch. 14, Sec. 3] Municipal telecommunications
infrastructure maintenance fee.
A. Every telecommunications provider as defined by this chapter shall
register with the City within 30 days after the effective date of this
chapter or becoming a telecommunications provider, whichever is later,
on a form to be provided by the City, provided, however, that any
telecommunications retailer that has filed a return pursuant to
§ 14-104C this chapter shall be deemed to have registered in
accordance with this section. [Ord. No. 1997-96]
B. Every telecommunications provider who has registered with the City
pursuant to § 14-102A has an affirmative duty to submit an amended
registration form or current return as required by § 14-104C, as the
case may be, to the City within 30 days from the date of the occurrence
of any changes in the information provided by the telecommunications
provider in the registration form or most recent return on file with the
City. [Ord. No. 1997-96]
A. A City telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee is hereby
imposed upon all telecommunications retailers in the amount of 1.0% of
all gross charges charged by the telecommunications retailer to service
addresses within the City for telecommunications originating or
received in the City. [Ord. No. 1997-96]
B. Upon the effective date of the infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized in this chapter, the City infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized hereunder shall be the only fee or compensation for the use
of all public rights-of-way within the City by telecommunications
retailers. Imposition of the infrastructure maintenance fee provided
§ 14-101 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 14-103
1:398
§ 14-104. [Ch. 14, Sec. 4] Collection, enforcement, and
administration of telecommunications infrastructure maintenance
fees.
under this chapter does not, however, serve as a limitation on the
levying of any taxes or imposition of any fees otherwise authorized by
law. [Ord. No. 1997-96]
C. The City telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized by this section shall be collected, enforced, and
administered as set forth in § 14-104 of this chapter. [Ord. No.
1997-96]
A. A telecommunications retailer shall charge to and collect from each
customer an additional charge in an amount equal to the City
infrastructure maintenance fee attributable to that customer's service
address. [Ord. No. 1997-96]
B. Unless otherwise approved by the City Manager the infrastructure
maintenance fee shall be remitted by the telecommunications retailer
to the City not later than the last day of the month subsequent to the
month in which a bill is issued to the customer; provided, however, that
the telecommunications retailer may retain an amount not to exceed 2%
of the City infrastructure maintenance fee collected by it to reimburse
itself for expenses incurred in accounting for and remitting the fee.
[Ord. No. 1997-96]
C. Remittance of the municipal infrastructure fee to the City shall be
accompanied by a return, in a form to be prescribed by the City
Manager which shall contain such information as the City Manager may
reasonably require. [Ord. No. 1997-96]
D. Any infrastructure maintenance fee required to be collected pursuant
to this chapter and any such infrastructure maintenance fee collected
by such telecommunications retailer shall constitute a debt owed by the
telecommunications retailer to the City. The charge imposed under
§ 14-104A by the telecommunications retailer pursuant to this chapter
shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the telecommunications
retailer who provides such services until paid and, if unpaid, is
recoverable at law in the same manner as the original charge for such
services. [Ord. No. 1997-96]
E. If it shall appear that an amount of infrastructure maintenance fee has
been paid that was not due under the provisions of this chapter,
whether as a result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such
amount shall be credited against any infrastructure maintenance fee
due, or to become due, under this chapter, from the
telecommunications retailer who made the erroneous payment;
provided, however, the City Manager may request, and
telecommunications retailer shall provide, written substantiation for
such credit. However, no claim for such credit may be made more than
§ 14-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-104
1:399
§ 14-105. [Ch. 14, Sec. 5] Compliance with other laws.
Nothing in this chapter shall excuse any person or entity from obligations
imposed under any law, including but not limited to:
three years after the date of the erroneous payment unless, (1) the
credit is used only to offset a claim of underpayment made by the City
within the applicable statutory period of limitations, and (2) the credit
derives from an overpayment made by the same telecommunications
retailer during the applicable statutory period of limitations. [Ord. No.
1997-96]
F. Amounts paid under this chapter by telecommunications retailers shall
not be included in the tax base under any of the following acts as
described immediately below:
(1) "Gross charges" for purposes of the Telecommunications Excise Tax
Act (35 ILCS 630/1 et seq.);
(2) "Gross receipts" for purposes of the municipal utility tax as
prescribed in Section 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS
5/8-11-2);
(3) "Gross charges" for purposes of the municipal telecommunications
tax as prescribed in Section 8-11-17 of the Illinois Municipal Code
(65 ILCS 5/8-11-17);
(4) "Gross revenue" for purposes of the tax on annual gross revenue of
public utilities prescribed in Section 2-202 of the Public Utilities
Act (220 ILCS 5/2-202). [Ord. No. 1997-96]
G. The City shall have the right, in its discretion, to audit the books and
records of all telecommunications retailers subject to this chapter to
determine whether the telecommunications retailer has properly
accounted to the City for the City infrastructure maintenance fee. Any
underpayment of the amount of the City infrastructure maintenance fee
due to the City by the telecommunications retailer shall be paid to the
City plus 5% of the total amount of the underpayment determined in an
audit, plus any costs incurred by the City in conducting the audit, in an
amount not to exceed 5% of the total amount of the underpayment
determined in an audit. Said sum shall be paid to the City within 21
days after the date of issuance of an invoice for same. [Ord. No.
1997-96]
H. The City Manager, or his or her designee, may promulgate such further
or additional regulations concerning the administration and
enforcement of this chapter, consistent with its provisions, as may be
required from time to time and shall notify all telecommunications
retailers that are registered pursuant to § 14-102 of this chapter of such
regulations. [Ord. No. 1997-96]
A. Generally applicable taxes; and
§ 14-104 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 14-105
1:400
§ 14-106. [Ch. 14, Sec. 6] Existing franchises and licenses. [Ord.
No. 1997-96]
Any franchise, license, or similar agreements between telecommunications
retailers and the City entered into before the effective date of this chapter
regarding the use of public rights-of-way shall remain valid according to and
for their stated terms except for any fees, charges or other compensation to
the extent waived.
§ 14-107. [Ch. 14, Sec. 7] Penalties. [Ord. No. 1997-96]
Any telecommunications provider who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or
refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject
to fine in an amount not to exceed $500 per day.
§ 14-108. [Ch. 14, Sec. 8] Enforcement. [Ord. No. 1997-96]
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or
further remedies that the City may have for enforcement of this chapter.
§ 14-109. [Ch. 14, Sec. 9] Severability. [Ord. No. 1997-96]
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct,
and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portions hereof.
§ 14-110. [Ch. 14, Sec. 10] Conflict. [Ord. No. 1997-96]
This chapter supersedes all Chapters or parts of Chapters of the City Code
adopted prior hereto which are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such
conflict.
B. Standards for construction on, over, under, or within, use of or repair of
the public rights-of-way, including standards relating to free standing
towers and other structures upon the public rights-of-way, as provided;
and
C. Any liability imposed for the failure to comply with such generally
applicable taxes or standards governing construction on, over, under, or
within, use of or repair of the public rights-of-way; and
D. Compliance with any ordinance or provision of this Code concerning
uses or structures not located on, over, or within the right-of-way.
§ 14-105 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-110
1:401

ARTICLE II
Small Wireless Facilities Deployment
§ 14-201. [Ch. 14, Sec. 11] Purpose and scope.
§ 14-202. [Ch. 14, Sec. 12] Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
ANTENNA — Communications equipment that transmits or receives
electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless
services.
APPLICABLE CODES — Uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or
mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or
local amendments to those codes, including the National Electrical Safety
Code.
APPLICANT — Any person who submits an application and is a wireless
provider.
APPLICATION — A request submitted by an applicant to the City for a
permit to collocate small wireless facilities, and a request that includes
the installation of a new utility pole for such collocation, as well as any
applicable fee for the review of such application.
COLLOCATE or COLLOCATION — To install, mount, maintain, modify,
operate, or replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support
structure or utility pole.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE — Cable service, as defined in 47 U.S.C.
522(6), as amended; information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(24), as
amended; telecommunications service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(53), as
amended; mobile service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(53), as amended; or
wireless service other than mobile service.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this Ordinance is to establish regulations,
standards and procedures for the siting and collocation of small
wireless facilities in a manner that is consistent with the Small Wireless
Facilities Deployment Act (the Act), Public Act 100-0585.20
B. Conflicts with other ordinances. This Ordinance supersedes all
Ordinances or parts of Ordinances adopted prior hereto that are in
conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict.
C. Conflicts with State and Federal Laws. In the event that applicable
federal or State laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of
this Ordinance, the wireless provider shall comply with the
requirements of this Ordinance to the maximum extent possible without
violating federal or State laws or regulations. [Ord. No. 2018-61]
20.Editor's Note: See 50 ILCS 840/1.
§ 14-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-202
1:403
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER — A cable operator, as defined in
47 U.S.C. 522(5), as amended; a provider of information service, as defined
in 47 U.S.C. 153(24), as amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined
in 47 U.S.C. 153(51), as amended; or a wireless provider.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
FEE — A one-time charge.
HISTORIC DISTRICT or HISTORIC LANDMARK — A building, property, or
site, or group of buildings, properties, or sites that are either:
LAW — A federal or State statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order,
local ordinance or resolution.
MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY — A small wireless facility that is not larger
in dimension than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in
height and that has an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than 11 inches.
MUNICIPAL UTILITY POLE — A utility pole owned or operated by the City
in public rights-of-way.
PERMIT — A written authorization required by the City to perform an action
or initiate, continue, or complete a project.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, limited liability company,
partnership, association, trust, or other entity or organization.
PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY — The functional division of the federal
government, the State, a unit of local government, or a special purpose
district located in whole or in part within this State, that provides or
has authority to provide firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other
emergency services to respond to and manage emergency incidents.
RATE — A recurring charge.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway,
street, public sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated for compatible
use. Right-of-way does not include City-owned aerial lines.
Listed in the National Register of Historic Places or formally
determined eligible for listing by the Keeper of the National Register,
the individual who has been delegated the authority by the federal
agency to list properties and determine their eligibility for the National
Register, in accordance with Section VI.D.1.a.i through Section
VI.D.1.a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement codified at 47
CFR Part 1, Appendix C; or
A.
Designated as a locally landmarked building, property, site, or historic
district by an ordinance adopted by the City pursuant to a preservation
program that meets the requirements of the Certified Local
Government Program of the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office
or where such certification of the preservation program by the Illinois
State Historic Preservation Office is pending.
B.
§ 14-202 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 14-202
1:404
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY — A wireless facility that meets both of the
following qualifications:
UTILITY POLE — A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part
by a communications service provider or for electric distribution, lighting,
traffic control, or a similar function.
WIRELESS FACILITY —
WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER — Any person authorized to
provide telecommunications service in the State that builds or installs
wireless communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities,
wireless support structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless
services provider but is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless
services provider for the application submitted to the City.
WIRELESS PROVIDER — A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless
services provider.
WIRELESS SERVICES — Any services provided to the general public,
including a particular class of customers, and made available on a
Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six cubic
feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements,
the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an
imaginary enclosure of no more than six cubic feet; and
A.
All other wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole
associated with the facility is cumulatively no more than 25 cubic feet
in volume. The following types of associated ancillary equipment are
not included in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meter,
concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation box, groundbased
enclosures, grounding equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off
switch, and vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other
services.
B.
Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications
between user equipment and a communications network, including:
(1) Equipment associated with wireless communications; and
Radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular
and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless
of technological configuration.
(2)
A.
Wireless facility includes small wireless facilities. Wireless facility does
not include:
The structure or improvements on, under, or within which the
equipment is collocated; or
(1)
Wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber optic cable that is
between wireless support structures or utility poles or coaxial, or
fiber optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or
directly associated with an antenna.
(2)
B.
§ 14-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-202
1:405
nondiscriminatory basis using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at
a fixed location or mobile, provided using wireless facilities.
WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER — A person who provides wireless
services.
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE — A freestanding structure, such as
a monopole; tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other
existing or proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting
wireless facilities. Wireless support structure does not include a utility
pole.[Ord. No. 2018-61]
§ 14-203. [Ch. 14, Sec. 13] Regulation of small wireless facilities.
A. Permitted use. Small wireless facilities shall be classified as permitted
uses and subject to administrative review, except as provided in
paragraph (C9) regarding height exceptions or variances, but not
subject to zoning review or approval if they are collocated (i) in rightsof-
way in any zoning district, or (ii) outside rights-of-way in property
zoned exclusively for commercial or industrial use.
B. Permit required. An applicant shall obtain one or more permits from the
City to collocate a small wireless facility. An application shall be
received and processed, and permits issued shall be subject to the
following conditions and requirements:
(1) Application requirements. A wireless provider shall provide the
following information to the City, together with the City's Small Cell
Facilities Permit Application, as a condition of any permit
application to collocate small wireless facilities on a utility pole or
wireless support structure:
(a) Site specific structural integrity and, for a municipal utility
pole, make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer,
as that term is defined in Section 4 of the Structural
Engineering Practice Act of 198921;
(b) The location where each proposed small wireless facility or
utility pole would be installed and photographs of the location
and its immediate surroundings depicting the utility poles or
structures on which each proposed small wireless facility
would be mounted or location where utility poles or structures
would be installed. This should include a depiction of the
completed facility;
(c) Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer,
as that term is defined in Section 4 of the Structural
Engineering Practice Act of 1989, for each proposed small
wireless facility covered by the application as it is proposed to
be installed;
21.Editor's Note: See 225 ILCS 340/4.
§ 14-202 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 14-203
1:406
(d) The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and
all other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless
facility;
(e) A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of
each small wireless facility covered by the application, if
approved; and
(f) Certification that the collocation complies with the Collocation
Requirements and Conditions contained herein, to the best of
the applicant's knowledge.
(g) In the event that the proposed small wireless facility is to be
attached to an existing pole owned by an entity other than the
City, the wireless provider shall provide legally competent
evidence of the consent of the owner of such pole to the
proposed collocation.
(2) Application process. The City shall process applications as follows:
(a) The first completed application shall have priority over
applications received by different applicants for collocation on
the same utility pole or wireless support structure.
(b) An application to collocate a small wireless facility on an
existing utility pole or wireless support structure, or
replacement of an existing utility pole or wireless support
structure shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and
shall be deemed approved if the City fails to approve or deny
the application within 90 days after the submission of a
completed application.
However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted
activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify
the City in writing of its intention to invoke the deemed
approved remedy no sooner than 75 days after the submission
of a completed application.
The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the
90th day after submission of the complete application or the
10th day after the receipt of the deemed approved notice by
the City. The receipt of the deemed approved notice shall not
preclude the City's denial of the permit request within the time
limits as provided under this Ordinance.
(c) An application to collocate a small wireless facility that
includes the installation of a new utility pole shall be processed
on a nondiscriminatory basis and deemed approved if the City
fails to approve or deny the application within 120 days after
the submission of a completed application.
§ 14-203 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-203
1:407
However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted
activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify
the City in writing of its intention to invoke the deemed
approved remedy no sooner than 105 days after the submission
of a completed application.
The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the
120th day after submission of the complete application or the
10th day after the receipt of the deemed approved notice by
the City. The receipt of the deemed approved notice shall not
preclude the City's denial of the permit request within the time
limits as provided under this article.
All permits for new utility poles applied for under this article
shall be issued only if the applicant complies with the
requirements of Chapter 38, Article V of this code, as may be
amended from time to time, as well as with all applicable law.
(d) The City shall deny an application that does not meet the
requirements of this article.
[1] If the City determines that applicable codes, ordinances or
regulations that concern public safety, or the Collocation
Requirements and Conditions contained herein require
that the utility pole or wireless support structure be
replaced before the requested collocation, approval shall
be conditioned on the replacement of the utility pole or
wireless support structure at the cost of the provider.
[2] The City shall document the basis for a denial, including
the specific code provisions or application conditions on
which the denial is based, and send the documentation to
the applicant on or before the day the City denies an
application.
[3] The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the
City and resubmit the revised application once within 30
days after notice of denial is sent to the applicant without
paying an additional application fee. The City shall
approve or deny the revised application within 30 days
after the applicant resubmits the application or it is
deemed approved. Failure to resubmit the revised
application within 30 days of denial shall require that the
applicant to submit a new application with applicable fees,
and recommencement of the City's review period.
[4] The applicant must notify the City in writing of its
intention to proceed with the permitted activity on a
deemed approved basis, which may be submitted with the
revised application.
§ 14-203 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 14-203
1:408
[5] Any review of a revised application shall be limited to the
deficiencies cited in the denial. However, this revised
application cure does not apply if the cure requires the
review of a new location, new or different structure to be
collocated upon, new antennas, or other wireless
equipment associated with the small wireless facility.
(e) Pole attachment agreement. Within 30 days after an approved
permit to collocate a small wireless facility on a municipal
utility pole, the City and the applicant shall enter into a Master
Pole Attachment Agreement, provided by the City for the initial
collocation on a municipal utility pole by the application. For
subsequent approved permits to collocate a small wireless
facility on a municipal utility pole, the City and the applicant
shall enter into a License Supplement of the Master Pole
Attachment Agreement.
(3) Completeness of application. Within 30 days after receiving an
application, the City shall determine whether the application is
complete and notify the applicant. If an application is incomplete,
the City must specifically identify the missing information. An
application shall be deemed complete if the City fails to provide
notification to the applicant within 30 days after all documents,
information and fees specifically enumerated in the City's permit
application form are submitted by the applicant to the City.
Processing deadlines are tolled from the time the City sends the
notice of incompleteness to the time the applicant provides the
missing information.
(4) Tolling. The time period for applications may be further tolled by:
(a) An express written agreement by both the applicant and the
City; or
(b) A local, State or federal disaster declaration or similar
emergency that causes the delay.
(5) Consolidated applications.
(a) An applicant seeking to collocate small wireless facilities
within the jurisdiction of the City shall be allowed, at the
applicant's discretion, to file a consolidated application and
receive a single permit for the collocation of up to 25 small
wireless facilities if the collocations each involve substantially
the same type of small wireless facility and substantially the
same type of structure.
(b) If an application includes multiple small wireless facilities, the
City may remove small wireless facility collocations from the
application and treat separately small wireless facility
collocations for which incomplete information has been
provided or that do not qualify for consolidated treatment or
§ 14-203 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-203
1:409
that are denied. The City may issue separate permits for each
collocation that is approved in a consolidated application.
(6) Duration of permits.
(a) The duration of a permit shall be for a period of not less than
five years, and the permit shall be renewed for equivalent
durations unless the City makes a finding that the small
wireless facilities or the new or modified utility pole do not
comply with the applicable City codes or any provision,
condition or requirement contained in this article.
(b) If the Act is repealed as provided in Section 90 therein,
renewals of permits shall be subject to the applicable City code
provisions or regulations in effect at the time of renewal.
(7) Means of submitting applications. Applicants shall submit
applications, supporting information and notices to the City by
personal delivery at the Department of Community Development,
by regular mail postmarked on the date due or by any other
commonly used means, including electronic mail.
C. Collocation requirements and conditions.
(1) Public safety space reservation. The City may reserve space on
municipal utility poles for future public safety uses, for the City's
electric utility uses, or both, but a reservation of space may not
preclude the collocation of a small wireless facility unless the City
reasonably determines that the municipal utility pole cannot
accommodate both uses.
(2) Installation and maintenance. The wireless provider shall install,
maintain, repair and modify its small wireless facilities in safe
condition and good repair and in compliance with the requirements
and conditions of this article and applicable law. The wireless
provider shall ensure that its employees, agents or contractors that
perform work in connection with its small wireless facilities are
adequately trained and skilled in accordance with all applicable
industry and governmental standards and regulations.
(3) No interference with public safety communication frequencies.
(a) The wireless provider's operation of the small wireless
facilities shall not interfere with the frequencies used by a
public safety agency for public safety communications.
(b) A wireless provider shall install small wireless facilities of the
type and frequency that will not cause unacceptable
interference with a public safety agency's communications
equipment.
(c) Unacceptable interference will be determined by and
measured in accordance with industry standards and the FCC's
§ 14-203 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 14-203
1:410
regulations addressing unacceptable interference to public
safety spectrum or any other spectrum licensed by a public
safety agency.
(d) If a small wireless facility causes such interference, and the
wireless provider has been given written notice of the
interference by the public safety agency, the wireless provider,
at its own expense, shall remedy the interference in a manner
consistent with the abatement and resolution procedures for
interference with public safety spectrum established by the
FCC including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47
CFR 90.672 through 47 CFR 90.675.
(e) The City may terminate a permit for a small wireless facility
based on such interference if the wireless provider is not in
compliance with the Code of Federal Regulations cited in the
previous paragraph. Failure to remedy the interference as
required herein shall constitute a public nuisance.
(4) The wireless provider shall not collocate small wireless facilities on
City utility poles that are part of an electric distribution or
transmission system within the communication worker safety zone
of the pole or the electric supply zone of the pole.
However, the antenna and support equipment of the small wireless
facility may be located in the communications space on the City
utility pole and on the top of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable,
if the wireless provider complies with applicable codes for work
involving the top of the pole.
For purposes of this subparagraph, the terms "communications
space," "communication worker safety zone," and "electric supply
zone" have the meanings given to those terms in the National
Electric Safety Code as published by the Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers.
(5) The wireless provider shall comply with all applicable codes and
local code provisions or regulations that concern public safety.
(6) The wireless provider shall comply with written design standards
that are generally applicable for decorative utility poles, or
reasonable stealth, concealment and aesthetic requirements that
are set forth in a City ordinance, written policy adopted by the City,
a Comprehensive Plan or other written design plan that applies to
other occupiers of the rights-of-way, including on a historic
landmark or in a historic district.
(7) Alternate placements.
(a) Except as provided in this collocation requirements and
conditions section, a wireless provider shall not be required to
collocate small wireless facilities on any specific utility pole, or
§ 14-203 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-203
1:411
category of utility poles, or be required to collocate multiple
antenna systems on a single utility pole. However, with respect
to an application for the collocation of a small wireless facility
associated with a new utility pole, the City may propose that
the small wireless facility be collocated on an existing utility
pole or existing wireless support structure within 100 feet of
the proposed collocation, which the applicant shall accept if
it has the right to use the alternate structure on reasonable
terms and conditions, and the alternate location and structure
does not impose technical limits or additional material costs as
determined by the applicant.
(b) If the applicant refuses a collocation proposed by the City, the
applicant shall provide written certification describing the
property rights, technical limits or material cost reasons the
alternate location does not satisfy the criteria in this
paragraph.
(8) Height limitations.
(a) The maximum height of a small wireless facility shall be no
more than 10 feet above the utility pole or wireless support
structure on which the small wireless facility is collocated.
(b) New or replacement utility poles or wireless support
structures on which small wireless facilities are collocated may
not exceed the higher of:
[1] Ten feet in height above the tallest existing utility pole,
other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities,
that is in place on the date the application is submitted to
the City, that is located within 300 feet of the new or
replacement utility pole or wireless support structure and
that is in the same right-of-way within the jurisdictional
boundary of the City, provided the City may designate
which intersecting right-of-way within 300 feet of the
proposed utility pole or wireless support structures shall
control the height limitation for such facility; or
[2] Forty-five feet above ground level.
(9) Height exceptions or variances. If an applicant proposes a height
for a new or replacement pole in excess of the above height
limitations on which the small wireless facility is proposed for
collocation, the applicant shall apply for a variance in conformance
with procedures, terms and conditions set forth in Chapter 44 of
the City code.
(10) Contractual design requirements. The wireless provider shall
comply with requirements that are imposed by a contract between
the City and a private property owner that concern design or
§ 14-203 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 14-203
1:412
construction standards applicable to utility poles and groundmounted
equipment located in the right-of-way.
(11) Ground-mounted equipment spacing. The wireless provider shall
comply with applicable spacing requirements in applicable codes
and ordinances concerning the location of ground-mounted
equipment located in the right-of-way if the requirements include a
waiver, zoning or other process that addresses wireless provider
requests for exception or variance and do not prohibit granting of
such exceptions or variances.
(12) Undergrounding regulations. The wireless provider shall comply
with local code provisions or regulations concerning
undergrounding requirements that prohibit the installation of new
or the modification of existing utility poles in a right-of-way without
prior approval if the requirements include a waiver, zoning or other
process that addresses requests to install such new utility poles or
modify such existing utility poles and do not prohibit the
replacement of utility poles.
(13) Collocation completion deadline. Collocation for which a permit is
granted shall be completed within 180 days after issuance of the
permit, unless the City and the wireless provider agree to extend
this period or a delay is caused by make-ready work for a municipal
utility pole or by the lack of commercial power or backhaul
availability at the site, provided the wireless provider has made a
timely request within 60 days after the issuance of the permit for
commercial power or backhaul services, and the additional time to
complete installation does not exceed 360 days after issuance of
the permit. Otherwise, the permit shall be void unless the City
grants an extension in writing to the applicant.
D. Application fees. Application fees are imposed as follows:
(1) Applicant shall pay an application fee as set forth in the Schedule of
Fees for an application to collocate a single small wireless facility
on an existing utility pole or wireless support structure, and for
each small wireless facility addressed in a consolidated application
to collocate more than one small wireless facility on existing utility
poles or wireless support structures. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
(2) Applicant shall pay an application fee as set forth in the Schedule of
Fees for each small wireless facility addressed in an application
that includes the installation of a new utility pole for such
collocation. [Ord. No. 2018]
(3) Notwithstanding any contrary provision of State law or local
ordinance, applications pursuant to this section shall be
accompanied by the required application fee. Application fees shall
be non-refundable.
§ 14-203 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-203
1:413
(4) The City shall not require an application, approval or permit, or
require any fees or other charges, from a communications service
provider authorized to occupy the rights-of-way, for:
(a) Routine maintenance;
(b) The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities
that are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the
wireless provider notifies the City at least 10 days prior to the
planned replacement and includes equipment specifications
for the replacement of equipment consistent with Subsection
B(1)(d) of this section; or
(c) The installation, placement, maintenance, operation or
replacement of micro wireless facilities suspended on cables
that are strung between existing utility poles in compliance
with applicable safety codes.
(5) Wireless providers shall secure a permit from the City to work
within rights-of-way for activities that affect traffic patterns or
require lane closures.
E. Exceptions to applicability.
(1) Nothing in this article authorizes a person to collocate small
wireless facilities on:
(a) Property owned by a private party or property owned or
controlled by the City or another unit of local government that
is not located within rights-of-way, or a privately owned utility
pole or wireless support structure without the consent of the
property owner;
(b) Property owned, leased, or controlled by a park district, forest
preserve district, or conservation district for public park,
recreation or conservation purposes without the consent of the
affected district, excluding the placement of facilities on rightsof-
way located in an affected district that are under the
jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local government
as provided by the Illinois Highway Code; or
(c) Property owned by a rail carrier registered under Section
18c-7201 of the Illinois Vehicle Code,22 Metra Commuter Rail
or any other public commuter rail service, or an electric utility
as defined in Section 16-102 of the Public Utilities Act,23
without the consent of the rail carrier, public commuter rail
service, or electric utility. The provisions of this Ordinance do
not apply to an electric or gas public utility or such utility's
wireless facilities if the facilities are being used, developed and
22.Editor's Note: See 625 ILCS 5/18c-7201.
23.Editor's Note: See 220 ILCS 5/16-102.
§ 14-203 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 14-203
1:414
maintained consistent with the provisions of Subsection I of
Section 16-108.5 of the Public Utilities Act.24
(2) For the purposes of this subsection, "public utility" has the meaning
given to that term in Section 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act.25
Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to relieve any person
from any requirement (a) to obtain a franchise or a State-issued
authorization to offer cable service or video service or (b) to obtain
any required permission to install, place, maintain, or operate
communications facilities, other than small wireless facilities
subject to this Ordinance.
F. Preexisting agreements.
(1) Existing agreements between the City and wireless providers that
relate to the collocation of small wireless facilities in the right-ofway,
including the collocation of small wireless facilities on City
utility poles, that are in effect on June 1, 2018, remain in effect for
all small wireless facilities collocated on the City's utility poles
pursuant to applications submitted to the City before June 1, 2018,
subject to applicable termination provisions contained therein.
Agreements entered into after June 1, 2018, shall comply with this
Ordinance.
(2) A wireless provider that has an existing agreement with the City on
the effective date of the Act may accept the rates, fees and terms
that the City makes available under this Ordinance for the
collocation of small wireless facilities or the installation of new
utility poles for the collocation of small wireless facilities that are
the subject of an application submitted two or more years after the
effective date of the Act by notifying the City that it opts to accept
such rates, fees and terms. The existing agreement remains in
effect, subject to applicable termination provisions, for the small
wireless facilities the wireless provider has collocated on the City's
utility poles pursuant to applications submitted to the City before
the wireless provider provides such notice and exercises its option
under this paragraph.
G. Annual recurring rate. A wireless provider shall pay to the City an
annual recurring rate to collocate a small wireless facility on a City
utility pole located in a right-of-way that equals (i) $200 per year or (ii)
the actual, direct and reasonable costs related to the wireless
provider's use of space on the City utility pole. If the City has not billed
the wireless provider actual and direct costs, the fee shall be $200
payable on the first day after the first annual anniversary of the
issuance of the permit or notice of intent to collocate, and on each
annual anniversary date thereafter.
24.Editor's Note: See 220 ILCS 5/16-108.5.
25.Editor's Note: See 220 ILCS 5/3-105.
§ 14-203 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-203
1:415
§ 14-204. [Ch. 14, Sec. 14] Design standards.
In addition to any other applicable design standards as set forth in this
article or in an applicable code or law, a wireless provider shall comply with
the following design standards:
H. Abandonment. A small wireless facility that is not operated for a
continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned. The
owner of the facility shall remove the small wireless facility within 90
days after receipt of written notice from the City notifying the wireless
provider of the abandonment. The notice shall be sent by certified or
registered mail, return receipt requested, by the City to the owner at
the last known address of the wireless provider. If the small wireless
facility is not removed within 90 days of such notice, the City may
remove or cause the removal of such facility pursuant to the terms of its
pole attachment agreement for municipal utility poles or through
whatever actions are provided for abatement of nuisances or by other
law for removal and cost recovery. A wireless provider shall provide
written notice to the City if it sells or transfers small wireless facilities
within the jurisdiction of the City. Such notice shall include the name
and contact information of the new wireless provider. [Ord. No.
2018-61]
A. Screening. Whenever any equipment or appurtenances, i.e., cabinet,
controller, etc., are to be installed, screening must be installed to
minimize the visibility of such equipment or appurtenance and shall not
be permitted to obstruct sight lines or to create other traffic or safety
problems.
B. Color and stealth. All small wireless facilities, including all related
equipment and appurtenances, must be a color that blends with the
surroundings of the utility pole, wireless support structure, or other
structure on which such facility or equipment is mounted, placed, or
collocated. The color must be comprised of nonreflective materials
which blend with the materials and colors of the surrounding area and
structures. The applicant shall use good faith efforts to employ
reasonable stealth techniques to conceal the appearance of a small
wireless facility or its related equipment and appurtenances.
C. Utility poles; wireless support structures; extensions. Any utility pole
extension or wireless support structure extension must blend with the
color of the utility pole or wireless support structure upon which such
extension is mounted. Any new utility pole or replacement utility pole
must blend with the color, style, and structure of any surrounding utility
poles or wireless support structures.
D. Size. The applicant shall make good faith efforts to ensure the
silhouette of a small wireless facility and its related equipment and
appurtenances are reduced to minimize visual impact. [Ord. No.
2018-61]
§ 14-203 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 14-205
1:416
§ 14-205. [Ch. 14, Sec. 15] Safety standards.
In addition to any other applicable safety standards as set forth in in this
article or in an applicable code or law, a wireless provider shall comply with
the following safety standards:
§ 14-206. [Ch. 14, Sec. 16] Dispute resolution. [Ord. No. 2018-61]
The Circuit Court of McLean County shall have exclusive jurisdiction to
resolve all disputes arising under the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment
Act. Pending resolution of a dispute concerning rates for collocation of small
wireless facilities on municipal utility poles within the right-of-way, the City
shall allow the collocating person to collocate on its poles at annual rates
of no more than $200 per year per municipal utility pole, with rates to be
determined upon final resolution of the dispute.
§ 14-207. [Ch. 14, Sec. 17] Indemnification. [Ord. No. 2018-61]
A wireless provider shall indemnify and hold the City and its officers,
employees, and agents harmless against any and all liability or loss from
personal injury or property damage resulting from or arising out of, in
whole or in part, the use or occupancy of the City improvements or rightof-
way associated with such improvements by the wireless provider or its
employees, agents, or contractors arising out of the rights and privileges
A. A small wireless facility and any related equipment or appurtenance
shall not be collocated in a manner so as to obstruct or interfere with a
motorist's view of roadways, nor shall any small wireless facility and
any related equipment or appurtenance be collocated in a manner that
obstructs the view of a motorist at an intersection.
B. All small wireless facilities shall comply with tornado design standards
as contained in the EIA-TIA 222 (latest version).
C. Any and all transmission cables and cable trays deployed horizontally
above the ground between any number of small wireless facilities and
its equipment, or between any number of small wireless facilities, or
between any number of small wireless facilities' equipment, shall be at
least eight feet above the ground at all points.
D. Wires and cables connecting the antenna to the remainder of the small
wireless facility must be installed in accordance with the national
electrical code, national electrical safety code, and any other applicable
code adopted by the City Code and in force at the time of the
installation of the small wireless facility. Any wiring must be covered
with an appropriate cover. No wiring or cabling serving the facility will
be allowed to interfere with any existing uses.
E. No signage is permitted on any small wireless facility or its related
equipment or appurtenances other than signs that are required for
public safety purposes, by law, or by the FCC, FAA, or other similar
governmental agency. [Ord. No. 2018-61]
§ 14-205 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-207
1:417
granted under this Ordinance and the Act. A wireless provider has no
obligation to indemnify or hold harmless against any liabilities and losses as
may be due to or caused by the sole negligence of the City or its employees
or agents. A wireless provider shall further waive any claims that they may
have against the City with respect to consequential, incidental, or special
damages, however caused, based on the theory of liability.
§ 14-208. [Ch. 14, Sec. 18] Insurance.
§ 14-209. [Ch. 14, Sec. 19] Severability. [Ord. No. 2018-61]
If any provision of this Ordinance or application thereof to any person or
circumstances is ruled unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such invalidity
shall not affect other provisions or applications of this Ordinance that can
be given effect without the invalid application or provision, and each invalid
provision or invalid application of this Ordinance is severable.
A. The wireless provider shall carry, at the wireless provider's own cost
and expense, the following insurance:
(1) Property insurance for its property's replacement cost against all
risks;
(2) Workers' compensation insurance, as required by law; or
(3) Commercial general liability insurance with respect to its activities
on the City improvements or rights-of-way to afford minimum
protection limits consistent with its requirements of other users of
City improvements or rights-of-way, including coverage for bodily
injury and property damage.
B. The wireless provider shall include the City as an additional insured on
the commercial general liability policy and provide certification and
documentation of inclusion of the City in a commercial general liability
policy prior to the collocation of any wireless facility.
C. A wireless provider may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance
coverage and limit requirement required by the City. A wireless
provider that self-insures is not required, to the extent of the selfinsurance,
to comply with the requirement for the name of additional
insureds under this section. A wireless provider that elects to selfinsure
shall provide to the City evidence sufficient to demonstrate its
financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage limits required by
the City. [Ord. No. 2018-61]
§ 14-207 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 14-209
1:418
Chapter 15
ELECTRICITY
§ 14-209 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-209
1:419

ARTICLE I
(Reserved)
[Repealed 9-23-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-68]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-209
1:421

ARTICLE II
Electrical Contractors
§ 15-201. [Ch. 15, Sec. 3] Definitions.
ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR — Any person, firm, limited liability company
or corporation engaged in the business of installing or altering by contract
electrical equipment and apparatus for utilization of electricity supplied
for light, heat, or power, not including radio apparatus or equipment for
wireless reception of sounds and signals and not including apparatus,
conductors, and other equipment installed for or by public utilities including
common carriers, which are under the jurisdiction of the Illinois Commerce
Commission, for use in their operation as public utilities but the term
"Electrical Contractor" does not include employees employed by such
contractor to do or supervise such work.[Ord. No. 2013-68]
§ 15-202. [Ch. 15, Sec. 4] Electrical contractor - required to be
licensed - license fee.
§ 15-203. [Ch. 15, Sec. 5] Application for certificate of license -
examination - issuance of license.
A. All electrical work in the City shall be done by a licensed electrical
contractor or his employees except as otherwise provided in this
chapter. Before any person, firm, limited liability company or
corporation shall engage in the business of electrical contracting in the
City, said entity shall continue in said business of electrical contracting
in the City, such person, firm, or corporation shall be required to have a
license and pay a license fee as set forth in the Schedule of Fees yearly,
which license issued thereunder shall expire on the 31st day of
December of the year in which it was issued. The City Clerk shall keep a
suitable record of all registrations. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
B. Nothing in this Code shall prevent a builder-occupant of a single-family
residence from installing or doing electrical work in such residence,
including accessories, without an Electrical Contractor license;
however, a builder-occupant is subject to all other provisions of this
Code.
C. To qualify as an owner-occupant, the single-family residence to be
worked on must be resided in by the owner-occupant for a period of at
least one year from the date an occupancy certificate is issued or final
inspection is completed. [Ord. No. 2013-68]
A. Any person, firm, limited liability company or corporation desiring to
engage in the business of electrical contracting shall apply for a license
to the Community Development Department, stating the name and
place of business of the applicant and the name of the representative of
the applicant who will act as supervisor of the work to be done under
the license. Such applicant shall be at least 18 years of age shall supply
a satisfactory affidavit that the applicant has had at least four years of
§ 15-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-203
1:423
§ 15-204. [Ch. 15, Sec. 6] Same - expiration; renewals.
experience being employed full-time as an Electrician or Electrician
Helper installing and altering electrical wiring and apparatus for a
licensed electrical contractor, with at least two of those years of
experience just prior to the time of application. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
B. Each applicant for a license under this section must pass an
examination prior to the issuance of such license. Candidates for the
Electrical Contractor License must pass the "Standard Master
Electrician" examination administered by the International Code
Council or its designated testing agent. In the event any applicant fails
to pass said examination, he shall not present himself for reexamination
before six months shall elapse from the date of his last examination.
[Ord. No. 2013-68]
C. Any person, firm, limited liability company or corporation who shall
have filed proper application, paid the fee as set forth in the Schedule of
Fees, passed the examination referred to in Subsection B and placed on
file with the City Clerk a certificate of liability insurance in an amount
not less than $300,000 aggregate bodily injury, $100,000 aggregate
property damage, shall be entitled to receive a license to do electrical
work and to engage in the business of electrical contracting in the City.
[Ord. No. 2018-89]
D. A license issued under this section can be suspended or revoked by the
Building Board of Appeals, for repeated failure to perform work
properly or for refusal to correct work that has been installed
improperly when directed to do so by the Electrical Inspector. [Ord.
No. 2013-68]
E. The Building Board of Appeals may issue a limited license to a person,
firm, limited liability company or corporation licensed as a heating
contractor in the City of Bloomington. The Certificate would permit the
holder to do branch circuit electrical power wiring to new heating or
cooling equipment being installed in existing residential buildings. The
work to be performed under this limited certificate shall include not
more than the actual branch circuitry required to serve or connect four
ton or less of air conditioning or five horse power of air conditioning
and heating combined, or 7,000 watts of air conditioning and heating
combined. This certificate shall not permit the installation of wiring for
electric heating equipment which uses electricity as the primary source
of fuel, and/or heat through the use of resistance type elements or other
electricity-to-heat-converter systems. The examination for this license
shall be the "Standard Maintenance Electrician" examination
administered by the International Code Council or its designated
testing agent. The application fee shall be in an amount as set forth in
the Schedule of Fees. The annual renewal fee shall be as set forth in the
Schedule of Fees. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
§ 15-203 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 15-204
1:424
§ 15-205. [Ch. 15, Sec. 7] Electrical contractor - license not to be
loaned or assigned. [Ord. No. 2008-17]
Licenses issued by the Electrical Commission shall not be loaned, rented,
assigned or transferred. Any licensed contractor whose named license
holders employment is terminated or becomes deceased must have another
named representative who meets the qualifications of § 15-203A apply
within 30 days for examination and re-license.
§ 15-206. [Ch. 15, Sec. 7.1] Reciprocal provisions. [Ord. No.
2018-89]
Any person, firm, limited liability company or corporation who is licensed
for the current year in any jurisdiction where the requirements of licensing
A. No person, firm, limited liability company or corporation granted a
license under provisions of this division shall install, repair or perform
any wiring after the expiration of the license or after the license has
been suspended or revoked by the Building Board of Appeals, as herein
provided. Any person having secured an Electrical Contractor's license
under the conditions above set forth shall be granted a renewal of such
license, provided application is made to the Electrical Inspector by the
holder of such license and upon payment of an amount as set forth in
the Schedule of Fees with such renewal request.
B. All licenses shall expire on the 31st day of December of each year, and a
renewal shall be obtained on or before January 31st of the following
year.
C. Any licenses forfeited for nonpayment of the renewal fee may be
reinstated upon the payment of the annual renewal fee as set forth in
the Schedule of Fees, plus $25 for each month, or portion of a month
that such delinquency has continued; provided, however, that after the
same has been delinquent and not in force on March 1st of the following
year, then the same shall be null and void and shall not be renewed.
D. A license will be automatically put in an inactive status after a period of
12 months consecutive inactivity and except as herein provided, the
Building Board of Appeals is permitted to reissue the holder's license
without reexamination. The Electrical Contractor's license inactive
status can remain with payment of the annual renewal fee in an amount
as set forth in the Schedule of Fees. The twelve-month period will start
at the end of the year during which the contractor was last active in
Bloomington.
E. Such inactive license may be reinstated if the contractor furnishes
satisfactory evidence that his qualifications meet the standards for
issuance of a license, and places on file with the City Clerk, a current
certificate of liability insurance in an amount not less than $300,000
aggregate bodily injury, $100,000 aggregate property damage. [Ord.
No. 2018-89]
§ 15-204 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-206
1:425
are substantially equal to the requirements in force in this City and such
jurisdiction extends a similar privilege to the persons licensed under this
Electrical Code, shall not be required to take an examination, but shall pay
a annual registration fee in an amount as set forth in the Schedule of Fees
as provided in this chapter. Such reciprocal registration must include and
place on file with the City Clerk a current certificate of liability insurance
in an amount not less than $300,000 aggregate bodily injury, $100,000
aggregate property damage, to engage in electrical contracting for such
year in this City, and shall file a current copy of his license with the
Electrical Inspector.
§ 15-207. [Ch. 15, Sec. 8] Penalty. [Ord. No. 2008-17]
Any person, firm, or corporation that shall do any electrical work, or that
shall engage in the business of electrical contractor without obtaining a
license as herein provided for or that shall re-violate any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $500 for each
offense and a separate and distinct offense shall be regarded as committed
every day on which such person, firm, or corporation shall continue to
operate contrary to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 15-206 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 15-207
1:426
ARTICLE III
Electrical Code
§ 15-301. [Ch. 15, Sec. 9] Adoption of Electric Code. [Ord. No.
2014-07]
There is hereby adopted by the City for the purpose of establishing rules
and regulations for the safe and practical installation, alteration and use of
electrical equipment, including permits and penalties, that certain Electric
Code known as the National Electrical Code, as published by the National
Fire Protection Association, being particularly the 2014 edition thereof and
the whole thereof, save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted,
modified or amended, of which not less than one copy is on filed in the office
of the Clerk of the City and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated
as fully as if set out at length herein and from the date on which the
Ordinance shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling in the
installation, alteration, and use of electrical equipment within the corporate
limits of the City and on City owned property outside the corporate limits of
the City.
§ 15-302. [Ch. 15, Sec. 10] Establishment of office of Electrical
Inspector. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
The office of Electrical Inspector is hereby created who shall receive such
compensations as may be provided by ordinance. He shall be under the
supervision of the Director of Community Development Department.
§ 15-303. [Ch. 15, Sec. 11] (Reserved) [Repealed 6-23-1975 by Ord.
No. 1975-66]
§ 15-304. [Ch. 15, Sec. 12] Qualifications.
No person shall be appointed to the Office of Electrical Inspector who is not
reasonably well skilled in the various departments of electricity and well
versed in the rules or requirements of the National Electrical Code.
§ 15-305. [Ch. 15, Sec. 13] Conflict of interest. [Ord. No. 1990-23]
Said Electrical Inspector shall not directly or indirectly engage or have
interest in any business or occupation that deals with electricity in any of
its various forms including electrical appliances while in the employment of
the City.
§ 15-306. [Ch. 15, Sec. 14] Duties and authority.
A. The Electrical Inspector shall enforce all laws relating to the
installation, alteration and use of electrical equipment; to see that the
construction, maintenance and control of all electrical appliances and
apparatus and systems of electrical wiring and systems of poles for the
carriage of said electrical wires and the electrical wiring of all buildings
in the City, either public or private, and electric or illuminated signs or
§ 15-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-306
1:427
§ 15-307. [Ch. 15, Sec. 15] (Reserved) [Repealed 6-23-1975 by Ord.
No. 1975-66]
§ 15-308. [Ch. 15, Sec. 16] Scope of Code. [Ord. No. 2005-92]
The provisions of this article shall control the design and construction of all
new installations of electrical conductors, fittings, devices, and fixtures for
light, heat, and power service equipment and all equipment used for power
supply, including those for and with information technology equipment,
communications circuits and their related systems and to radio and
television receiving systems and amateur radio transmission systems in
buildings and structures; and all alterations or extensions to existing wiring
systems therein to insure safety. All such installations shall conform to the
provisions of this article and accepted engineering practice.
§ 15-309. [Ch. 15, Sec. 17] Permits required.
billboards shall conform to and comply with the rules and regulations
established by this article. The Electrical Inspector, in the discharge of
his official duties, and upon proper identification, shall have authority
to enter any buildings, structure or premises at any reasonable hour. In
dangerous situations the Electrical Inspector shall have the authority
to order service discontinued to any property until such conditions
are corrected. Said Electrical Inspector shall have the authority to
order service discontinued to any property until such conditions are
corrected. Said Electrical Inspector in the work of his office shall have
the same powers as a Police Officer.
B. It shall be the duty of said Electrical Inspector to end the dangers
associated with the use of electricity, to inspect in the manner
hereinafter provided all uses of electricity within the corporate limits of
the City or on City owned property outside the corporate limits of the
City, whether used either as a motive power or for heating, lighting or
telephone purposes; or for any other purpose whatever requiring a
connection system of wires or of poles and wires extending throughout,
along, or across the streets, alleys or other public places of the City or
any portion thereof, or where electricity is used in any private property
within the City when connected with any such general system of
electrical power or any isolated system. [Ord. No. 2008-17]
A. No electrical wiring for light, heat, or power or maintenance or repair
of or to any electrical conductor, equipment or material regulated by
The National Electrical Code or as adopted and or modified in this
chapter other purposes shall be installed in a building or structure nor
shall an alteration or extension of an existing electrical wiring system
be made without being appropriately licensed and or registered and
until a permit has been issued therefor.
B. All electrical equipment shall be installed, altered, or changed under
the supervision of the Electrical Inspector of said City, and no person
§ 15-306 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 15-309
1:428
§ 15-310. [Ch. 15, Sec. 18] Permits, plans, and specifications
required. [Ord. No. 2008-17]
Prior to the issuance of an electrical permit, plans, specifications, and
schedules in sufficient detail shall be filed with the Electrical Inspector
showing the location and capacity of all lighting facilities, electrically
operated equipment and light and power circuits required for all service
equipment for new buildings or structures or major rewiring projects. Minor
permits may be issued with only a simple sketch or written description of
the work to be done submitted. A permit shall be issued only to a licensed
electrical contractor or an owner of an owner-occupied single family home.
shall use any electricity in said electrical equipment without first having
said equipment inspected and approved according to these rules and
regulations and the Code of the City.
C. All work on a particular job must be performed by the licensed
contractor or his employee representative who the permit was issued
to. [Ord. No. 2008-17]
D. The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
(1) Repairs and maintenance. Minor repair work, including the
replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable
electrical equipment to approved permanently installed
receptacles.
(2) Public service agencies. The installation, alteration, or repair of
electrical equipment for the operation of communications and
signals or the transmission of intelligence by wire by public service
agencies.
(3) Power companies. The installation, alteration, or repair of electrical
equipment of a power or public service company for its use in the
generation, transmission, distribution, or metering of electricity;
and such other maintenance or construction as may be required to
insure the safe and adequate transmission of electricity to the
premises being served by said power company.
(4) Temporary testing systems. The installation of any temporary
system required for the testing or servicing of electrical equipment
or apparatus. Such system must be approved as safe for the
location wherein or on it is to be used by the Electrical Inspector.
(5) Railway utilities. The installations or equipment employed by a
railway utility in the exercise of its functions as a public carrier and
located outdoors. [Ord. No. 2008-17]
(6) Transmitting equipment. The electrical equipment used for radio or
television transmission, except the equipment and wiring for power
supply and installation of towers and antennae. [Ord. No.
2005-92]
§ 15-309 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-310
1:429
The Electrical Inspector shall be notified of any change of deviation from
the plans submitted.
§ 15-311. [Ch. 15, Sec. 19] Permit fees.
§ 15-312. [Ch. 15, Sec. 20] Annual limited permits.
In lieu of an individual permit required for each procedure under § 15-309
above, the maintenance of an already approved electrical installation in
a company or establishment may be performed under an annual limited
permit subject to the following:
A. The permit fee for all work covered by provision of the National
Electrical Code of the City shall be calculated based on estimated/
reasonable cost/value and nature of the work proposed for all new
work, improvement, installations, system repair, replacement, addition,
and alteration including material and labor shall be in amount as set
forth in the Schedule of Fees.
B. Fee surcharge. Any work undertaken without a permit shall be subject
to a surcharge of 100% of the regular charge or $50, whichever is
greater, upon issuance of a valid permit. This shall be construed as a
supplemental penalty accruing regardless of any imposition provided
for in this Code. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
A. The permit shall be issued to the firm, company or corporation only if it
has under regular employment a qualified company electrician who is
responsible for all work covered by the permit.
B. The permit is applied for and a fee paid in an amount as set forth in the
Schedule of Fees. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
C. Scope of work.
(1) Repair of existing luminaries (lighting fixtures).
(2) Replacement of damaged or defective devices, such as,
(a) Switches and receptacles.
(b) Motion sensors.
(c) Time clocks.
(3) The disconnecting and or reconnecting of motors for motor driven
equipment from their existing electrical connection.
(4) The disconnecting and or reconnecting of modular office partitions
from existing electrical supply.
(5) This permit does not allow for the installation of service conductors
or distribution equipment or their related systems, such as sub
panels, motor control centers and conduit systems.
§ 15-310 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 15-312
1:430
§ 15-313. [Ch. 15, Sec. 21] Inspection and tests.
(6) This permit does not allow for the installation of new branch
circuits or lighting circuits or their related devices to accommodate
building and or room additions.
D. Instead of a qualified company electrician being employed by a
company, work allowed in the annual limited permit shall be performed
by a licensed electrical contractor upon notification of and approval by
the Electrical Inspector or the Director of Community Development.
[Ord. No. 2017-96]
E. To be a qualified company electrician, one must appear before the
Electrical Commission for review and pass the "Standard Maintenance
Electrician" examination administered by the International Code
Council or its designated testing agent. [Ord. No. 2008-17]
F. The annual limited permit shall at no time be used for work performed
beyond the premises for which it was issued. [Ord. No. 2008-17]
G. The review fee for the qualified company electrician test shall be as set
forth in the Schedule of Fees. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
A. During the installation of electrical wiring systems and service
equipment, the Electrical Inspector shall make inspections to insure
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. The Electrical Inspector shall within one working day of notification of
completion by the contractor make his inspection. No work in
connection with an electric wiring system shall be covered or concealed
until it has been inspected and permission to do so has been granted by
the Electrical Inspector, and he is hereby authorized to demand the
removal of any flooring, lathing, plaster, sheet or metal, or other
material which may conceal any electrical wiring or apparatus contrary
to the provisions of this article.
C. On completion of the inspection of any electrical wiring or apparatus
designed to be concealed and found to be in compliance with the
provisions of this article, it shall be the duty of said Inspector to post a
"Rough-In" inspection sticker on a location, and said sticker shall be
considered as expressed permission to conceal any part of the system,
but no concealment shall take place until such sticker has been posted
by said Inspector. [Ord. No. 2008-17]
D. On completion of the work, the Electrical Inspector shall inspect the
work to insure compliance with all requirements.
E. It shall be unlawful to use or permit the use of, or to supply current for
new electric wiring for heat, light or power in a building or structure,
unless approved by the Electrical Inspector. No electrical current shall
be turned on to such equipment so inspected, nor shall any company
wires be connected therewith, until such approval is procured.
§ 15-312 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-313
1:431
§ 15-314. [Ch. 15, Sec. 22] Inspection upon complaint. [Ord. No.
1990-23]
Upon complaint in writing of any citizen as to the unsafe condition of any
part of any such electrical system within the City, it shall be the duty of
such Electrical Inspector to inspect such part complained of, and if he finds
that such complaint is well grounded, or if he otherwise finds any defect to
require the person, firm or corporation at fault in the matter to put such
part in proper condition, it shall then be the duty of such person, firm or
corporation to put such defective part in proper condition.
§ 15-315. [Ch. 15, Sec. 23] Condemnation of electrical work or
equipment; right of appeal.
F. Emergency service can be performed if life or property is endangered
by delay or if undue or unnecessary hardship is or will be caused by
such delay. Such service must be reported to the Electrical Inspector
for the purpose of obtaining his property inspection within 72 hours
following the performance of such service.
G. Any work which is rejected by the Electrical Inspector shall be
corrected and reinspected within 30 days.
H. If, upon reinspection, an electric wiring system is found defective and
unsafe, the Electrical Inspector shall revoke all certificates and permits
in effect; and the use of such system shall be discontinued until it has
been made to conform to this chapter and after a new permit has been
issued. [Ord. No. 1990-23]
A. The City Electrical Inspector shall have the authority upon inspection or
reinspection to condemn any or all electrical work installed or being
installed that may be considered unsafe or hazardous to life or property.
Upon condemnation of such work, he shall serve a written notice upon
the person owning, using or installing the same to place the work in a
secure and safe condition, and in compliance with the provisions herein
contained. If any person owning, using or installing such condemned
electrical work shall deem that he is aggrieved by the condemnation by
the City Electrical Inspector, he shall have the right to appeal from the
decision of the City Electrical Inspector to the City Electrical
Commission within 10 days after receiving the written condemnation
notice. The Commission shall select a reasonable time and place for a
hearing and give due notice to the parties involved and shall render a
decision on the appeal without unreasonable delay. The decision of this
Commission shall be final. Upon condemnation of any electrical work,
the City Electrical Inspector is authorized to refuse the connection or to
disconnect or to order the disconnection of any electrical supply lines
until the condemned electrical work has been made safe and is
approved by the City Electrical Inspector. Such order shall be in
writing, signed by the City Electrical Inspector and served upon the
§ 15-313 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 15-315
1:432
§ 15-316. [Ch. 15, Sec. 24] Electrical Code modifications -
additional provisions.
The following modifications and/or additional provisions are hereby adopted
and included in and as a part of the Electrical Code of the City and shall
supersede any other provisions of this Code:
utility company furnishing service and the owner of the property. [Ord.
No. 1990-23]
B. Any petition for a variance/interpretation from the Electrical
Commission shall be filed with the Community Development
Department, accompanied by a fee in an amount as set forth in the
Schedule of Fees payable to the City of Bloomington. [Ord. No.
2018-89]
C. Any application for a variance/interpretation to this Code proposed by
the City Council, Zoning Board of Appeals, Construction Board of
Appeals, Building Code Review Board, Plumbing Board of Appeals,
Electrical Commission, HVAC Board, City staff or Regional Planning
Commission staff shall be exempted from the requirements of this
section. [Ord. No. 2005-92]
A. Type AC or MC cables shall have an enclosed ground conductor equal in
size to the current carrying conductors and used in concealed
applications only.
B. Type "S" fuses and fuse adapters for plug fuses are mandatory, unless
circuit breaker type panels are installed.
C. The use of # 10 gauge or smaller aluminum or copper-clad aluminum
wire is prohibited.
D. All snap or toggle switches used in any location shall be of a type which
has an equipment ground terminal.
E. Ceiling mounted lighting outlet boxes in dwelling units more than three
feet from any wall shall be ceiling (paddle) fan listed and be secured
according to the listing installation instructions. Garages and closets
not having ceiling fans are excluded.
F. Section 210.8 - Ground-Fault Circuit-Interrupter Protection for
Personnel is hereby modified as follows:
(1) In dwelling units, GFCI protection is not required for receptacles in
garages, that are not readily accessible and use a single receptacle
located within the ceiling space for a garage opener that, in normal
use, is not easily moved from one place to another and that is cordand-
plug connected.
(2) In dwelling units, GFCI protection is not required for receptacles in
unfinished basements not intended as habitable rooms and limited
to storage areas, work areas, and the like, with receptacles that are
§ 15-315 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-316
1:433
§ 15-317. [Ch. 15, Sec. 25] (Reserved) [Repealed 3-26-1990 by Ord.
No. 1990-23]
§ 15-318. [Ch. 15, Sec. 26] Wires and electrical apparatus not
properly insulated - nuisance.
Any electrical wire, pole or electrical support or other electrical apparatus
in said City which shall not be properly insulated, or installed or which
causes any unnecessary risk or danger of injury to persons or property in
said City, is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and any person, company or
corporation who shall maintain or use the same in such dangerous condition
shall be fined as hereinafter provided. The Electrical Inspector is hereby
authorized to cut out the same and prevent its further use.
§ 15-319. [Ch. 15, Sec. 27] Construction of article.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to exempt any person, firm or
corporation from liability now existing or that in the future may arise
to the City or any person for damage from negligence or from defective
construction relating to maintaining or making connection with any such
system of electrical power within the corporate limits of the City, nor
to release any person, firm or corporation from any restriction under
ordinances granting them their respective franchises; now shall the City be
held to assume any liability by reason of the inspection authorized herein
or certificate or permit being issued pursuant to the provisions of this
article, or from a failure of the Electrical Inspector to perform his full duties
hereunder.
§ 15-320. [Ch. 15, Sec. 28] General regulations.
The following regulations shall be followed:
not readily accessible, a single receptacle for sump pump use or
a duplex receptacle for two sump pumps located within dedicated
space for each sump pump that, in normal use, is not easily moved
from one place to another and that is cord-and-plug connected.
[Ord. No. 2008-17]
A. No wire or wires shall be installed, operated or maintained over any
street, alley, sidewalk or building in this City which shall be likely
seriously to interfere with the work of the Fire Department in the use of
ladders or other apparatus, or which shall obstruct or render hazardous
the use of fire escapes, and on complaint of the Chief of the Fire
Department to the person, firm or corporation maintaining said wires,
said obstructing, interfering or hazardous wires shall be removed or
property rearranged.
B. The Chief of the Fire Department or said Electrical Inspector or a
competent person delegated by them or either of them shall have the
power to cause the removal of all wires or the turning off of all electrical
current where the circuits interfere with the work of the Fire
§ 15-316 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 15-320
1:434
§ 15-321. [Ch. 15, Sec. 29] (Reserved) [Repealed 9-12-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-92]
§ 15-322. [Ch. 15, Sec. 30] Penalties. [Ord. No. 2008-17]
Any person who shall violate a provision of this Code or shall fail to comply
with any of the requirements therefor or who shall erect, construct, alter,
or add to in violation of an approved plan or directive of the Electrical
Inspector, or of a permit or certificate under the provisions of this Code
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than
$500 or by imprisonment not exceeding six months, or both such fine
and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.
§ 15-323. [Ch. 15, Sec. 31] Conflict of provisions of Code of the City;
effect of partial invalidity.
In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict
with any zoning, building, fire safety or health provisions of the Code of
the City existing on the effective date of this chapter, the provision which
establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the
health and safety of the people shall prevail. In any case where a provision
of any other provision of the Code of the City establishes a lower standard
Department during the progress of a fire. The said Electrical Inspector
is hereby authorized and empowered to cause the turning off of electric
current from all conductors or apparatus which are deemed by him to
be in an unsafe condition or which have not been installed in conformity
with the provisions of this article. No person, firm or corporation shall
supply or cause to be supplied any electric current to conductors or
apparatus which have been deemed by said Inspector to be in an unsafe
condition or which have not been installed in conformity with the
provisions of this article and from which the said Electrical Inspector
has caused the electric current to be turned off.
C. The words or terms "electrical wiring and apparatus" as used in this
article shall be construed to include all material, devices, machinery,
appliances, appurtenances or conductors used in connection with the
production of electric light, heat or power or the transmission of
electrical signals, except where specifically limited.
D. The Electrical Inspector shall decide all questions not provided for in
this article pertaining to installation, operation or maintenance of
electrical wiring and apparatus.
E. No person, firm or corporation shall interfere with the said Electrical
Inspector or any competent person or persons lawfully deputized to
assist him as hereinabove provided, while in the performance of duty,
and each such interference shall be deemed to constitute a separate
offense within the intent and meaning of this section. [Ord. No.
2008-17]
§ 15-320 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-323
1:435
for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people,
the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to prevail and such other
provisions of the Code of the City are hereby declared to be repealed to the
extent that they may be found to conflict with this chapter.
§ 15-323 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 15-323
1:436
Chapter 16
DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE
§ 15-323 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-323
1:437

ARTICLE I
In General
§ 16-101. [Ch. 16, Sec. 1] Establishment.
There is hereby created the Department of Finance for the City. This
department shall consist of the Director of Finance and such other officers
and employees as may be provided for by the Council.
§ 16-102. [Ch. 16, Sec. 2] Director of Finance.
There is hereby established the office of Director of Finance, who shall
be appointed by the City Manager as provided by law. The City Manager
shall serve as ex-officio Director of Finance unless and until a separate
appointment is made to this office. The Director of Finance shall have
control and supervision over all employees assigned to this department
subject to the supervision of the City Manager. He shall receive such salary
as may be provided by ordinance.
§ 16-103. [Ch. 16, Sec. 3] Duties generally of Director of Finance.
A. The Director of Finance shall be ex-officio City Comptroller and City
Collector. He shall, in addition to the performance of duties vested in
the City Comptroller and the City Collector by State law:
(1) Establish, organize, and keep all accounts of the City government;
(2) Prepare, under the direction of the City Manager, the annual
budget which shall, upon the approval of the City Manager,
constitute his report of estimates required by law to be submitted
to the Council;
(3) Prepare and submit to the City Manager such financial statements
and reports as the City Manager may require;
(4) Preaudit all revenues in order to insure the receipt and deposit of
all sums due the City;
(5) Preaudit all expenditures in order to prevent expenditures in
excess of budget appropriations and in order to prevent illegal and
irregular expenditures;
(6) Conduct special studies and investigations into the financial affairs
of the City departments whenever he deems it advisable;
(7) Collect or supervise the collection of all moneys belonging to the
City from all sources, except real and personal taxes and from other
Governmental jurisdictions;
(8) Issue all licenses and enforce licensing ordinances of the City,
except where such duties are vested in other departments and
offices;
§ 16-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-103
1:439
§ 16-104. [Ch. 16, Sec. 4] Compensation of City Comptroller as
collector.
The Director of Finance shall not receive or be entitled to, because of being
ex-officio City collector, any remuneration from the City other than that
fixed by the annual appropriation and salary ordinance of the City.
§ 16-105. [Ch. 16, Sec. 5] Revenues.
The Director of Finance shall receive and collect all charges for the use of
City property or special services rendered by the City, sums due the City
on any contracts, and all other sums due the City other than those which
are by law paid directly to the Treasurer. It shall be the duty of the Director
of Finance to keep the City Manager informed as to all sums due on taxes,
accumulations in the motor fuel account to the credit of the City and all
other revenues to which the City is entitled. Likewise, he shall also receive
and collect all other license fees, permit fees, and City charges where it has
not either by statute or this Code been provided that they shall be otherwise
collected. He shall give every person paying money into the treasury a
receipt therefor, specifying the date of payment, amount and upon what
account paid. Nothing in this section shall interfere with the City Clerk
collecting in behalf of the City for such fees as said Clerk is now collecting
for and is by this Code provided for.
§ 16-106. [Ch. 16, Sec. 6] Bond.
The Director of Finance shall furnish bond in the amount of $125,000
conditioned upon the faithful performance of his duties as such Director
of Finance and ex-officio City Collector and City Comptroller with a
corporation licensed to do business in the State of Illinois as surety. Such
(9) Assist the City Manager in the purchase of all supplies, materials,
and equipment required by the various departments and agencies
of the City, subject to the ordinances relating thereto and the
directions of the City Manager;
(10) Sell such personal property of the City as will not be needed for
further public use, subject to the approval of the City Manager;
(11) Have charge of the storage of supplies and materials purchased by
the City and not delivered directly to the various departments and
agencies and keep proper records thereof; and,
(12) Attend all sales of real estate in the City made under proceedings in
the county court to enforce the collection of any special tax or
assessment levied and assessed by ordinance of the City Council
for any public improvement, and to bid at such sales in behalf of the
City.
B. The Director of Finance shall perform such duties with the objective
that the financial interests of the City shall, at all times, be protected.
§ 16-103 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 16-106
1:440
bond shall be filed with the City Clerk after being approved by the City
Council.
§ 16-107. [Ch. 16, Sec. 7] Appropriation accounts.
Accounts shall be kept by the Director of Finance for each appropriation
made by the Council, together with a record of each allotment of the
appropriation by the City Manager, and every purchase order and contract
and every warrant passed for payment shall state specifically against which
it is drawn. The Director of Finance's accounts shall show for each
departmental appropriation and allotment made the amount of obligations
incurred against the same and the balance remaining to the credit thereof.
§ 16-108. [Ch. 16, Sec. 8] Certification of balance prerequisite to
expenditures.
No contract or purchase order involving the expenditure of tax or bond
money shall be issued or entered into, nor shall any such be valid, unless the
Director of Finance shall first certify thereon that there is in the treasury
to the credit of the appropriation from which it is to be paid a balance
sufficient to meet the obligation. Notwithstanding the foregoing
requirements, stores and service requisitions and emergency purchase
orders issued in accordance with the rules promulgated by the City
Manager may be certified not later than 24 hours after their issuance.
§ 16-109. [Ch. 16, Sec. 9] Limitation on certified expenditures.
The allotments of appropriations, as approved by the City Manager and
from time to time revised by him, shall limit the amount of expenditures
which may be certified against any appropriation by the Director of Finance
during any month of the fiscal year.
§ 16-110. [Ch. 16, Sec. 10] Liability for uncertified obligations.
If an official or employee of the City shall authorize or incur an obligation
against the City, without first securing the Director of Finance's certification
required by this article, he and his sureties shall be individually liable for
the amount of such obligations.
§ 16-111. [Ch. 16, Sec. 11] Availability of balance at close of fiscal
year.
At the close of each fiscal year, any balance of an appropriation, except
those relating to bond funds and other appropriations specifically granted
for longer than one year by the Council, shall automatically lapse and shall
cease to be available for expenditure, unless re-appropriated by the Council.
§ 16-112. [Ch. 16, Sec. 12] Maintenance of accounts.
All accounts of the City, except those pertaining to the Board of Library
Trustees and Board of Election Commissioners, shall be kept by the
§ 16-106 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-112
1:441
Department of Finance, and control accounts in a general ledger shall be
kept by the department on these excepted funds. Accounts kept elsewhere
shall be subject to the control accounts so maintained and in strict
accordance with orders of the Director of Finance.
§ 16-113. [Ch. 16, Sec. 13] To keep records, etc., for Treasurer.
The Director of Finance shall also prepare and keep for the treasurer all
bond registers and other records required by law to be kept by the treasurer
and shall prepare for signature and publication the annual treasurer's
report and any other report required by law.
§ 16-114. [Ch. 16, Sec. 14] Evidence of ownership of City bonds;
form of endorsement.
By the endorsement of the Director of Finance upon any bonds of the City,
payable to bearer, when presented for that purpose by the owner, such
bonds shall become payable only to the person named in such endorsement,
his assignees or legal representatives, anything on the face of such bonds
to the contrary notwithstanding. The affidavit of the person presenting any
such bond, or his authorized agent or attorney, that he is the owner thereof
shall be sufficient evidence to the Director of Finance of such ownership.
The endorsement of the Director of Finance may be in the following form:
"By virtue of the act of the General Assembly of Illinois, the Code of the City
of Bloomington, and the consent of (A.B.), the owner of this bond, this bond
is made payable only to said (A.B.), his assignees or legal representatives,
anything on the face hereof to the contrary notwithstanding (C.D.) Director
of Finance.
§ 16-115. [Ch. 16, Sec. 15] Form and execution of City bonds, etc.
Whenever the corporate authorities of the City shall provide by ordinance
for the issuance of improvement bonds for the purpose of anticipating the
collection of special assessments heretofore levied or hereafter to be levied,
in pursuance of the provisions of the statutes of the State, such bonds shall
be lithographed or steel-engraved on the best quality of heavy bond paper,
of a design to be approved by the City Manager, and shall be signed by
the Mayor and countersigned by the Director of Finance. Coupons shall be
attached to the bonds which shall bear the facsimile signatures of the Mayor
and the Director of Finance.
§ 16-116. [Ch. 16, Sec. 16] Selection of bonds to be paid.
The Director of Finance is hereby designated as the officer who shall, on or
before January tenth of each year, ascertain the amount collected on special
assessments applicable to the payment of bonds of each series unmatured,
and if the amount is sufficient to pay all of the unmatured bonds of the series
outstanding against the amount collected in full, then all of said bonds of
said series shall be paid from the amount ascertained and available. In the
event that the amount collected is not sufficient to pay all of said unmatured
§ 16-112 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 16-116
1:442
bonds of the series in full, then and in that event the payment shall be
the pro-rata share of the amount available for the payment of all such
unmatured bonds, outstanding in such series. The Director of Finance shall
send notice by registered mail to the address of the known owners of each
of the designated bonds as set out in the Treasurer's records, specifying a
day not less than 30 after the date of the notice, upon which the designated
bonds will be paid, either in full or in part as the case may be, at his
office. He shall also supplement this notice by publishing a notice not less
than 15 days prior to the date set for payment, in one or more newspapers
of general circulation published in the City. The notice shall contain the
number of bonds to be so paid, the series thereof, the assessment to which
they relate, whether payment is to be made in full, or a pro-rata, payment is
to be made, naming the particular series upon which the partial payment is
to be made, and that the same will be paid at the time and at a place to be
specified, pursuant to the Statute of the State of Illinois in such case made
and provided.
§ 16-117. [Ch. 16, Sec. 17] Bond register - report.
The Director of Finance shall keep in his office in a book expressly for
that purpose, to be known as the bond register, a full and correct list
of all outstanding bonds of said City, showing the number, amount, time
of maturity, rate of interest and place of payment of each bond; and for
what and to whom the same was issued; and when any City bonds are
surrendered, canceled, or paid, said register shall show the fact, and in
his annual report to the City Manager the said Director of Finance shall
describe particularly the bonds sold, exchanged or redeemed during the
fiscal year and give an itemized statement of the expenses thereof.
§ 16-116 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-117
1:443

ARTICLE II
Accounting
§ 16-201. [Ch. 16, Sec. 18] Establishment of accounting procedure.
The Director of Finance shall establish the City's accounting procedure in
such manner that the accounts will show all financial transactions of every
branch of the City government and all financial transactions relating to all
appropriations, funds, and sub-funds, all cash receipts and disbursements,
and all transactions affecting the acquisition, custody, and disposition of
assets. Such accounts shall at all times show the fiscal condition of the City,
including the current revenues and expenses of all municipal funds and
accounts.
§ 16-202. [Ch. 16, Sec. 19] Warrants - record.
He shall keep in a suitable book and accurate list of all warrants drawn upon
the City Treasury, showing the date, number, and amount of each, the name
of the person in whose favor drawn, and the fund out of which each warrant
is payable.
§ 16-203. [Ch. 16, Sec. 20] Reports by officers - neglect.
The Director of Finance shall require all officers charged in any manner
with the receipt, collection, or disbursement of City funds to submit to him
monthly reports in writing showing in detail all such receipts, collections,
and disbursements. If any such officer shall neglect to make such report
or to adjust his accounts whenever required by the Director of Finance or
to pay over to the proper officer any money in his possession belonging
to the City, it shall be the duty of the Director of Finance to cause a
written notice to be served upon such officer and his sureties demanding
a settlement of his accounts with the City forthwith. In case of neglect or
refusal of such officer to make such settlement and pay over said moneys for
a period of 10 days after the service of said notice, the Director of Finance
shall report such officer to the City Manager for his action in the matter,
and proceedings shall be instituted against such delinquent officer and his
sureties for the recovery of any money due said City.
§ 16-204. [Ch. 16, Sec. 21] Record of public improvements -
contracts.
The City Clerk shall keep in his office a correct list of all local and public
improvements ordered by the City Council and let under contract by the
City. All contracts and specifications therefor made by authority of the City
Council in relation to such improvements shall be filed in the City Clerk's
office.
§ 16-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-205
1:445
§ 16-205. [Ch. 16, Sec. 22] Duties regarding special tax and special
assessments.
It shall be the duty of said Director of Finance, whenever any warrant for
the collection of any special tax: or special assessment shall be certified
to him by the Clerk of the county or Circuit Court of McLean County,
immediately to give notice to persons whose names are in the assessment
roll, or the occupants of the property assessed by written notice, informing
them of said special assessment and request payment. It shall be the duty
of said Director of Finance to certify opposite each tract or lot on which
the assessment is paid, together with the name and address of the person
paying same, also the date of payment; and he shall satisfy the respectivejudgment
of the same on the judgment records of the McLean County
Circuit or County Courts.
§ 16-206. [Ch. 16, Sec. 23] Report of delinquent list to County
Collector.
It shall be the duty of said Director of Finance, on or before the last day
required by the County Treasurer in each year, to make a report in writing
to the general officer of the county designated by the general revenue laws
of this State to apply for judgment and land for taxes, of all the lands,
town lots, tracts or parcels of real estate on which he shall be unable to
collect special assessments, or installments thereof, matured and payable,
or interest thereon, or interest due on installments not yet matured, on
all warrants in his hands, with the amount of such delinquent special
assessments or installments and interest together with his warrants; which
report shall be accompanied with the oath of the said Director of Finance
that the list is a correct return and report of the land, town lots, and real
property on which the special assessments or special taxes levied by the
City or installments thereof or interest thereon, remain due and unpaid; that
he is unable to collect the same or any part thereof, and that all due notices
required by law have been duly given.
§ 16-207. [Ch. 16, Sec. 24] Special assessment funds kept separate.
All moneys received on any special assessment shall be held by said
Director of Finance as a special fund to be applied to the payment of the
improvement for which the assessment was made, and said money shall be
used for no other purpose whatever, unless to reimburse the City for money
expended for such improvement out of its general fund.
§ 16-208. [Ch. 16, Sec. 25] Tax sales - attendance.
Said Director of Finance shall attend all sales of real estate in said City to
enforce the collection of any special tax or special assessment levied and
assessed by ordinance of the City Council for any public improvement and
shall bid at such sales on behalf of the City when directed so to do by the
Council.
§ 16-205 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 16-209
1:446
§ 16-209. [Ch. 16, Sec. 26] Financial reports.
At the close of each month, and at any other time if so ordered, the Director
of Finance shall prepare and submit to the City Manager a statement of the
condition of each appropriation and fund or sub-fund and such other reports
as may be required of him. At the close of the year, he shall submit to the
City Manager a complete report of the financial transactions of the year and
the condition of the City's finances, including a balance sheet for each fund,
and such other reports as are required by law.
§ 16-210. [Ch. 16, Sec. 27] Annual report for publication.
He shall within 20 days after the first day of May in each year make out
an annual report for publication, giving a detailed statement of all the
receipts and revenues of the City during the preceding year. Said report
shall detail the resources and liabilities of the City, the condition of all
unexpended appropriations, all contracts' unfulfilled, the balance of money
remaining in the treasury, all sums due and outstanding, and all other
matters necessary to exhibit the true financial condition of the City. When
examined and approved by the City Manager, said report shall be published
in such manner as the Council may direct.
§ 16-211. [Ch. 16, Sec. 28] Examination of claims.
The Director of Finance shall examine all payrolls, vouchers, bills, and other
claims and demands against the City and shall not issue a warrant for
payment thereof, unless he has found by diligent investigation that the claim
is in proper form, correctly computed and duly approved; that it is justly
and legally due and payable; and that it is accompanied by the certification
of a responsible official of the department concerned that the goods and
services listed therein were actually received. He may require a statement
in writing under oath as to any fact or matter concerning the justness or
correctness of any such bill or claim. If he finds a claim to be fraudulent,
erroneous, or otherwise invalid, he shall refuse to authorize the payment of
the same and shall make immediate report of the circumstances to the City
Manager.
§ 16-212. [Ch. 16, Sec. 29] Appropriation exhausted - report.
Whenever any appropriation or fund is exhausted, the Director of Finance
immediately shall notify the City Manager thereof, and he shall not
thereafter draw any warrant against such fund or appropriation until the
same shall be renewed.
§ 16-213. [Ch. 16, Sec. 30] Payment of bills.
A. The Director of Finance shall prepare immediately preceding each
regular bimonthly meeting of the Council a warrant on the Treasurer
for the payment of all sums due from the City, listing each item and the
fund out of which it is payable; which warrant when properly signed by
§ 16-209 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-213
1:447
§ 16-214. [Ch. 16, Sec. 31] Internal audit.
the Mayor and Clerk shall authorize the issuance of a voucher or check
as provided by law for the payment of each item.
B. No item shall be included in such warrant unless it has been authorized
by the Council. A list of all items to be paid shall be submitted to the
Council before the warrant on the Treasurer is submitted to the Mayor
for his signature. Such list shall contain the statement of the Director of
Finance and of the City Manager to the effect that all items contained
therein are proper expenses due from the City for services performed
or materials furnished to the City. Approval of such list of items to be
paid by the Council on a roll call vote shall constitute the Council's
approval of the payment of all expenses listed thereon; provided that
the Council may, in the motion to approve payment, except specific
items from such approval, in which case such items shall not be paid.
C. Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter contained, where
employees' services have been previously authorized and such services
performed and being due and payable, the payment for such services
may be made and a regular warrant on the Treasurer for such payments
issued without requiring further Council authorization. It shall be the
duty, however, of the Director of Finance to prepare a report of such
payments so made to be presented to the Council at the next meeting
following for further approval of the payments so made.
D. If the Director issues a warrant authorizing payment of any item for
which no appropriation has been made or for the payment of which
there is not a sufficient balance in the proper appropriation and
allotment, or which is otherwise contrary to law, he and his sureties
shall be individually liable to the City for the full amount thereof.
A. The Director of Finance shall conduct a thorough and continuous
internal audit of all receipts, payments, assets, and liabilities of all
funds handled by the City, or by any agency there of, in order to protect
the City from loss through accident, negligence or dishonesty. Said
Director of Finance shall audit all reports of officers handling any City
moneys, including the Police Magistrate, and submit the same to the
City Manager, together with any objections he has thereto. It shall be
his responsibility to see that all amounts legally due the City are
correctly computed, collected in full, and deposited in the treasury to
the credit of the proper fund and account. He shall verify the daily cash
transactions and certify to the correctness of the daily cash report.
B. At least once a year, he shall audit the securities and insurance policies
and official bonds of the City and shall determine whether City property
is properly and adequately insured and whether City employees are
properly and adequately bonded, reporting his findings to the, City
Manager.
§ 16-213 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 16-214
1:448
§ 16-215. [Ch. 16, Sec. 23] Special audits.
The Director of Finance shall, when so ordered by the City Manager, and
may upon his own initiative, make special audits and investigations into the
finances of any department of the City government.
§ 16-216. [Ch. 16, Sec. 33] Independent audit.
At the close of each fiscal year the Council shall cause an audit to be made
of the City accounts by duly qualified public accountants.
§ 16-217. [Ch. 16, Sec. 34] Application of article to certain boards,
etc.
The provisions of this article, except §§ 16-108 to 16-111 of this Code, shall
apply to the accounts and transactions of the Board of Library Trustees and
Board of Election Commissioners. The provisions of §§ 16-108 to 16-111 of
this Code shall apply if so requested by the Board concerned.
§ 16-218. [Ch. 16, Sec. 35] Public service utilities.
The Director of Finance shall procure from all persons or corporations
operating Public Service Utilities, other than municipal utilities, in the City,
and cause to be placed on file such reports as they by law or this Code or
otherwise are required to make to the City or any of its officers, and he shall
procure copies of such reports as are made to the State or to any public
office or department and shall cause the same to be placed on file and shall
collect, or cause to be collected, all license fees, franchise taxes, rentals, or
other moneys which may be due or become due to the City. He shall report
to the City Manager any failures to make reports or pay money due to the
City, with such recommendations in relation thereto as he may deem proper.
He shall, whenever the City has authority so to do, cause to be examined the
accounts and records of any person or corporation operating such service
utility in the City and shall report to the City Manager any refusal to permit
such examination.
§ 16-219. [Ch. 16, Sec. 36] Charge for returned checks. [Ord. No.
2018-89]
The Director of Finance shall have the authority to impose a fee as set
forth in the Schedule of Fees against any person who presents a check
made payable to the City of Bloomington to satisfy any obligation due from
C. He shall maintain an inventory of all real property owned by the City
and of all other property of the City having a useful life of one year or
more. No money shall be received by any department of the City except
by means of a numbered receipt or other controlled stationery
prescribed, furnished, and controlled by the Director of Finance. No
money shall be paid, out of the treasury except by means of a warrant
issued by the Director of Finance.
§ 16-214 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-219
1:449
such person to the City, when such check is not honored by such person's
financial institution after having been duly presented for payment.
§ 16-220. [Ch. 16, Sec. 36A] Assessment of interest on past due
accounts. [Ord. No. 1998-131]
Any fees, debts, accounts receivable or other payments due to the City
which remain unpaid more than 60 days after the date for payment specified
in the written instrument creating the obligation to pay or, if no written
instrument created the obligation to pay, 60 days after the due date set forth
in the first demand for payment sent by the City to the debtor, shall have an
interest penalty of 10% per month assessed on the unpaid principal of such
fee, debt, account receivable or other payment. This interest penalty may
be waived, reduced, or otherwise settled by the City Manager. This § 16-220
does not apply to fees, debts, accounts receivable or other payments where
another City ordinance sets forth a penalty for late payment which more
specifically applies to such other fee, debt, account receivable or other
payment.
§ 16-221. [Ch. 16, Sec. 37] Daily settlements.
The Director of Finance shall deposit each day in the usual course of
business, to the credit of the City in any bank in the City of Bloomington,
all moneys belonging to the City collected by or coming to him in his official
capacity.
§ 16-222. [Ch. 16, Sec. 38] Books, etc., open to examination.
All warrants, books and all papers pertaining to his office as such ex-officio
collector and comptroller shall at all times be open to the inspection of
and subject to the examination of the City Manager, the Mayor and any
Councilman.
§ 16-219 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 16-222
1:450
ARTICLE III
Budget
§ 16-301. [Ch. 16, Sec. 39] Fiscal year designated.
The fiscal year of the City shall commence on the first day of May of each
year.
§ 16-302. [Ch. 16, Sec. 40] Submission of proposed budget to
Council.
On or before the 15th day of March of each year, the City Manager shall
submit to the Council a proposed budget for the forthcoming fiscal year,
based upon a careful consideration of departmental needs and fund
resources, as presented to the City Manager by department heads.
§ 16-303. [Ch. 16, Sec. 41] Information to be shown for each fund.
The proposed budget referred to in the preceding section shall set forth
for each fund: All proposed expenditures for the administration, operation
and maintenance of all departments and agencies for which appropriations
are to be made or taxes levied by the Council; all expenditures for capital
projects to be financed by bonds, tax levies, grants-in-aid or other means
during the fiscal year; all interest and debt redemption charges during the
fiscal year; and the actual or estimated operating deficits from previous
fiscal years. In addition thereto, the proposed budget shall set forth for each
fund the anticipated income from all sources, available surpluses, and other
means of financing such expenditures for the ensuing fiscal year, the total
of which shall be not less than the total proposed expenditures from such
fund.
§ 16-304. [Ch. 16, Sec. 42] Division into two parts; information
designated for each part.
The proposed budget, as submitted to the Council, shall consist of two parts,
as follows, and be submitted to the City Council on or before March 15th of
each year:
A. Part 1 shall contain a statement in which the City Manager shall explain
the principal items in the budget and the factors affecting the program,
discuss the City's financial status in relation to its activities program for
the coming year and recommend a financial policy for summarizing the
proposed expenditures and anticipated income for the coming year,
together with comparisons showing the actual expenditures and income
for the last completed fiscal year and the latest estimated figures for the
whole of the current fiscal year and may include suitable statistical
tables to indicate trends.
B. Part 2 shall contain the following items:
(1) Actual expenditures for the last completed fiscal year;
§ 16-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-304
1:451
§ 16-305. [Ch. 16, Sec. 43] Revision, alteration, etc., of proposed
budget ordinance; public hearing. [Ord. No. 2005-29]
The Council may revise, alter, increase or decrease the items of the
proposed budget; provided, that when it increases the total proposed
expenditures, it shall also make definite provision to increase the sum of the
anticipated income so that the total means of financing the budget of such
fund shall at least equal the aggregate proposed expenditures of such fund.
When the Council makes such changes, it shall issue a statement setting
forth clearly its action thereon. Final action shall not be taken on the budget
until at least one public hearing has been held thereon. A public notice
shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City at least
10 days previous to the time set for the hearing. After the public hearing,
the Council may further amend the appropriation ordinance before final
adoption.
§ 16-306. [Ch. 16, Sec. 44] Allotment of appropriations for
departments.
The City Manager shall establish periodic allotments to control the rate of
expenditure of any department.
§ 16-307. [Ch. 16, Sec. 45] Five year budgets.
(2) Estimated expenditures for the whole of the fiscal year in progress;
and
(3) Amounts required for the coming fiscal year.
(4) Departmental work programs for the ensuing fiscal year and
explanations of increases or decreases in budget items
recommended.
(5) Detailed estimates of the anticipated income for the fiscal year,
with revenue data for the current and last complete preceding year
properly arranged for comparative purposes.
(6) A statement of the bonded and other indebtedness of the City
government, showing the debt redemption and interest
requirements.
A. On or before the date of submitting the proposed annual budget, the
City Manager shall submit to the Council a Five Year Budget consisting
of an estimate of the amounts required during the next five years for:
(1) Departmental operation and maintenance;
(2) Debt service and other fixed charges;
(3) Replacement of capital assets; and
(4) Capital outlays for public improvements, permanent properties and
equipment.
§ 16-304 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 16-307
1:452
§ 16-308. [Ch. 16, Sec. 46 through Ch. 16, Sec. 46.4] Funding
ordinance for Police and Firefighter Pension Plans. [Ord. No.
2013-85]
B. The budget shall also indicate the means by which the proposed
expenditures can be financed.
C. The Council shall consider the Five Year Budget and shall adopt it after
public hearings and such revision thereof as may be deemed wise
provided that no appropriation or tax levy shall be made therein. Each
year in the preparation of the budget, the City Manager shall include in
the proposed Annual Budget for the ensuing fiscal year such items from
the previously adopted Five Year Budget as he may deem wise. At the
same time, he shall propose to the Council a revision of the Five Year
Budget and the extension of the same over an additional year, to the end
that the City may have at all times a budget plan for meeting the City's
needs for five years in the future.
A. Purpose. This ordinance is intended to set forth guidelines the City
Council will use to determine the contributions needed to fund pension
benefits for its Police and Fire employees as required by State law
under Articles 3 and 4 of the Illinois Pension Code. This ordinance is
further intended to:
(1) Ensure that the pension funds have sufficient assets on hand to pay
all benefits due;
(2) Minimize the annual volatility of budgeted contributions;
(3) Provide for equity among different generations of taxpayers with
respect to bearing the costs of pension contributions;
(4) Ensure that all statutory funding requirements are satisfied; and
(5) Provide for full funding of pension liabilities. [Ord. No. 2013-85]
B. Fund contributions.
(1) In order to achieve the objectives set forth in Subsection A and
beginning with the budget for fiscal year 2015, the City Council will
begin phasing in a process by which contributions to Police and
Fire pension funds are based upon Actuarially Determined
Employer Contributions (ADEC) prepared in accordance with
Subsection C of this chapter. In the period from fiscal year 2015
through fiscal year 2019, the City will move gradually from
contributing to these pension funds based upon the statutory
minimum required by law, to basing them upon the ADEC, with
contribution levels based entirely upon the ADEC occurring no
later than fiscal year 2019.
(2) Pension contributions will be funded through the annual property
tax levy. The Finance Director shall include the ADEC in the tax
§ 16-307 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-308
1:453
levy estimate provided annually to the City Manager and City
Council.
(3) The City Manager and Finance Director shall communicate the
ADEC to both the Police and Fire pension boards prior to the
adoption of the tax levy by the Council. [Ord. No. 2013-85]
C. Actuarially determined employer contributions; preparation and
assumptions.
(1) The Finance Director will utilize the services of a certified
independent actuary to calculate Actuarially Determined Employer
Contributions each year, beginning with the May 1, 2013 actuarial
valuation. The annual valuation will be prepared in compliance
with all applicable Actuarial Standards of Practice and completed
by October 1. The certified independent actuary shall also calculate
the statutory minimum contribution as required by the Illinois
Pension Code.
(2) The ADEC shall be determined using the following funding method
elements:
(a) Long term outlook. The City will use a thirty-year closed period
to amortize its unfunded pension liabilities. Said closed period
shall extend from May 1, 2011 through May 1, 2041.
(b) Assumptions. The ADEC shall be calculated using the following
assumptions:
[1] Interest rate: 7%.
[2] Actuarial cost method. The Entry Age Normal (EAN)
actuarial cost method required by the Government
Accounting Standards Board will be used to determine the
Normal Cost as well as the Actuarial Accrued Liability.
[3] Amortization method. A level percent of pay assumption of
4% will be used to amortize existing unfunded pension
liabilities.
[4] Asset valuation method. In order to minimize the impact of
investment volatility on the ADEC, an asset evaluation
method utilizing a five year smoothing for investment
gains and losses will be used.
[5] Level of funding. The ADEC will be calculated using a
target funding ratio of 100%. [Ord. No. 2013-85]
D. Review of pension funding ordinance. The City Manager or Finance
Director shall review this ordinance at least annually, examining its
effectiveness and determining whether any modifications are necessary
to ensure the ordinance is acted upon in conformance with accounting
§ 16-308 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 16-308
1:454
standards, best practices and changes in legislation. [Ord. No.
2013-85]
§ 16-308 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-308
1:455

ARTICLE IV
Purchasing and Contracts
§ 16-401. [Ch. 16, Sec. 48] Advance quantity purchasing.
Supplies, materials and equipment in common use by more than one
department or used in large quantities by one department may be
purchased for stores or contracted for by the City Manager on the basis
of the total advance requisitions or estimates previously filed by the
departments covering their requirements for a future period, to be
delivered as needed and paid for out of an account provided for that
purpose, which account shall be reimbursed whenever goods are issued
from stores by transfer from the appropriation of the department receiving
the same.
§ 16-402. [Ch. 16, Sec. 49] Approval of contracts, purchases, open
market orders and general spending levels.
A. The City Manager is hereby authorized to procure, at his discretion, on
the open market, commodities, supplies and services, and construction,
repair and maintenance projects, costing not more than $50,000 per
individual purchase, contract and/or procurement. This provision shall
apply only to the extent the amount of the procurement is covered
within the City's existing appropriation ordinance.
B. The City Manager's determination with respect to contracts, purchases
or open market orders involving the expenditure of more than $50,000
per individual purchase, contract and/or procurement shall be
approved by the Council before taking effect.
C. The approval of contracts, purchases and open market orders, whether
within the authority of the City Manager or the Council shall remain
subject to the applicable competitive procurement requirements of
§ 16-403.
D. The City Manager shall establish regulations, as set forth in Chapter 2,
§ 2-202, setting forth more detailed requirements and procedures for
the procurement of commodities, supplies and services, and
construction, repair and maintenance projects as well as when
contracts shall be used for procurement and when purchase orders
shall be used.
E. The City Manager may authorize payments of expenditures approved in
the City's budget and appropriation ordinance that are routine in
nature and otherwise required by an existing contract or
intergovernmental agreement, as well as utility payments, health
insurance payments and other contributions approved within the
budget and appropriation ordinance. Any such expenditure shall be
reported on the City's Bills and Payroll report.
§ 16-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-402
1:457
§ 16-403. [Ch. 16, Sec. 50] Competitive procurement requirements;
notice of procurement; waiver or bids.
F. Nothing herein shall limit the ability of the City Manager to hire
employees, enter into and sign employment contracts, and to sign
contracts with employment agencies.
G. The City Manager shall have the authority to execute a change order to
any contract if either (1) the amount of the change order is under
$5,000; or (2) the change order does not raise the total cost of the
procurement more than $50,000. For all other change orders, the City
Council shall approved the change order or may give authority to the
City Manager in the motion to approve the contract authority to execute
change orders.
H. All formal conrtacts shall be approved as to form by the Corporation
Counsel. [Ord. No. 2015-06]
A. Requirements. Except as provided in § 16-403C all contracts, purchases
or open market orders in the amount of $25,000 and above made by the
City shall be awarded to the vendor whose bid, quote or offer, after due
notice is given as provided in Subsection B below, is determined by the
City Manager (for procurements between $25,000 and $50,000) or the
Council (for procurements in excess of $50,000) to serve best the
interest of the City, taking into consideration the quality of the
construction, repair, maintenance, services, goods, supplies, materials,
and equipment supplied, their conformity with the specifications, the
price, delivery terms and the service reputation of the vendor, and such
other criteria as may be specified in the documents seeking the bid,
quote or offer. The City reserved in all cases the right to reject all bids,
quotes and/or offers. This process shall be known as "competitive
procurement." For the procurement of construction, repair, or
maintenance, equipment, supplies, materials, goods or services
estimated to be under $25,000, the City Manager shall establish
purchasing and/or bid procedures by regulation. [Ord. No. 2015-06]
B. Notices. All notices to bidders or responders for procurement of
construction, repair, or maintenance, equipment, supplies, materials,
goods or services estimated to be $25,000 or more shall be published
no less than 10 days in advance of the date announced for the receiving
of bids or responses, in a daily newspaper of general circulation in the
City, and shall simultaneously be available at the City Clerk's office in
the City Hall. The newspaper notice required shall include a general
description of the articles to be purchased, shall state where the
competitive procurement documents may be secured and the time and
place for opening bids or responses. In addition, sealed bids or
responses shall be solicited by mailing notices to prospective suppliers.
[Ord. No. 2015-06]
C. Waiver of competitive procurement requirements. The competitive
procurement requirements set forth in this article may be waived in the
§ 16-402 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 16-403
1:458
following circumstances by either the City Manager or City Council, as
applicable:
(1) Resolution waiving. The City Council by Resolution adopted by a
majority vote of the Councilmen elected, including the Mayor, may
direct the City Manager to enter into contracts or to make
purchases in excess of $25,000 by waiving the competitive
procurement process. A resolution waiving the competitive
procurement requirements may be approved when the City Council
determines the bid waiver to be in the best interests of the City and
the waiver is for contracts for construction, repair and
maintenance, services, goods, supplies, materials and equipment
and is authorized by two-thirds of the Councilmen elected; or
(2) Joint purchases. In cases where the construction, repair, or
maintenance, equipment, supplies, materials, goods or services for
amounts in excess of $25,000 have already been approved through
a state competitive bidding process or are being purchased
through a joint purchase agreement with one or more other
governmental units, the City Council or City Manager may approve
the purchase without the adoption of a Resolution waiving the
competitive procurement process. Nothing shall prevent the City
from seeking quotes and bids, and making purchases, from
supplies or vendors who can provide lower prices than those
available through joint purchasing programs for equivalent or
better items. The City Manager is further authorized to enter into
joint purchasing agreements without prior approval of the City
Council and to exercise his or her spending authority without
competitive procurement if the purchase is through a joint
purchasing program.
(3) Sole source procurement. Contracts for construction, repair and
maintenance, services, goods, supplies, materials and equipment
that are produced or provided by only one supplier or vendor may
be awarded without engaging in the competitive procurement
processes required by this Code and without adoption of a
resolution by either the City Council or City Manager, as
applicable. For this exception to apply, the following steps must be
followed:
(a) The City Manager, or his designee, shall perform due diligence
to determine whether there is more than one possible vendor
and shall document said efforts;
(b) The vendor shall provide a letter indicating its sole source
status; and
(c) If the City Manager, or his designee, determines that there is
only one supplier or vendor if the construction, repair and
maintenance, services, goods, supplies, materials and
equipment the City requires, the City Manager, or his
§ 16-403 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-403
1:459
designee, is authorized to negotiate and to recommend to the
City Council for contracts and purchases in excess of $50,000,
as applicable, a contract with such supplier or vendor to
purchase the construction, repair and maintenance, services,
goods, supplies, materials and equipment, at prices or on
terms most advantageous to the City. In such a case, the City
Manager, or his designee, shall make a written determination
that such supplier or vendor is the sole source for such
construction, repair and maintenance, services, goods,
supplies, materials and equipment. For contracts or purchases
between $25,000 and $50,000, the City Manager may proceed
with the purchase without Council approval if all of the steps
outlined herein are met.
(4) Limited source procurement. Contracts for construction, repair
and maintenance, services, goods, supplies, materials and
equipment that are produced or provided by a specialized supplier
or vendor, or where due to compatibility issues with existing
equipment a limited source procurement is necessary, may be
awarded without engaging in the competitive procurement
processes required by this Code and without the adoption of a
resolution. For this exception to apply, the following steps must be
followed:
(a) If the City Manager, or his designee, determines that a
specialized supplier or vendor is needed or has been used in
the past on a specific project for construction, repair and
maintenance, services, goods, supplies, materials and
equipment within the special parameters required by the City
or pursuant to an overall plan for procurement to achieve
improved public service or long term operational efficiencies
for the City, the City Manager, or his designee, is authorized to
negotiate and to recommend to the Council a contract with
such supplier or vendor to purchase the construction, repair
and maintenance, services, goods, supplies, materials and
equipment, at prices or on terms most advantageous to the
City. For contracts or purchases between $25,000 and $50,000,
the City Manager may proceed with the purchase without
Council approval if all of the steps outlined herein are met.
(b) In the case of a Limited Source Procurement, the City
Manager, or his designee, shall make a written determination
of the basis for the special City parameters or overall plan for
procurement to achieve improved public service or long term
operational efficiencies for the City and that such supplier or
vendor is the single source for such construction, repair and
maintenance, services, goods, supplies, materials and
equipment.
(5) Professional Services, Contracts, agreements or memberships in or
with trade or professional organizations, lobbying groups,
§ 16-403 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 16-403
1:460
§ 16-404. [Ch. 16, Sec. 51] Failure of vendors to deliver materials,
etc.
Any vendor who fails to live up to the terms of his contract for the delivery of
materials, supplies, or equipment may be declared an irresponsible vendor
by the City Manager for a period of one year thereafter and shall not
be awarded any further orders for furnishing such supplies, materials or
equipment to any department of the City, unless the Council shall by threefourths
vote remove such disqualification.
§ 16-405. [Ch. 16, Sec. 52] Emergency purchases; report required
when more than $50,000. [Ord. No. 2015-06]
In the case of accident or other circumstances creating an emergency
where necessary to protect life, the public health and safety, and public
property, or in the case of the occurrence of any breakage or loss of
equipment, or in other circumstances which could not reasonably be
anticipated, whereby any necessary regular service of the City is, or is about
to be, interrupted or whereby the City will suffer any great or continuing
loss, the City Manager, upon the request of the department head, may
negotiate an emergency purchase to address any such circumstance,
without engaging in the competitive procurement process and in such
amount as may be necessary in the circumstances. In the case of such
emergency purchases involving amounts in excess of $50,000, the City
Manager shall, at the next meeting of the Council thereafter, render a full
report on the case.
§ 16-406. [Ch. 16, Sec. 53] Record of supplies, etc.; fiscal year
inventory.
The Director of Finance shall keep an accurate record of all supplies and
commodities on hand in store rooms operated by him or by departments
subject to control of the City Manager. At the end of the fiscal year, each
department head shall supply the Director of Finance with an inventory of
all such materials then on hand in any such store room under his direction.
§ 16-407. [Ch. 16, Sec. 54] Adoption, etc. of additional rules and
regulations.
After consultation with the standardization committee, the City Manager
shall adopt, promulgate and from time to time amend rules and regulations
not inconsistent with law for the following purposes:
governmental services memberships, and professional services for
legal and employment related services shall be exempt from the
competitive procurement requirements as shall all employee
contracts and hires and agreements with any collection agencies.
(6) Emergency procurements. Emergency procurements pursuant to
§ 16-405. [Ord. No. 2015-06]
§ 16-403 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-407
1:461
§ 16-408. [Ch. 16, Sec. 55] Purchases or contracts contrary to
article.
Whenever any official or employee of the City government shall purchase
or contract for any supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services
contrary to the provisions of this article or the rules and regulations made
thereunder, such order or contract shall be void and of no effect.
§ 16-409. [Ch. 16, Sec. 56] Exemptions.
None of the provisions of this article shall apply to the Board of Library
Trustees nor to the Board of Election Commissioners unless so requested by
the Board concerned.
§ 16-410. [Ch. 16, Sec. 57] Disposal of surplus property.
A. To prescribe the manner in which supplies, materials and equipment
shall be delivered, stored and distributed.
B. To prescribe the dates for submitting advance requisitions or estimates
of future purchase requirements, the future period which they shall
cover, the form in which they shall be submitted, and their revision by
the City Manager.
C. To prescribe the manner of inspecting all deliveries of supplies,
materials and equipment.
D. To require monthly reports by City departments of stock of supplies,
materials and equipment.
E. To provide for the transfer between departments of surplus supplies,
materials and equipment.
F. To prescribe the amount of deposit or bond to be submitted with a bid
on a contract and the amount of deposit or bond to be given for the
faithful performance of a contract.
G. To provide for emergency purchases in the open market for immediate
delivery in emergencies, to define such emergencies, and to prescribe
the manner in which purchases shall be made.
H. To provide for such other matters as may be necessary to give effect to
the foregoing rules and provisions of this article.
A. Purpose. This section establishes procedures for the disposition of
property, other than real estate, which is "surplus" to the needs of the
City. "Surplus" is defined for purposes of this section to mean any
tangible, personal property owned by the City that is not needed at
present or in the foreseeable future or that is no longer of value or use
to the City. An item of property shall be considered to have no further
usefulness when:
§ 16-407 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 16-410
1:462
(1) The item or its function has been totally replaced by other City
property and no probable future function exists for it;
(2) The City no longer performs the service for which the item was
purchased and no other service can reasonably be provided by the
item; or
(3) The item is no longer able to reliably or economically perform the
work required of it.
B. Responsibility for administration. The City's purchasing agent or such
other officer as designated by the City Manager, is responsible for the
administration of this section. The purchasing agent shall coordinate
the disposition of surplus property, and shall aid the City Manager or
City Council in determining the best method of disposal. The
purchasing agent shall maintain a record of the property, surplus
determination, disposal method selected, and the manner of disposal,
including the name of the person to whom the surplus property was
transferred.
C. Report to purchasing agent. All departments of the City shall cooperate
with the purchasing agent to ensure the most efficient and beneficial
disposition of surplus property. A City department responsible for
property which it wishes to declare surplus shall provide the
purchasing agent with a detailed description of the property, its
location and condition, and its estimated value.
D. Determination of value. A department wishing to dispose of a single
item of surplus property, or a group of items, shall make and estimate
the reasonable market value in "as is, where is" condition. The
purchasing agent shall verify the accuracy of this estimate. If the
responsible department for the surplus property cannot make an
estimate of the reasonable market value after use of pricing guides such
as the National Automobile Dealers Association used car guide, the
Computer Blue Book, the Heavy-Equipment Green Book, or any other
pricing guide, the purchasing agent shall contact peers in other
municipalities for cost comparisons.
E. Condition of surplus property upon sale. Surplus property sold by the
City is sold in "as is, where is" condition, without warranty, either
express or implied, payment on delivery or otherwise instructed for
Internet sales, FOB (Free on Board) the City property location. Personal
computers are disposed of without installed operating systems or
applications software, due to software license restrictions.
F. Procedure. Property worth $1,000 or less. If the property is not needed
by the City and the estimated value is $1,000 or less, the purchasing
agent may dispose of the property in any manner deemed to be in the
City's best interests, after consultation with and approval by the City
Manager, without the requirement of City Council action.
§ 16-410 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-410
1:463
G. Procedure. Property of a value greater than $1,000 and Less than
$20,000.
(1) If the surplus property has an estimated value between $1,000.01
and $19,999.99, the purchasing agent may dispose of the surplus
property in one of the specifically approved methods listed in this
section without submitting a report to City Council:
(a) Public auction, including web-based auctions;
(b) Solicitation of written bids; or
(c) Transfer to another agency of government at or below
reasonable market value.
(2) Alternatively, the purchasing agent may request the City Council's
authorization to dispose of the surplus property in another manner.
(3) If the purchasing agent cannot dispose of the property in one of the
methods specified in this section, the purchasing agent shall notify
City Council and recommend further action. City Council will then
direct the disposition of the surplus property.
H. Procedure. Property of a Value of More than $20,000. Disposition of
surplus property of a value of $20,000 or more must be approved by a
majority of the City Council prior to disposal.
I. Permissible methods of disposition of surplus property include, but are
not limited to:
(1) Public auction. Disposal of surplus property may be by public
auction provided the purchasing agent publish an advertisement
for public auction at least once in the official newspaper of the City
not less than 10 days prior to the auction, or for an auction
conducted electronically on the world-wide web, within three days
of the date the personal property is delivered to the entity
conducting the auction. The advertisement shall also be posted on
the City's website not less than 10 days prior to the public auction.
The published notice shall specify the time, place and terms upon
which the personal property shall be offered and a general
description of the personal property to be sold. For auctions
conducted electronically on the world-wide web, the published
notice shall include a general description of the personal property
to be auctioned and the world-wide web address of the auction
location.
(2) Solicitation of written bids. Disposal of surplus property may be by
solicitation of written bids provided the purchasing agent publish
an advertisement for solicitation of written bids at least once in the
official newspaper of the City not less than 10 days prior to the
deadline for solicitation of written bids. The advertisement shall
also be posted on the City's web-site not less than 10 days prior to
§ 16-410 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 16-410
1:464
the bid submission. The advertisement for bids shall describe the
property to be sold and shall designate when and where the bids
are to be submitted, the place and the time that the bids will
be opened, the minimum price, if any, and the terms of the sale.
The item will be sold in "as is, where is" condition to the person
submitting the highest bid provided, however, a lower bid
submitted by a nonprofit organization or governmental agency may
be accepted by the City. The purchasing agent shall determine the
time in which the successful bidder must remove the item.
(3) Trade-in on a purchase of City property. Disposal of surplus
property may be by trade-in, in conjunction with acquisition of
other price-based items.
(4) Transfer to another agency of government at or below reasonable
market value. Disposal of surplus property may be by sale, trade,
donation, or other transfer to another public agency or
governmental unit by negotiation.
(5) Donation. Disposal of surplus property may be by donation to any
organization operating within or providing a service within the City
which is recognized by the Internal Revenue Service as a 501(c)(3)
nonprofit organization.
(6) Lease or loan.
(7) Scrap or scrap metal.
(8) Recycling or destruction and disposal to a waste landfill. Once the
department head of the surplus property and the purchasing agent
have agreement to destroy worthless property, or if there is excess
from a public auction that has been determined unsellable and
cannot be donated or disposed of by any other means, authorized
personnel in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local
regulations shall carry out such destruction.
J. Exempt property.
(1) Drugs, needles, syringes, hazardous substances, controlled
substances, firearms, and other sensitive items. The purchasing
agent does not have authority to handle, dispense, or dispose of
items that require special handling and control. Authorized
personnel in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local
regulations shall carry out the destruction.
(2) Forfeited property. The Bloomington Police Department may utilize
and dispose of forfeited personal property as approved by the City
Council. The Bloomington Police Department may also utilize the
City's methods of disposal for such property, unless such property
is considered exempt property.
§ 16-410 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-410
1:465
§ 16-411. [Ch. 16, Sec. 57A] City officers not to have interest in
municipal contracts. [Ord. No. 1992-128]
No officer of the City shall be interested, directly or indirectly, in any
contract made and entered into under the provisions of this article in any
manner which is prohibited by state law. For the purposes of this section,
"officer" shall include all elected officials of the City of Bloomington, the
City Manager, the Assistant City Manager, all department heads of the City
of Bloomington, and the assistant directors or deputies of all departments
of the City, including the City Engineer, the Water Resources Manager, the
Superintendent of Streets and Sewers, the Superintendent of Refuse and
the Superintendent of Equipment Maintenance.
§ 16-412. [Ch. 16, Sec. 57B] Municipal contracts with City
employees. [Ord. No. 1992-128]
No City employee shall enter into, or attempt to enter into, any contract
with the City which involves the sale of goods or services to the City unless
the fact that the person is an employee of the City is first disclosed to
the City Council or such other person authorized to execute contracts on
behalf of the City for the purchase of goods and services. In cases where
the City Council or such other person authorized to execute such contracts
on behalf of the City determines that a conflict of interest exists or that
entering into such a contract carries with it the appearance of impropriety,
the City Council or such other person authorized to execute such contracts
on behalf of the City may refuse to enter into such contract. In cases where
no disclosure has been made that the person seeking to contract with the
City is an employee of the City, any contracts entered into without such
disclosure shall, at the option of the City, be declared void.
§ 16-413. [Ch. 16, Sec. 58] Public facility construction.
K. City employees and City Council. No City employee or member of City
Council shall directly or indirectly use, take or dispose of property
surplus to the City other than in their official duties. A City employee or
member of City Council, except those directly involved in declaring
items surplus or having privileged information regarding the item or
the value thereof which is not available to members of the public, is
allowed to compete, as members of the public, for the purchase of
publicly sold surplus property.
L. Police department and fire department property - retirement. Upon
honorable retirement from service with the City, a police officer or
firefighter may receive, with the approval of the City Manager or his or
her designee, an item or individual set of specialized and personal use
items used by the police officer or firefighter at the time of his or her
retirement. This may include, but is not limited to, a firearm, badge,
helmet, or canine service dog. [Ord. No. 2010-22]
§ 16-410 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 16-413
1:466
A. The goal of the public construction of City facilities is to deliver public
facilities that meet the needs of the citizens and the public employees
that use them and that represent sound investments of tax dollars.
High-quality, cost-effective design and construction services are key to
achieving this goal on each public facility construction project. As part
of any proposed new public facility construction project estimated to be
in excess of $500,000, the City Manager shall first propose to the City
Council a project management plan for the design, construction and
oversight of the project.
B. The project management plan may either be approved or rejected by a
majority of the City Council and the project management plan
ultimately approved shall govern the design, construction, oversight
and general scope of the project. This plan shall include whether the
project will be design-build or whether a general contractor will be
utilized. The project management plan shall be approved prior to
bidding the project, but may be altered or amended by a majority of the
City Council after bidding. The project management plan shall include a
schedule, identify critical issues, outline any risks, estimates of cost,
and budget. The project management plan shall provide for the
transition of all record drawings, record of contractors and
subcontractors, operation and maintenance manuals, training for the
proper operation of the facility and equipment, and a record of
warranties to City staff. [Ord. No. 2015-06]
§ 16-413 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-413
1:467

ARTICLE V
(Reserved)
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-413
1:469

ARTICLE VI
Non-Referendum Indebtedness
§ 16-601. [Ch. 16, Sec. 101] Authority. [Ord. No. 1975-30]
The City of Bloomington, McLean County, Illinois, acting by its Mayor and
City Council, may, from time to time, borrow money for proper public
purposes and in evidence of such borrowing, issue its full faith and credit
bonds (general obligation) payable from ad valorem taxes to be levied
without the City. Such bonds may be issued without the submission of the
question of their issuance to the electors of the City for their approval,
and the procedures for the issuance of such bonds shall be substantially as
herein provided.
§ 16-602. [Ch. 16, Sec. 102] Bond ordinance. [Ord. No. 1975-30]
The City of Bloomington shall adopt an Ordinance (hereinafter designated
the "Bond Ordinance") describing the public purpose or purposes to be
served by such borrowing and in such Bond Ordinance shall make a finding
and determination that such borrowing of money is necessary for the
welfare of the government and affairs of the City, is a proper public purpose
or purposes and is in the public interest, which finding and determination
shall be deemed conclusive.
§ 16-603. [Ch. 16, Sec. 103] Contents of ordinance.
A. The Bond Ordinance shall indicate the amount of money necessary to
be borrowed, the amount of bonds to be issued in evidence thereof,
shall fix the details of such bonds, including their date, number,
denomination, optional call feature prior to maturity, and maturity,
which shall not exceed 40 years from the date of said bonds, and their
maximum rate of interest which shall not exceed 8% per annum payable
semiannually. The bonds shall be sold in such manner-as may be
determined by the Mayor and City Council. If the bonds are authorized
to bear interest at the maximum rate, they shall be sold at a price of less
than par, provided the price shall be such that the interest cost to the
City of the money received by it from the proceeds of the sale of
average maturity of all bonds sold as a single issue, according to
standard tables of bond values.
B. A contract for the sale of such bonds may be entered into prior to the
adoption of the Bond Ordinance or the Bond Ordinance may provide for
the subsequent sale of the bonds therein authorized. In the event of
such subsequent sale and if the bonds bear interest at a rate or rates
less than that authorized in such Bond Ordinance, prior to the delivery
of such bonds, the taxes levied in such Bond Ordinance shall be abated
by that amount representing the savings resulting from the sale of such
bonds at a lower rate of interest than authorized in such Bond
Ordinance. [Ord. No. 1976-121]
§ 16-601 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-604
1:471
§ 16-604. [Ch. 16, Sec. 104] Form of bonds.
§ 16-605. [Ch. 16, Sec. 105] Payment - from taxes. [Ord. No.
1975-30]
The Bond Ordinance shall make provision for the payment of such bonds,
both principal thereof and interest thereon until-maturity, by the levy of
a direct annual tax upon all the taxable property within the City of
Bloomington sufficient for such purpose. A copy of such Bond Ordinance,
as adopted, certified to by the City Clerk, shall be filed in the offices of the
County Clerk of McLean County. Such Bond Ordinance, as so filed, shall
constitute the authority for the County Clerk in and for each of the years
for which taxes are levied in said Bond Ordinance, to extend such taxes
for collection against all the taxable property situated within the City of
Bloomington. The taxes so levied for the payment of principal and interest
on the bonds shall be extended annually by the County Clerk without
limitation as to rate or amount and such taxes shall be in addition to and
in excess of all other taxes levied or authorized to be levied by the City
of Bloomington. Except as provided herein, such taxes so levied shall not
be subject to repeal or abatement in any manner whatsoever until such
time as all the bonds authorized under the terms of said Bond Ordinance
and issued shall have been paid in full, both principal thereof and interest
thereon up to and including the date of maturity; provided, however, that
if the City of Bloomington has funds available, it may appropriate same,
A. The Bond Ordinance shall authorize the execution of the bonds therein
authorized on behalf of the City of Bloomington by the signatures of the
Mayor and City Clerk of said City, shall require the seal of the City to be
affixed to such bonds, shall determine whether such bonds to be issued
shall be registered in the name of the owner as to principal only or
whether the same shall be fully registered as to both principal and
interest, shall indicate the place or places of payment of the principal
and interest maturing on said bonds and shall set forth the form of
bond.
B. The Mayor may designate another to affix his signature to any full faith
and credit bonds of the City which are required to be signed by the
Mayor. In such case, the Mayor shall send to the Mayor and City
Council a written notice of the person so designated by him, such notice
stating the name of the person so selected and the particular bonds
which such person shall have authority to sign as proxy for the Mayor. A
written signature of the Mayor executed by the person so designated,
with the signature of the person so designated underneath, shall be
attached to each notice. Each notice, with the signature attached, shall
be recorded in the journal of the proceedings of the Mayor and City
Council and then filed with the City Clerk. When the signature of the
Mayor is placed on a full faith and credit bond of the City at the
direction of the Mayor in the specified manner, such full faith and credit
bond in all respects shall be as binding on the City as if signed by the
Mayor in person. [Ord. No. 1975-30]
§ 16-604 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 16-605
1:472
deposit said amount in the Bond and Interest Redemption Account and
order their deposit in trust with the paying agent at least 15 days prior
to the payment date for purpose of the payment of any of the maturities
of bonds or interest thereon, in which event the taxes so levied to pay
such principal or interest may be abated by the amount so deposited, such
abatement to be by Ordinance of the City of Bloomington duly adopted and
placed on file with the County Clerk.
§ 16-606. [Ch. 16, Sec. 106] Publication of bond ordinance.
§ 16-607. [Ch. 16, Sec. 107] Method of payment. [Ord. No. 1975-30]
Any bonds authorized and issued pursuant to the provisions of any Bond
Ordinance adopted pursuant to the provisions hereof and also any bonds
issued and outstanding, which by their terms are payable from taxes
unlimited as to rate or amount and levied against all the taxable property
within the City of Bloomington, may be refunded prior to their maturity or
at their maturity, and including the refunding of matured interest coupons
evidencing interest upon such unpaid bonds. Such refunding shall be by
the issuance of refunding bonds to be authorized by a Refunding Bond
Ordinance which shall be adopted in the manner and subject to the terms,
conditions and provisions as herein required for the issuance of bonds for
public purposes. Any such refunding shall be issued on the basis of an
exchange of par for par for bonds and matured interest coupons to be
refunded, or such refunding bonds shall be sold at not less than par and the
proceeds thereof be used for the purpose of paying maturing principal and
matured interest coupons on such outstanding bonds as they become due.
§ 16-608. [Ch. 16, Sec. 108] Home rule enactment. [Ord. No.
1975-30]
Pursuant to the authority granted by Section 6 of Article VII of the
Constitution of Illinois, 1970, the procedures hereby established for the
issuance of full faith and credit bonds (general obligation) as herein
provided for, shall be controlling and shall be complied with by the City of
Bloomington in the borrowing of money through the issuance of general
obligation bonds of the City notwithstanding anything to the contrary
contained in the provisions of the "Illinois Municipal Code" and all acts
A. The provisions of any Bond Ordinance shall constitute an appropriation
of the amounts required as therein referred to and described and upon
the delivery of the bonds therein authorized, the proceeds thereof shall
be used solely and only for the purpose or purposes for which the bonds
were authorized.
B. Upon the adoption of any Bond Ordinance by the City of Bloomington
and its approval by the Mayor, the same shall be published in a
newspaper published and of general circulation in the City of
Bloomington and said Ordinance shall become effective upon
publication. [Ord. No. 1976-121]
§ 16-605 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-608
1:473
amendatory thereof and supplementary thereto and any other law or laws
of the State of Illinois.
§ 16-608 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 16-608
1:474
ARTICLE VII
Investment of City Funds
§ 16-701. [Ch. 16, Sec. 121] City funds defined. [Ord. No. 1976-133]
The words "City funds," as used in this article mean current operating
funds, special funds, interest and sinking funds, and funds of any kind or
character belonging to or in the custody of the City of Bloomington.
§ 16-702. [Ch. 16, Sec. 122] Obligations of United States banks,
Federal National Mortgage Association or savings and loan
associations - funds in custody of City.
A. The City of Bloomington may invest any public funds in bonds, notes,
certificates of indebtedness, treasury bills or other securities now or
hereafter issued, which are guaranteed by the full faith and credit of
the United States of America as to principal and interest, or may invest
in certificates of deposit or time deposits constituting direct obligations
of any bank as defined by the Illinois Banking Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch.
16 1/2, Sec. 101 et seq.26). Investments may be made only in those
certificates of deposit or time deposits in banks which are insured by
the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or may invest in short term
discount obligations of the Federal National Mortgage Association or
may invest in shares or other forms of securities legally issuable by
savings and loan associations incorporated under the laws of this state
or any other state or under the laws of the United States. Investments
may be made only in those savings and loan associations the shares, or
investment certificates of which are insured by the Federal Savings and
Loan Insurance Corporation. Any such securities may be purchased at
the offering or market price thereof at the time of such purchase. All
City funds shall be invested as, in the judgment of the Director of
Finance, will not be required for expenditure within a period of 30 days
from and after the earliest possible date on which the funds can be
invested without regard to the account to which such funds are
allocated; provided that after any such investment sufficient funds will
be available to meet all City obligations as they accrue. All such
securities so purchased shall mature or be redeemable on a date or
dates prior to the time when, in the judgment of the Director of Finance,
City funds so invested will be required for expenditure by the City of
Bloomington or the Director of Finance. The expressed judgment of the
Director of Finance as to the time when any City funds will be required
for expenditure or be redeemable is final and conclusive.
B. The City of Bloomington may also invest any City funds in a Public
Treasurers' Investment Pool created under Section 17 of "An Act to
revise the law in relation to the State Treasurer," approved April 23,
1893, as amended (Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 130, Sec. 1727).
26.Editor's Note: See 205 ILCS 5/1 et seq.
27.Editor's Note: See 15 ILCS 505/17.
§ 16-701 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-702
1:475
§ 16-703. [Ch. 16, Sec. 123] Allocation of interest on investments.
[Ord. No. 1976-133]
Earnings accruing on City funds invested pursuant to this article may be
allocated to such accounts and funds as is deemed appropriate by the
Director of Finance, except where by law or by ordinance such earnings are
directed to be credited to and paid to a particular fund; provided that such
allocations are made a matter of record by the Director of Finance.
§ 16-704. [Ch. 16, Sec. 124] Designation of payee and fund -
registration. [Ord. No. 1976-133]
If any securities, purchased under authority of § 16-702 of this chapter
issuable to a designated payee or to the order of a designated payee,
then the City of Bloomington shall be so designated, and further, if such
securities are purchased with money taken from a particular fund of the
City and if by law or by ordinance such earnings are directed to be credited
to and paid to a particular fund, the name of such fund shall be added that
of the City. If any such securities are registerable, either as to principal or
interest, or both, and such earnings are directed to be credited to and paid
to a particular fund, then such securities shall be so registered in the name
of the City of Bloomington, and in the name of the fund to which they are to
be credited.
§ 16-705. [Ch. 16, Sec. 125] Safekeeping and disposition of
securities - payments. [Ord. No. 1976-133]
All securities purchased under the authority of this article shall be held
for the benefit of the City of Bloomington and if purchased with money
taken from a particular fund and by law or by ordinance, the funds and
earnings therefrom are directed to be credited to and paid to a particular
fund, such securities shall be credited to and deemed to be a part of such
fund, and shall be held for the benefit thereof. All securities so purchased
shall be deposited and held in a safe place by the Director of Finance and
such Director of Finance is responsible upon his official bond or bonds for
the safekeeping of all such securities. Any securities purchased by the City
of Bloomington under authority of this article may be sold at any time,
at the then current market price thereof, by the Director of Finance of
the City of Bloomington. All payments received as principal or interest,
or otherwise, derived from any such securities shall be credited to the
City of Bloomington and if by law or by ordinance, the funds and earnings
therefrom are directed to be credited to and paid to a particular fund to the
fund by or for which such securities were purchased.
C. To the extent the City has custody of funds not owned by it or another
public agency and does not otherwise have authority to invest such
funds, the City may invest such funds as if they were its own. Such
funds must be released to the appropriate person at the earliest
reasonable time, but in no case exceeding 31 days, after the private
person becomes entitled to the receipt of them. [Ord. No. 1976-133]
§ 16-702 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 16-705
1:476
ARTICLE VIII
Special Assessment Financing Bonds
§ 16-801. [Ch. 16, Sec. 140] Powers and duties. [Ord. No. 1979-55]
Except where otherwise provided in Bloomington City Code, in making local
improvements by special assessment, the Board of Local Improvements and
the City Council shall follow the procedures set forth in Division 1, Division
2, and Division 4 of Article 9 of Chapter 4 of the Illinois Revised Statutes,
as heretofore or hereafter amended.28 Said Divisions 1, 2, and 4 of Article 9
of Chapter 24 are hereby adopted by the City of Bloomington by reference,
copies of Article 9 having been on file in the office of the City Clerk for
a period of not less than 30 days prior to the adoption of this article.
The Board of Local Improvements and the City Council shall have all the
powers and duties set forth in said statute incorporated herein by reference,
provided that in addition to the powers and duties set forth in said statute,
the Board of Local Improvements and the City Council shall have the powers
and duties set forth in § 16-802 of this article.
§ 16-802. [Ch. 16, Sec. 141] Bonds payable out of private benefit
funds. [Ord. No. 1979-55]
In lieu of the bonds authorized in Sections 9-2-119 and 9-2-127 of Division
2 of Chapter 24 of the Illinois Revised Statutes,29 as heretofore or hereafter
amended, the City, immediately upon confirmation of the Assessment Roll
by the Court and upon the prior or concurrent redemption or other
satisfaction of all outstanding vouchers, if any, may issue and deliver to
the buyer thereof bonds provided for in this § 16-802, and use the funds
therefrom to pay for the work and to redeem any outstanding vouchers. The
bonds shall be dated as of and shall draw interest from the date of their
issuance. The bonds shall be issued at not less than their par value. The
bonds shall be executed by such officers as may be prescribed by ordinance
of the City with the corporate seal attached.
Both principal and interest on this bond are payable at the office of the
Treasurer of said City of Bloomington in lawful money of the United States
of America.
This bond is issued in payment for outstanding vouchers or for part of the
work to be done under Special Assessment No. _____ levied for the purpose
of (the "Improvement") __________ which assessment bears interest from
the _____ day of _____ and this bond and the interest thereon are payable
solely out of the installments of the assessment when collected or out of
other funds received by the City from payments made with respect to the
assessment or the improvement and do not constitute a general obligation
of the City of Bloomington.
28.Editor's Note: See 65 ILCS 5/9-1-1 et seq., 5/9-2-1 et seq., and 5/9-4-1 et seq.
29.Editor's Note: See 65 ILCS 5/9-2-119 and /59-2-127, respectively.
§ 16-801 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-802
1:477
THIS BOND IS ONE OF A SERIES OF BONDS WHICH ARE TO BE PAID
AND REDEEMED IN NUMERICAL ORDER AND NOT ON A PRO RATA
BASIS.
The bonds in the series, aggregating ____________________ Dollars ($_____),
are numbered from __________ to __________ inclusive, bonds numbered
__________ to __________ being of the denomination of $_____ each, and
bonds numbered __________ to __________ being of the denomination of
$_____ each.
By the terms of the Statute and Ordinance authorizing these bonds,
whenever there shall be sufficient funds in the hands of the Treasurer of
the City of Bloomington, after the payment of all interest due on the bonds,
and after the establishment of such reserve, if any, as the Treasurer in his
discretion may deem advisable to pay interest to become due at the next
interest coupon date, to prepay on or more of the bonds, then it is the
duty of such treasurer to call and pay such bond or bonds. The Treasurer
shall cause notice of such call for prepayment to be published in some
newspaper of general circulation in the City of Bloomington, Illinois, not
less than five nor more than 30 days prior to the date fixed for prepayment.
This bond will cease to bear interest on and after the date so fixed for
prepayment. The presentation of the bond will waive the necessity of giving
notice of its call for payment. Bonds shall be paid in numerical order
beginning with the lowest numbered outstanding bond.
IN TESTIMONY WHEREOF, the City of Bloomington has caused its
corporate seal to be hereto affixed, and this bond to be signed by the
officers prescribed by Ordinance, and the coupons hereto attached to be
signed by such officials by their original or facsimile signatures, which
officials, if facsimile signatures are used, do adopt by the execution hereof
as and for their proper signatures their respective facsimile signatures
appearing on the coupons, all as of the _____ day of _____, 19_____.
SEAL
§ 16-802 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 16-802
1:478
The bonds bear interest at a rate of not more than 70% annually, nor less
than 4% annually. The bonds shall recite specifically that they are payable
solely and only from the assessment levied for the payment of the cost of
the improvement or from other funds received by the City from payments
made with respect to the assessment or the improvement, designating the
improvement for which the assessment has been levied, and shall mature
on or before December 31 next succeeding the January 2 on which the
last installment shall mature. Interest coupons attached to the bonds shall
bear the official or facsimile signatures of the same officers who signed
the bonds and shall be made payable at the office of the Treasurer of the
City. The bonds shall be numbered consecutively beginning with number
one upwards and shall be payable in their numerical order and redeemable
prior to maturity in numerical order as hereinafter provided. Each of the
bonds issued pursuant to this § 16-802 shall bear a legend on the face of
the bond printed in bold face type and in a paragraph by itself to the effect
that the bond is one of a series of bonds which are to be paid and redeemed
in numerical order and not on a pro rata basis.
The bonds authorized in this § 16-802 shall be in substantially the following
form:
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
NUMBER DOLLARS
STATE OF ILLINOIS COUNTY OF McLEAN
CITY OF BLOOMINGTON
IMPROVEMENT BOND
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS That the City of Bloomington,
'in the County of McLean, State of Illinois, hereby acknowledges itself
to owe, and for value received promises to pay to the BEARER, the sum
of ____________________ Dollars ($_____) on the _____ day of __________, but
subject to the prepayment at the par value hereof at any time as
hereinafter provided, together with interest thereon at the rate of _____
percent (_____%) per annum, from date hereof until paid, payable on the
_____ day of _____ and annually thereafter on the _____ day of __________ in
each year on presentation and surrender of the interest coupons hereto
attached.
Interest coupons which may be attached to bonds authorized in this section
may be in the following form:
Coupon No. __________ $__________
On the _____ day of _____, 19 _____, unless the bond to which this coupon is
attached shall have theretofore been called for payment at an earlier date
and payment made or provided for.
§ 16-802 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-802
1:479
The City of Bloomington in the County of McLean, State of Illinois, will pay
to BEARER ____________________ Dollars ($_____), out of funds realized from
the collections of Special Assessment No. __________ of the municipality or
out of other funds received by the City from payments made with respect
to said Assessment or made with respect to the improvement for which
said Assessment has been levied, at the office of the Treasurer of the
municipality, for interest due on that day on its improvement bond dated as
of the _____ day of __________, 19 _____.
Bond No. __________
§ 16-803. [Ch. 16, Sec. 142] Home rule. [Ord. No. 1979-55]
This article is adopted pursuant to and as an exercise of the City of
Bloomington's authority as a home rule unit under Article VII, Section 6, of
the 1970 Constitution of the State of Illinois. The provisions of this article
supersede any provisions of State law to the contrary, to the extent that they
necessarily conflict.
§ 16-802 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 16-803
1:480
Chapter 17
FIRE DEPARTMENT AND FIRE PREVENTION
§ 16-803 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-803
1:481

ARTICLE I
Fire Department
DIVISION 1
Generally
§ 17-101. [Ch. 17, Sec. 1] Establishment of department -
composition - indefinite absences - duties.
A. There is hereby established an executive department of the municipal
government of the City of Bloomington which shall be known as the Fire
Department. The Fire Department shall consist of the Fire Chief, who
shall be Director of the Department; a Deputy Chief of Operations; and
a Deputy Chief of Administration; a Training Officer; a Public Education
Officer; three Battalion Chiefs; 18 Captains; 87 Firefighters; and such
civilian employees as may be provided for in the City budget from time
to time by the City Council. The Fire Chief, Deputy Chiefs, Training
Officer and Public Education Officer shall maintain and be eligible to
improve their commissioned ranks and these appointments will not
affect the numbers and ranks of the remaining numbers of sworn
members of the department. The rank of Assistant Chief is the
administrative equivalent of suppression Battalion Chief e.g., Training
Officer. [Ord. No. 2014-93]
B. Notwithstanding the limitation enumerated in Subsection A above, the
City Manager is authorized to request an additional member of the Fire
Department whenever he determines that at least one member of the
Department is absent from his or her regularly scheduled duties for a
period of indefinite duration.
(1) Whenever the City Manager makes a determination under this
subsection, he shall inform the Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners, which shall treat such determination as a vacancy
and fill it. Any person appointed to the Department under this
subsection shall receive an appointment, subject to being laid off in
the event the absent member returns to his or her regular duties
prior to the creation of a vacancy in the Department, unless the
City Manager makes a determination that laying off the firefighter
at that time would create a hardship in the department because of
the particular job duties which the firefighter is engaged in at the
time the absent member returns. Any person laid off shall be
recalled to service as soon as a vacancy exists or another
determination under this subsection is made.
(2) Layoffs shall be subject to the following provisos:
(a) Firefighters enrolled in the Certified Basic Firefighter
Operations Academy shall not be laid off until completion of
such courses;
§ 17-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-101
1:483
§ 17-102. [Ch. 17, Sec. 2] Appointments - members, officers of the
City. [Ord. No. 1975-76]
The Fire Chief shall be appointed by the City Manager and his appointment
shall be made upon no other basis than that of merit and fitness, and he
need not be a member of the department at the time of his appointment, it
being expressly intended that he not be appointed by the Board of Fire and
Police Commissioners. The members of the Fire Department, so constituted,
shall be and are officers of the City. These officers shall include any member
appointed or commissioned to perform fire fighting duties.
§ 17-103. [Ch. 17, Sec. 2A] Deputy Fire Chiefs. [Ord. No. 2008-53]
A Deputy Chief of Operations and a Deputy Chief of Administration shall,
with the approval of the City Manager, be appointed by the Fire Chief. Their
appointments shall be made upon no other basis than that of merit and
fitness, and the appointees need not be a member of the Fire Department
at the time of appointment. It is expressly intended that he or she not
be appointed by the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners. Deputy Fire
Chiefs shall be and are officers of the City. Their duties shall consist of
such administrative and operational duties as are assigned by the Fire
Chief. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the Deputy Fire
Chiefs shall be second in command only to the Fire Chief. In the event a
person who is appointed Deputy Fire Chief by the Fire Chief had previously
been appointed or promoted to a position within the fire service by the
Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, a Deputy Fire Chief shall revert
to such position in the event he or she resigns or is removed from the
position of Deputy Fire Chief. A person appointed to the position of Deputy
Fire Chief shall be eligible to seek placement on and promotion from any
entry level or promotional lists established by the Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners.
§ 17-104. [Ch. 17, Sec. 3] Supervision over Department equipment.
The Fire Chief shall have the control, subject to the order and direction of
the City Manager, of the Fire Department and, all fire apparatus belonging
to the City; whenever any fire apparatus needs repairing said Fire Chief
shall cause the same to be done without delay.
(b) If more than one firefighter is hired pursuant to this
subsection, firefighters shall be laid off pursuant to the "last-in,
first out" method; and
(c) A firefighter on lay-off status pursuant to this subsection shall
be recalled to service prior to the hiring of a new candidate
from the eligibility list.
(3) The making of a determination under this subsection lies solely
within the discretion of the City Manager, and no person may
compel the City Manager to make a determination under this
subsection. [Ord. No. 2014-93]
§ 17-101 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 17-105
1:484
§ 17-105. [Ch. 17, Sec. 4] Command at fires.
In case of fire, the Fire Chief or Assistant Fire Chief in command at the
time the fire alarm is given shall take command of the Fire Department
and direct the management thereof for the suppression of the fire, in the
best manner possible; and when it may be necessary for the protection of
other property and to prevent the spread of the conflagration, the officer in
command may cause buildings to be removed, torn down, or destroyed in
the best manner possible.
§ 17-106. [Ch. 17, Sec. 6] Duties. [Ord. No. 2014-94]
It shall be the function and duty of the Fire Department to provide fire
suppression, fire prevention and life safety programs, public education, fire
investigation, technical rescue, hazardous materials response, emergency
medical services, domestic preparedness planning and response, and
aviation rescue and firefighting services.
§ 17-107. [Ch. 17, Sec. 7] Enforcement of ordinances.
It shall be the duty of all officers of the Fire Department, the Bureau of Fire
Prevention, and all police officers of the City to see that the provisions of
the Article are enforced and to arrest on view any person who shall be found
violating any of the provisions of this article or who shall hinder, resist, or
refuse to obey any such officer in the discharge of his duty, and to that end
all such officers are hereby vested with the usual power and authority of
police officers.
§ 17-108. [Ch. 17, Sec. 8] Investigation of fires. [Ord. No. 1980-26]
The Chief of the Fire Department shall be responsible for having the cause,
origin, and circumstances of every fire occurring in the City investigated
to determine as to whether such fire was the result of carelessness or by
design. Such investigation shall be begun within two days, not including
Sunday, of the occurrence of such fire. The assigned person responsible for
making such investigation shall forthwith notify the Department of Public
Safety of the State of Illinois and shall within one week of the occurrence
of the fire, furnish to said Department of Public Safety a written statement
of all facts relating to the cause and origin of the fire, and such other
information as may be called for by the blanks provided by said Department.
§ 17-109. [Ch. 17, Sec. 9] Fire Chief - bond - oath.
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the Fire Chief shall take the
oath prescribed by law for all City officers and shall execute and deliver
a bond payable to the City in the penal sum of $5,000 with sureties to be
approved by the Council, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the
duties of his office.
§ 17-110. [Ch. 17, Sec. 10] Powers - establish rules - training
officer.
§ 17-105 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-110
1:485
§ 17-111. [Ch. 17, Sec. 11] Custody of apparatus.
The said Fire Chief shall have the custody of the engines, hose, trucks,
ladders and all buildings belonging or appertaining to said Fire Department
and all other property and equipment belonging or appertaining to the Fire
Department, subject to the supervision of the City Manager.
§ 17-112. [Ch. 17, Sec. 13] Shall keep apparatus in repair.
He shall keep himself fully informed on the condition and efficiency of all
property or apparatus belonging to the Department. Whenever any of said
apparatus shall require alterations or repairs, he shall cause the same to be
done under his supervision and direction.
§ 17-113. [Ch. 17, Sec. 15] Record of fires, etc.
The Fire Chief shall keep an accurate list of all fires occurring in said City,
the date and location of each fire, the name of the owner of the property
destroyed, the cause of the fire, if known, the loss incurred thereby, the
amount of insurance, and such other information as he may deem important
to the City. Monthly and annually a report summarizing this information
shall be submitted to the City Manager.
§ 17-114. [Ch. 17, Sec. 16] Attend fires.
He shall attend whenever possible all fires occurring within the City and
take command of the Department at such fire and see that the several
members of the Fire Department faithfully perform their respective duties.
A. Said Fire Chief shall be the head of the Fire Department and shall have
full control over the same and over all members thereof while in the line
of their duty, subject to the control and supervision of the City Manager.
The said Fire Chief may, with the approval of the City Manager,
prescribe and establish such rules and regulations as he may deem
property for the government of the Fire Department and the members
thereof. He shall furnish each member of said department with a copy
of such rules and regulations, and it shall be his duty to see that said
rules and regulations are enforced.
B. The Fire Chief shall designate an officer of the Fire Department as
Training Officer, who shall be responsible directly to the Chief. The
Training Officer shall supervise the planning, coordination and
implementation of a comprehensive program of in-service employee
training and development, and all work incidental thereto.
C. The Fire Chief is authorized to establish by rule a program whereby
volunteer chaplains are available to confer with employees of the Fire
Department who desire counseling and to provide crisis intervention to
members of the public with whom the firefighters come in contact in the
discharge of their duties. [Ord. No. 1990-89]
§ 17-110 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 17-115
1:486
§ 17-115. [Ch. 17, Sec. 17] Same - general authority at fires.
Every person who shall be present at a fire shall be subject and obedient to
the orders of the Fire Chief and the Assistant Fire Chiefs in extinguishing
the fire and the removal and protection of property; provided that no person
not a member of the Fire Department shall be bound to obey any such
officers, unless such officers shall bear their respective badges of office or
their official character shall be known or made known to such person. Such
officers shall have power to arrest any person so refusing to obey such
lawful orders.
§ 17-116. [Ch. 17, Sec. 18] Fire Chief or designee to prescribe limits
within which persons permitted at fires or other emergency incident
scenes. [Ord. No. 2014-95]
The Fire Chief or his designee in command may prescribe limits in the
vicinity of any fire, or other emergency, within which no persons shall be
permitted to enter, except by permission of the officer in command.
§ 17-117. [Ch. 17, Sec. 19] May remove property at fires.
He shall have power to cause the removal of any property whenever it
shall become necessary for the preservation of such property from fire or to
prevent the spreading of fire or to protect adjacent property.
§ 17-118. [Ch. 17, Sec. 20] May destroy buildings.
He shall have power, when he deems it necessary to check the progress of
any fire, to cut down and remove any fence, building, or other erection of
any kind and he shall also have the power, when necessity exists, to blow up
or cause to be blown up with powder or otherwise any building or structure.
§ 17-119. [Ch. 17, Sec. 21] Interference with firemen; destruction of
fire apparatus.
No person shall willfully hinder or resist any City officer or fireman in
the performance of his duty at, going to, or returning from any fire, or
while attending to any of their respective duties connected with the Fire
Department or willfully or negligently, in any manner, cut, deface, destroy,
or injure any fire apparatus or any apparatus of the fire alarm system. Such
person shall be liable for all damages done to any such property in addition
to other penalties provided.
§ 17-120. [Ch. 17, Sec. 22] To enforce ordinances - examination and
inspection.
It shall be the duty of said Fire Chief to cause all provisions of the Code
of the City for the prevention of fires and all other rules and regulations
in reference to the Fire Department, to be strictly enforced. It shall be the
duty of the said Chief of the Fire Department to examine or cause to be
examined by the Bureau of Fire Prevention while in course of construction
§ 17-115 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-120
1:487
all churches, school houses, hotels, halls, theaters, rinks, or other public
buildings, and whenever he is of the opinion that such building is being
unsafely constructed, he shall at once report the same to the City Manager.
He shall at least twice each year carefully inspect all hotels, church
buildings, school houses, halls, theaters, rinks, and other public buildings in
the City limits, and if in his opinion any such building is dangerous to public
safety, he shall at once report the same to the City Manager.
§ 17-121. [Ch. 17, Sec. 23] Shall wear uniform.
The said Fire Chief shall provide himself, at his own expense, with a suitable
uniform, indicative of his rank, as prescribed by the rules and regulations of
said department.
§ 17-122. [Ch. 17, Sec. 24] Turn over property, etc., to successor.
Upon the expiration of his term of office, or his resignation or removal
therefrom, he shall deliver to his successor in office all books, records,
equipments, and property of every description in his possession belonging
to the City or appertaining to his office.
§ 17-123. [Ch. 17, Sec. 26] Shall prefer charges - may suspend
subordinates.
He may, either upon his own knowledge or upon information communicated
to him by others, prefer formal charges to the Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners against any member of the Fire Department for
incompetency, neglect of duty, disobedience of orders, drunkenness, or
violation of any of the standing rules and regulations of said Department. He
may also, pending such charges, suspend such member from duty, and such
suspension shall continue in force until the charges can be investigated by
said Board.
§ 17-124. [Ch. 17, Sec. 27] Use of fire apparatus for private
purposes.
No person shall, without first obtaining the consent of the Chief of the Fire
Department, use any hose or other fire apparatus belonging to the City for
any private purpose whatever.
§ 17-125. [Ch. 17, Sec. 28] Aid to Fire Department.
It shall be lawful for any member of the Fire Department in charge of
fire apparatus to require the aid of any motor vehicle or other source of
power in drawing or conveying fire apparatus to the scene of a fire or other
emergency.
§ 17-126. [Ch. 17, Sec. 29] Impersonating firemen, etc.
No person, not a member of the Fire Department, shall impersonate a
fireman or officer of the Fire Department.
§ 17-120 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 17-127
1:488
§ 17-127. [Ch. 17, Sec. 29A] Participation in state equipment
exchange program. [Ord. No. 2004-100]
The City Manager, at the request of the Fire Chief, is authorized to execute
the necessary documents to donate surplus fire equipment to the
Equipment Exchange Program administered by the Office of the State Fire
Marshall pursuant to 20 ILCS 2905/2.5, provided that: (1) no equipment
shall be so donated unless the recipient of such equipment shall execute
documents in which it agrees to defend, indemnify, and hold the City
harmless for any action arising from the ownership, use, operation or
possession of the equipment after the recipient takes possession; and (2)
that the City Manager shall disclose such donation to the City Council.
§ 17-128. through § 17-130. (Reserved)
§ 17-127 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-128
1:489

DIVISION 2
Assistant Fire Chiefs
§ 17-131. [Ch. 17, Sec. 30] Assistant Fire Chiefs - bond - oath.
Before entering upon the duties of their respective offices they shall each
take the oath prescribed for all City officers and shall execute a bond
payable to the City in the penal sum of $3,000, with sureties to be approved
by the Director of Finance, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the
duties of his office.
§ 17-132. [Ch. 17, Sec. 31] Power and authority.
The Assistant Fire Chief on duty shall be second in command of the said Fire
Department, in subordination to the Fire Chief, and in case of the absence
or disability of the said Fire Chief, he shall possess all the powers and
perform all the duties of the said Fire Chief.
§ 17-133. [Ch. 17, Sec. 32] Shall wear uniform.
They shall wear such uniform, to be provided at their own expense, as may
be designated by the rules and regulations of said Department, indicative of
his rank.
§ 17-134. [Ch. 17, Sec. 32.5] Advance certification required for
promotion.
A. No person shall be promoted to the rank of Lieutenant, Captain or
Assistant Chief from any promotional eligibility list established after
January 26, 1982 unless he or she has been certified as an Advanced
Certified Firefighter III by the Division of Personnel Standards and
Education of the Office of the State Fire Marshal. All persons appointed
Chief of the Department shall at the time of said appointment have such
certification or agree to obtain it within one year of the time of
appointment as a condition of continued employment. [Ord. No.
1982-5]
B. In the event that the State of Illinois requires periodic recertification of
Advanced Firefighter III's, all persons holding such certification as of
the date such requirement takes effect shall maintain such
certifications as a condition of continued employment. [Ord. No.
1982-5]
C. No person shall be promoted to the rank of Assistant Chief from any
promotional eligibility list established after January 1, 1999, unless he
or she possesses the following requirements:
(1) Certification as a Fire Officer II by the Division of Personnel
Standards and Education of the Office of the State Fire Marshal;
(2) An Associate Degree in Fire Science, Fire Service Management or
other job related area of study. [Ord. No. 1996-1]
§ 17-131 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-135
1:491
§ 17-135. through § 17-140. (Reserved)
§ 17-135 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 17-135
1:492
DIVISION 3
Firemen
§ 17-141. [Ch. 17, Sec. 33] Firemen, etc. - number.
There shall be in the said Fire Department as many engineers, firemen,
drivers, pipemen, truckmen and other subordinate employees as the
Council from time to time by Ordinance or Resolution may direct.
§ 17-142. [Ch. 17, Sec. 34] General duties.
They shall perform such duties as are provided for them by law or
Ordinance, and in addition thereto such other duties as from time to time
may be imposed upon them by the City Council, City Manager or the Chief.
§ 17-143. [Ch. 17, Sec. 35] Mandatory certifications.
A. No firefighter shall be hired for probationary appointment to the
Bloomington Fire Department unless and until he or she shall have
obtained certification from the State of Illinois as an Emergency
Medical Technician/Paramedic. [Ord. No. 2006-100]
B. All permanent firefighters below the rank of Lieutenant who possess
State of Illinois certification as an Emergency Medical Technician as of
January 26, 1982 shall be and they are hereby required as a condition of
continued employment, to maintain such certification. All permanent
firefighters below the rank of lieutenant who at an time held State of
Illinois certification as an Emergency Medical Technician shall on or
before January 1, 1983 obtain recertification as an Emergency Medical
Technician as a condition of continued employment. The City reserves
the right to require, as a condition of continued employment with the
City, that all persons accepting appointment as firefighters after May 1,
1996 be certified as an EMT-P (Paramedic) by the State of Illinois within
18 months of the commencement of their employment with the City (or
18 months after the date the City implements paramedic service,
whichever is later) and shall maintain such certification as a condition
of continued employment with the City.
C. Before an individual may commence regular full-time employment as a
firefighter, he must have been certified by the Illinois State Fire
Marshal as a Firefighter II, as having successfully completed an
approved training course as provided in the Illinois Fire Protection
Training Act, as amended. All Firefighter II training must be completed
by the trainee within his probationary period.
D. The Chief of the Fire Department is empowered to issue such orders
and take such steps as in his opinion may be necessary to cause the
certification requirements of this section to be met. [Ord. No.
1999-12]
§ 17-141 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-144
1:493
§ 17-144. [Ch. 17, Sec. 36] Property saved at fire - possession of.
No person shall be permitted to remove or take away any property in
the possession of the Department saved from any fire until proof of the
ownership shall have been made to the satisfaction of the Fire Chief.
§ 17-145. [Ch. 17, Sec. 38] Prescribed uniform to be worn.
§ 17-146. [Ch. 17, Sec. 39] Fire protection service outside of City.
The men or apparatus of the Fire Department shall not respond to any
call from or fight any fire outside of the corporate limits of said City,
provided that the Ordinance shall not apply to industrial or manufacturing
plants. Provided further that the Chief of the Fire Department may with
the approval of the City Manager enter into mutual and reciprocal aid
agreements with the proper officials of other surrounding cities for aid in
the case of fire. All of the members of said Fire Department hereby are
instructed to follow the directions contained in this section.
§ 17-147. [Ch. 17, Sec. 40] Vacancies and promotions.
The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners of the City shall not fill any
vacancies in the Fire Department or make any promotions within the Fire
Department until requested in writing by the City Manager to fill such
vacancies or make such promotions.
§ 17-148. [Ch. 17, Sec. 41] Disqualification from employment -
chemical abuse. [Ord. No. 1982-38]
It is the policy of the City of Bloomington that persons who take or consume
illegal drugs or consume alcohol excessively not be employed in the
Bloomington Fire Department. Whenever the Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners finds that an applicant for employment in the Bloomington
Fire Department has taken or consumed any narcotic, dangerous drug or
controlled substance (except pursuant to direction of a licensed physician)
or has repeatedly consumed alcohol to the point of intoxication, it shall
refuse to certify such applicant for appointment as a probationary employee
or shall decline to place such applicant on an eligibility list for original
appointment, unless such applicant shall establish to the Board's
satisfaction that such conduct has ceased and is unlikely to be resumed. An
applicant's successful completion of a chemical dependency detoxification
program may be considered as evidence of eligibility, but shall not be
conclusive evidence thereof.
A. The Fire Chief shall prescribe a suitable uniform for the members of the
Fire Department to be worn by them while in the line of their duty.
B. All members of the Department shall be required to provide themselves
with such uniform as may be prescribed at their own expense with the
exception of the rubber equipment, caps, badges, and helmets which
shall be furnished by the City.
§ 17-144 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 17-148
1:494
ARTICLE II
Fire Prevention Code
DIVISION 1
§ 17-201. [Ch. 17, Sec. 42] Adoption of Fire Prevention Code -
penalty.
A. There is hereby adopted by the City of Bloomington the "BOCA National
Fire Prevention Code" — 1996 Edition, as published by the Building
Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc. and not less than
three copies of which shall be purchased by the City to be held by the
City Clerk, the Building Safety Department, and the Fire Department,
and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated herein as fully as if
set out at length herein. Except as otherwise modified or amended
herein, the provisions of the BOCA National Fire Code shall be
controlling within the limits of the City and in such other areas as may
be provided for therein. In case any provision(s) of the BOCA National
Fire Code are inconsistent or in conflict with any other provision(s) of
the Bloomington City Code, the provision that is most restrictive shall
prevail. [Ord. No. 1996-112]
B. BOCA National Fire Prevention Code, F-514.7 shall be and the same is
hereby amended by adding thereto the following paragraphs:
It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the apartment building
to supply and install all required detectors and to insure that the
detectors serving each individual dwelling unit and/or any necessary
batteries powering said detectors are in operating condition at the
time a tenant takes possession of any such dwelling unit. It shall be
the responsibility of a tenant to test and provide general maintenance
for the detectors within the tenant's dwelling unit or rooming unit,
including but not limited to the replacement of any required batteries,
and to notify the owner or the authorized agent of the owner in writing
of any deficiencies which the tenant cannot correct. The owner shall
be responsible for providing one tenant per dwelling unit with written
information regarding detector testing and maintenance. The tenant
shall provide the owner or the authorized agent of the owner with
access to the dwelling unit to correct any deficiencies in the smoke
detector which have been reported in writing to the owner or the
authorized agent of the owner.
Any owner of an apartment building who:
(1) Fails to provide and/or install a smoke detector required by this
section;
(2) Fails to ensure that the smoke detector and batteries in any battery
powered smoke detector required by this section are in operating
condition at the time a tenant takes possession of a dwelling unit;
or
§ 17-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-201
1:495
(3) Fails to correct any deficiencies in a smoke detector after being
notified by a tenant in writing of the existence of deficiencies
which the tenant cannot correct within the time prescribed by the
Bloomington Fire Department shall, upon conviction thereof, be
fined not less than $25 for each day of noncompliance.
Any tenant of an apartment building occupying a dwelling unit
containing a battery powered smoke detector found by the
Bloomington Fire Department to be nonfunctional due to weak or
nonexistent batteries shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than
$25. It is the intent of the Bloomington City Council to make owners
of such apartment buildings and their tenants strictly liable for any
noncompliance without regard to their mental state so as to protect
the safety of all tenants. [Ord. No. 1996-112]
C. Effective January 1, 1994, all buildings equipped with sprinkler and/or
fire alarm detection systems connected to a central station shall have a
secure key box installed on the exterior of the premises in a location
accessible to the Fire Department in the case of an emergency. The key
box shall contain master keys necessary to gain access to all portions of
the premises, including but not limited to keys for entry to the
premises, keys to all locked points of egress, keys to locked mechanical
equipment rooms, keys to locked electrical rooms and keys to elevator
controls. All keys placed in the box shall be of a type approved by the
Chief of the Fire Department and must be obtained through the Fire
Department. The box shall be located and installed only in a manner
approved by the Chief of the Fire Department. Promptly upon the
installation of the key box, the owner of the building shall notify the Fire
Department of the exact location of the box and turn over the box key to
the Fire Department. Only the Fire Department shall have access to the
box. Neither the building owner, the owner's employees, agents or
representatives or any other entity or organization, including police or
other emergency response agencies, shall have access to the box. It
shall be the owner's responsibility to insure that all of the keys in the
box work and the owner shall provide the Fire Department with a new
key any time a lock opened by a key contained in the key box is changed
or rekeyed. [Ord. No. 1996-112]
D. It shall be illegal for any person to fail to comply with or violate any
applicable provision of the BOCA National Fire Prevention Code
adopted by reference into this chapter and/or any other provisions set
forth in this chapter and/or any regulation(s) issued by the Deputy Chief
of Operations or his designated representative(s) pursuant to any such
provisions. A separate offense shall be deemed to be committed on each
day on which a violation occurs or continues.
In all cases filed under this chapter, each owner-principal (e.g. person,
partnership or corporation) shall be responsible for and punishable for
all of the acts or omissions of or by its employees, agents or servants,
and it shall not be necessary to show that the said owner-principal had
§ 17-201 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 17-201
1:496
knowledge of such acts or omissions to find the owner-principal to be in
violations thereof. [Ord. No. 1996-112; Ord. No. 2004-57]
E. Any person found not complying with or in violation of any provision of
the BOCA National Fire Prevention Code adopted into this chapter and/
or any other provisions set forth in this chapter and/or any regulation(s)
issued pursuant to any such provisions shall be fined not less than $25
nor more than $750 for each offense, except as otherwise provided
herein. [Ord. No. 1996-112]
F. Any person not complying with or in violation of any of the provisions of
BOCA National Fire Prevention Code F-601.8, as adopted herein or
regulations issued pursuant thereto shall be fined not less than $15 nor
more than $50 for each person who is on the premises in excess of the
occupancy and occupant load limits provided for therein or pursuant to
said provisions by a representative of the City. [Ord. No. 1996-112]
§ 17-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-201
1:497

DIVISION 2
Bureau of Fire Prevention
§ 17-202. [Ch. 17, Sec. 43] Establishment; duties of Chief, etc. [Ord.
No. 2004-57]
A Bureau of Fire Prevention in the Fire Department of the City is hereby
established which shall be operated under the supervision of the Chief of
the Department. The Chief of the Fire Department shall designate an officer
of the Fire Department as Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention who shall
hold this office at the pleasure of the Chief of the Fire Department and who
shall be known as the Deputy Chief of Operations.
§ 17-203. [Ch. 17, Sec. 44] Duties of Fire Prevention Bureau.
A. Fire inspectors.
(1) It shall be the duty of the uniformed and civilian members of the
Bureau of Fire Prevention to enforce all laws and Ordinances of the
Fire Prevention Code so adopted or written by the City of
Bloomington.
(2) They shall have such other powers and perform such other duties
as are set forth in other Sections of this chapter and other
provisions of the Code of the City as may be conferred and imposed
from time to time by law.
B. Fire Investigator.
(1) It shall be the duty of the Deputy Chief of Operations or such other
uniformed member of the Fire Prevention Bureau assigned as a
Fire Investigator to determine the cause, origin, and circumstances
of all fires of suspicious nature, fires where arson (incendiary
nature) is suspected, fires where death(s) occurred, fires where the
cause(s) cannot be readily determined, and to other fires or fire
related incidents as required. [Ord. No. 2004-57]
(2) The Deputy Chief of Operations and all designated Fire
Investigators shall be and the same are hereby designated
conservators of the peace pursuant to Section 3-9-4 of the Illinois
Municipal Code (Ill. Rev. Stat. ch. 24, Sec. 3-9-4)30 to the extent
authorized in this chapter. When acting in the scope of their
investigative duties as provided in this chapter, they shall be
possessed of all powers of peace officers referred to in said Section
3-9-4 including powers of arrest, search and seizure and possession
and use of firearms necessary to carry out the duties of their office.
(3) They shall have such other powers and perform such other duties
as are set forth in other Sections of this chapter and other
30.Editor's Note: See now 65 ILCS 5/3.1-15-25.
§ 17-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-203
1:499
§ 17-204. [Ch. 17, Sec. 45] Definitions. [Ord. No. 2004-57]
Wherever the word "Municipality" is used in the Fire Prevention Code, it
shall be held to mean the City of Bloomington. Wherever the words "Chief
of the Bureau of Fire Prevention" are used in the Fire Prevention Code, they
shall be held to mean "Deputy Chief of Operations." Wherever the words
"Department of Public Safety" are used herein, they shall be held to mean
the "Department of Public Safety of the State of Illinois."
§ 17-205. [Ch. 17, Sec. 46] Establishment of limits of districts in
which storage of flammable liquids in outside above-ground tanks is
to be prohibited.
§ 17-206. [Ch. 17, Sec. 47] Establishment of limits in which bulk
storage of liquefied petroleum gases is to be restricted.
The limits referred to in this Code in which bulk storage of liquefied
petroleum gas is restricted are hereby established as follows: the fire limits.
§ 17-207. [Ch. 17, Sec. 48] Modifications.
The Chief of the Fire Department shall have power to modify any of the
provisions of the Fire Prevention Code upon application in writing by the
owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical
difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the Code, provided
that the spirit of the Code shall be observed, public safety secured, and
substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification when granted
or allowed and the decision of the Chief of the Fire Department thereon
shall be entered upon the records of the Department and a signed copy shall
be furnished the applicant.
§ 17-208. through § 17-210. (Reserved)
provisions of the Code of the City as may be conferred and imposed
from time to time by law. [Ord. No. 1984-12]
C. Training requirements. Prior to exercising any powers as conservators
of the peace pursuant to this section, Fire Investigators shall be
certified by the Illinois Local Governmental Law Enforcement Officers
Training Board as having satisfactorily completed the training for such
officers prescribed by the Board. [Ord. No. 1984-12]
A. The limits referred to in this Code in which storage of flammable liquids
in outside above-ground tanks is prohibited are hereby established as
follows: the fire limits.
B. The limits referred to in this Code in which new bulk plants for
flammable liquids are prohibited are hereby established as follows: the
fire limits.
§ 17-203 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 17-208
1:500
DIVISION 3
Multifamily House
§ 17-211. [Ch. 17, Sec. 51] Apartments and multifamily houses.
§ 17-212. through § 17-220. (Reserved)
A. Every apartment of every multifamily house and every rental room of
every lodging house hereafter erected, altered or converted shall have
access to two approved means of egress from each floor to the ground
level. The Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention of the City or the
designated inspectors of his Department are authorized to make
inspections of existing means of egress from any multifamily house or
lodging house in the City, and also consider plans for proposed
construction, alterations or conversions. The means of egress shall be
subject to the approval of the said Chief. Whenever in his opinion
existing conditions constitute a safety hazard, the Chief is authorized to
issue a written order setting forth necessary changes or alterations that
must be made. Upon failure to comply with the said order within the
time therein set forth to correct the deficiencies, the occupancy of the
apartment, rooms or building so concerned shall be discontinued.
B. Every existing apartment or multifamily house and every such building
hereafter erected, altered, or converted having one or more apartments
located in the basement shall have the heating unit contained in a fire
resistive enclosure or provide sprinkler protection if it is not possible to
so enclose the heating unit. If fuel oil is used as the heating agent, the
fuel oil tank shall be contained in a fire resistive enclosure. [Ord. No.
1993-80]
C. Every existing apartment house or multifamily house and every such
building hereafter erected, altered, or converted, having one or more
apartments located in the basement, shall have two approved means of
egress.
§ 17-211 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-212
1:501

DIVISION 4
Sign Shops
§ 17-221. [Ch. 17, Sec. 52] General provisions.
§ 17-222. through § 17-230. (Reserved)
A. All sign shops shall keep such building, lot, or premises so occupied
thereby free of all refuse, and such establishments shall be kept in a
neat, orderly, compact manner.
B. All paint materials shall be kept sealed closed and in a suitable cabinet
or fireproof room used exclusively for the storage of paints only.
C. All gas burners used in connection with the forming of glass shall be
kept entirely clear of all flammable material.
§ 17-221 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-222
1:503

DIVISION 5
Used Furniture and Upholstery Shops
§ 17-231. [Ch. 17, Sec. 53] General provisions.
§ 17-232. through § 17-240. (Reserved)
A. All upholstering materials (packing and filling material) shall be kept in
a fireproof container.
B. All flammable finishing materials shall be kept in a fire-proof cabinet,
locker, or fire-proof room where only flammable finishes are stored.
C. All furniture, etc., shall be stored in an orderly compact manner and
have adequate aisle space and proper exit facilities.
D. All mattresses which are forbidden by State laws to be offered for sale
shall be disposed of immediately.
E. All used furniture and upholstery establishments shall at all times be
kept free of rubbish and refuse of any nature.
F. All refuse while awaiting disposal shall be kept in a fire-proof container.
G. No oil stoves or kerosene stoves shall be allowed to be used for heating
purposes in any used furniture store or upholstery shop without a
permit from the Bureau of Fire Prevention.
§ 17-231 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-232
1:505

DIVISION 6
Dilapidated Buildings - Fire Hazards
§ 17-241. [Ch. 17, Sec. 54] Enforcement of rules applicable to same.
The Chief of the Fire Department, Fire Inspector of the Bureau of Fire
Prevention, shall under the direction of the Department of Public Safety of
the State of Illinois, enforce such rules and regulations as the Department
of Public Safety have or shall adopt, prescribe, promulgate, and publish
by authority of the State of Illinois to protect the public from the dangers
arising from any building or other structure, which is so occupied or so
situated as to endanger persons or property, or which by reason of faulty
construction, age, lack of proper repair, or any other cause has become
especially liable to fire or has become liable to cause injury by collapsing
or otherwise; or where there is kept or maintained on such premises,
combustible, or explosive material or inflammable conditions which
endanger the safety of said building or premises.
§ 17-242. [Ch. 17, Sec. 55] Rules and regulations adopted.
The rules and regulations of the Department of Public Safety of the State
of Illinois relating to dangerous conditions or fire hazards in buildings
or structures above referred to, adopted, prescribed, promulgated, and
published by said Department by the authority of the State of Illinois, and
the whole thereof, of which at least three copies have been and now are
filed in the office of the City Clerk, and the same are hereby adopted and
incorporated in this article as fully as if set forth at length herein; and
the provisions of such, unless otherwise provided in this Code shall be
controlling within the limits of the City of Bloomington.
§ 17-243. [Ch. 17, Sec. 56] Certified copy of rules as evidence.
A copy of any rule, certified by the Director of Public Safety of the State of
Illinois, shall be received in evidence in all courts of this State with the same
effect as the original.
§ 17-244. [Ch. 17, Sec. 57] Inspection of premises - notice to
remedy or remove.
The Chief of the Fire Department, Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention
or an inspector specially designated thereto shall inspect and examine at
reasonable hours any premises, and the buildings and other structures
thereon, and if such dangerous condition or fire hazard is found to exist
contrary to the rules herein referred to, or if a dangerous condition or fire
hazard is found to exist in any building or structure as specified in § 17-241
of this article and the rules herein referred to are not applicable to such
dangerous condition or fire hazard, he shall order the dangerous condition
removed or remedied and shall so notify the owner, occupant, or other
person interested in the premises. Service of the notice upon the owner,
§ 17-241 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-244
1:507
occupant, or other interested person shall be in person or by registered
mail.
§ 17-245. [Ch. 17, Sec. 58] Same - special hazards and appliances.
The Chief of the Fire Department, Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention,
or any inspector specially designated thereto shall inspect as often as may
be necessary, but not less than four times a year, all specially hazardous
manufacturing processes, storages or installations of gases, chemicals, oils,
explosives, and flammable materials, all interior fire alarm and automatic
sprinkler systems, and such other hazards or appliances as the Chief of
the Fire Department shall designate, and shall issue such orders as may be
necessary for the enforcement of the laws and ordinances governing the
same and for safeguarding of life and property from fire.
§ 17-246. [Ch. 17, Sec. 59] Same - places of assembly.
It shall be the duty of the Chief of the Fire Department to inspect or cause
to be inspected by the Bureau of Fire Prevention or by the Fire Department
officers or members each place of assembly at least monthly and at such
times, including time of occupancy and use, as to insure compliance with
all laws, regulations, and orders dealing with overcrowding, use of
decorations, maintenance of exit ways, collapse of revolving doors and
maintenance of fire appliances in such places of assembly. Where conditions
are found to be unsatisfactory, written orders for immediate correction shall
be given.
§ 17-247. [Ch. 17, Sec. 60] Same - correction of improper
conditions.
A. It shall be the duty of the Chief of the Fire Department to inspect, or
cause to be inspected by the Bureau of Fire Prevention, or by the Fire
Department officers and members as often as may be necessary, but not
less than twice a year in outlying districts and four times a year in the
closely built portions of the City all buildings and premises except the
interiors of private dwellings, for the purpose of ascertaining and
causing to be corrected any conditions liable to cause fire or any
violations of the provisions or intent of any provisions of the Code of the
City affecting the fire hazard.
B. Whenever any inspector, as defined above, shall find in any building or
upon any premises combustible or explosive matter or dangerous
accumulations of rubbish or unnecessary accumulation of wastepaper,
boxes, shavings or any highly flammable materials, and which is so
situated as to endanger life or property, or shall find obstructions to or
on fire escapes, stairs, passageways, doors, or windows, liable to
interfere with the operations of the Fire Department or egress of
occupants in case of fire, he shall order the same to be removed or
remedied.
§ 17-244 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 17-248
1:508
§ 17-248. [Ch. 17, Sec. 61] Same - upon complaint, etc.; remedying
or removal of dangerous conditions.
The Chief of the Fire Department, Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention
or an inspector upon the complaint of any person or whenever he or they
shall deem it necessary shall inspect all buildings and premises within their
jurisdiction. Whenever any officers shall find any building or other structure
which, for want of repairs, lacks of sufficient fire escapes, automatic or
other fire alarm apparatus or fire-extinguishing equipment or by reason of
age or dilapidated condition, or from any other cause, is especially liable to
fire and which is so situated as to endanger other property or the occupants
thereof; and whenever such officer shall find in any building combustible or
explosive matter or flammable conditions dangerous to the safety of such
building or the occupants thereof, he or they shall order such conditions or
materials to be removed or remedied in such manner as may be specified by
the Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention.
§ 17-249. [Ch. 17, Sec. 62] Service of order; compliance; appeal.
A. The service of such orders as mentioned in §§ 17-244 through 17-248 of
this chapter may be made upon the owner, occupant, or other person
responsible for the conditions, either by delivering a copy of same
personally or by delivering the same to and leaving it with any person in
charge of the premises, or in case no such person is found upon the
premises, by affixing a copy thereof in a conspicuous place on the door
to the entrance of the premises. Whenever it may be necessary to serve
such an order upon the owner of the premises, such order may be
served either by delivering to and leaving with the person a copy of the
order, or if such owner is absent from the jurisdiction of the officer
making the order, by mailing such copy to the owner's last known post
office address.
B. If such buildings or other premises are owned by one person and
occupied by another under lease or otherwise, the orders issued in
connection with the enforcing of this chapter shall apply to the
occupant above, except where the rules or orders require the making of
additions to or changes in the premises themselves, such as would
immediately become real estate and be the property of the owner of the
premises; in such cases the rules or orders shall affect the owner and
not the occupant unless it is otherwise agreed between the owner and
the occupant.
C. Any such order shall forthwith be complied with by the owner or
occupant of such premises or building. If such order is made by the
Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention or one of the inspectors, such
owner or occupant may within 24 hours appeal to the Chief of the Fire
Department who shall, within five days, review such order and file his
decision thereon, and unless by his authority the order is revoked or
modified, it shall remain in full force and be complied with within the
time fixed in such order or decision of the Chief of the Fire Department;
provided, however, that any such owner or occupant may, within 10
§ 17-248 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-249
1:509
§ 17-250. through § 17-260. (Reserved)
days after the making or affirming of any such order by the Chief of the
Fire Department or by the Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention file an
appeal to the Department of Public Safety, State of Illinois.
§ 17-249 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 17-250
1:510
DIVISION 7
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 17-261. [Ch. 17, Sec. 63] Miscellaneous provisions.
A. False alarms prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to send in
an alarm from any fire alarm box, telephone system, or any verbal alarm
except for the purpose of giving an alarm of a fire which such person
has reason to believe exists.
B. Hindrance to firemen. It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully
offer any hindrance to any fireman in his performance of his duty at a
fire.
C. Running vehicles over Fire Department equipment. It shall be unlawful
for any person to operate any vehicle, streetcar, locomotive, or railroad
car on, over or across any hose, ladders, or other equipment of the Fire
Department.
D. Defacing property. It shall be unlawful for any person to injure, deface
or destroy any property of the Fire Department.
E. Fire hydrants. It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct any fire
hydrant or to place or deposit any lumber, rock, sand, debris or other
substance within 10 feet of any such fire hydrant on any public or
private property in the City. The use of any wrenches other than those
especially made for the purpose of opening or shutting any fire hydrant
is strictly prohibited. No fire hydrant shall be used by any person other
than by a member of the Fire Department or City employee without first
having secured the permission of the Fire Chief or a designated
member of the Fire Chief or a designated member of the Fire
Department. Size, design, location and marking of all hydrants on
private property shall be approved by the Chief of the Bureau of Fire
Prevention.
F. Vacant buildings. Whenever any unoccupied building or structure in the
City is not properly secured or closed, the Fire Chief shall notify the
owner or person having control of such premises to forthwith secure or
close the same, so as to prevent unauthorized persons from gaining
access thereto, and the person so notified as aforementioned shall,
within 48 hours, comply with such orders as may be issued by the Fire
Chief.
G. General housekeeping.
(1) Broken windows, plastering, holes in floors or combustible hollow
partitions or sheeting and furring in any building shall be repaired
without delay.
(2) In buildings equipped with automatic sprinklers, stock shall be kept
at least 18 inches below the sprinkler heads so as not to interfere,
with the efficiency of the sprinkler system.
§ 17-261 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-261
1:511
(3) Stock shall be kept at least 18 inches below all ceilings and shall be
piled so as not to interfere with the operation of fire doors and so as
to maintain adequate aisles.
(4) All stock shall be kept in a neat, orderly, compact manner in accord
with good housekeeping.
(5) Wherever and whenever stock is dispensed directly from a shipping
container and combustible material is used as protective packing,
said packing material shall be removed from the container and
taken care of as provided in other parts of this Ordinance; or said
container shall be kept closed at all times except when removing
stock therefrom. [Ord. No. 1987-74]
H. Ashes. In no instance shall any person, firm or corporation allow over
one week's accumulation of ashes and clinkers to remain inside a
building at any time.
I. Vertical shafts.
(1) Openings (doors, etc.) to all vertical shafts (linen chutes, dumb
waiters, refuse chutes, etc.) shall be protected with a fire resistive
material and kept closed when not in use.
(2) All vertical shafts having a combustible lining shall be lined with a
fire resistive material or be protected by means of a sprinkler head
or heads at its uppermost point.
J. Smoke screen doors. No door or doors designed to act as, or installed to
act as or used as smoke screen doors shall be kept in an open position
by any means whatsoever and such doors shall be equipped with
automatic door closing devices which shall be maintained in operating
condition at all times.
K. Hoods, vents and stoves.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any persons, firm or corporation to permit
any vent or hood or other contrivance designed or intended to, or
which does, carry away grease or fat or the vapor thereof to
become foul or coated with grease, fat or other inflammable
material.
(2) All vents, hoods or other contrivances mentioned in Subsection
K(1) shall be equipped with a suitable grease filter. Said grease
filter shall be kept clean and free of grease, fat or other
inflammable material.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to allow any
stove, range, grill, floor or other appurtenance to become foul or
coated with grease, fat or other inflammable material.
L. Miscellaneous electrical.
§ 17-261 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 17-261
1:512
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to block or
allow to be blocked any fuse or fuses used in any electrical circuit
which may be used in any building or buildings.
(2) All electrical circuits shall be fused with the type and size fuse
allowed by the National Electrical Code. Where possible, circuit
breaker type fusing shall be employed on all new construction.
(3) The use of lamp cord type wiring, makeshift wiring, and excessive
extension (drop cord) type wiring shall be unlawful.
(4) The fastening of unapproved wiring to any woodwork or the
passing of any unapproved wiring through floors or partitions shall
be unlawful.
(5) All commercial type refrigeration units shall be equipped with
approved cross-the-line starters. Said cross-the-line starters shall
be equipped with built-in overload controls of a capacity gauged to
the motor on the refrigeration unit.
M. Fire extinguishers.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person, directly or through agent, to sell
or service, or offer to sell or service, in the City any fire
extinguisher unless he shall have first registered with and secured
a permit from the Fire Chief. Prior to issuing the permit, the Chief
shall require the registrant to demonstrate his knowledge of and
experience with fire extinguishers.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person, directly or through agent, to sell
or offer for sale in the City any make, type, or model of
extinguisher, either new or used, unless such make, type or model
of extinguisher has first been tested and is approved and labeled by
the Factory Mutual Laboratories, Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc.,
or other testing laboratory approved by the Deputy Chief of
Operations as providing adequate and reliable tests and
examination; and it shall be unlawful for any person, directly or
through agent, to deliver or make available for use in the City any
make, type, or model of extinguisher which is first tested and/or
serviced as required in the standards of the National Fire
Protection Association entitled "Standard for the Installation,
Maintenance, and Use of Portable Fire Extinguishers" (NFPA No.
10) 1990 Edition, a copy of which is on file in the office of the City
Clerk and which regulations hereby are adopted and made by
reference a part of this Code. [Ord. No. 2004-57]
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person, directly or through agent, to sell
or offer for sale in the City any make, type or model of vaporizing
liquid fire extinguisher, whether laboratory approved or not, except
for use on a motor carrier as authorized by the law of this State and
laws of the United States relating to motor carriers.
§ 17-261 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-261
1:513
(4) Installation. All fire extinguishers shall be installed in the manner
prescribed by the manufacturer thereof in every location where
required by this Code. Every required or non-required fire
extinguisher, when installed, shall be fully charged or ready for
immediate use. In buildings where appliances are likely to be
obscured by piles of stock, lumber or otherwise, a sign shall be
installed and maintained which shall mark the location of such
appliance in a manner legible at a distance of at least 50 feet.
(5) Maintenance. Extinguishers shall be recharged annually in the
manner prescribed by the manufacturer thereof in every location
where required by this Code. Every required or non-required fire
extinguisher, when installed, shall be fully charged or ready for
immediate use. In buildings where appliances are likely to be
obscured by piles of stock, lumber or otherwise, a sign shall be
installed and maintained which shall mark the location of such
appliance in a manner legible at a distance of at least 50 feet.
N. Fire caused by smoking.
(1) Any person who by smoking or attempting to light or smoke
cigarettes, cigars, pipes or tobacco in any manner, in which lighters
or matches are employed shall in any careless, reckless or
negligent manner whatsoever, whether willfully or wantonly or not,
set fire to any bedding, furniture, curtains, drapes, house or any
household fittings, or any part of any building whatsoever, so as to
endanger life or property in any way or to any extent shall be guilty
of violating this section and shall, upon conviction, be subject to a
fine of not less than $50 nor more than $200 for each offense.
(2) In each sleeping room of all hotels, rooming houses, lodging houses
and other places of public abode, a plainly printed notice shall be
kept posted in a conspicuous place, advising tenant of the
provisions of this section.
(3) Said notice shall be provided and posted by each hotel, rooming
house, lodging house, and other place of public abode, in which
more than three hotel guests, roomers, or lodgers reside, at no
expense to the City.
(4) Any person, firm or corporation failing to comply with the
provisions of Subsection N(2) and (3) of this section shall be subject
to a penalty of not less than $5 nor more than $200 for each
offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
during which said notice shall not be posted as provided herein.
O. Oil burners.
(1) Where oil burners are hereafter installed in heat producing
appliances designed for solid fuel, bottom ventilation shall be
provided to prevent the accumulation of vapors in the ash pit,
unless such pit is automatically purged by the burner.
§ 17-261 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 17-261
1:514
§ 17-262. [Ch. 17, Sec. 64] Alleviation of emergency situation -
financial responsibilities. [Ord. No. 1982-54]
Whenever any member of the Bloomington Fire Department in response to
call encounters an emergency situation requiring the procuring of goods
or services from sources other than the City of Bloomington to respond
to such emergency, said member is authorized by means of procedures
determined by the Fire Chief, to procure such goods or services. The City
of Bloomington shall be entitled to recover from any person, firm or entity
causing or contributing to the causing of said emergency any portion of the
cost of goods and/or services paid by the City.
§ 17-263. [Ch. 17, Sec. 65] Assistance to inspectors in investigation
of fires.
The Police Department upon request of the Chief of the Fire Department or
Bureau of Fire Prevention, shall assist the Fire Chief or Fire Inspector in the
investigation of any fire which, in their opinion, is of suspicious origin.
§ 17-264. [Ch. 17, Sec. 66] Schools; fire drills required; exits and
doors to be kept open.
It shall be the duty of the Chief of the Fire Department to require teachers
of public, private and parochial schools and educational institutions to have
(2) Controls. Oil burners shall be provided with means for manually
stopping the flow of oil to the burners from a point at a safe
distance from the burner. Automatically operated oil burners used
in steam or water boilers or fan type forced warm air furnaces shall
be equipped with automatic devices which will shut down the
burners in the event of undue steam pressure, excessive water
temperature within the heat producing appliance. Such systems
shall also be equipped with automatic devices to shut off the oil
supply to the burners in case of failure of ignition or interruption of
the supply or atomization of oil.
P. It shall be the duty of the owner, agent, lessee, or occupant to provide a
fire guard or guards at his own expense at any gathering in any
structure which in the opinion of the Fire Chief is dangerous to life and
property, because of structural conditions or lack of exits to
accommodate the number of persons present in case of fire.
Q. Fireworks. The Act regulating fireworks of the State of Illinois being
Sections 101 to 131 of Chapter 1274, Illinois Revised Statutes, is
hereby adopted by reference for the regulation of all fireworks within
the City of Bloomington.
R. Enclosure of windows in commercial remodeling. In commercial
remodeling, window and door openings shall not be sealed off without
the approval of the Fire Chief in order that proper ingress to each floor
for fire fighting purposes will be retained.
§ 17-261 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-264
1:515
one fire drill each month and to keep all doors and exits unlocked during
school hours and whenever any activity is taking place within the building.
§ 17-265. [Ch. 17, Sec. 67] Appeals. [Ord. No. 1993-80]
Whenever the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall disapprove an application or
refuses to grant a license or permit applied for, or where it is claimed that
the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code do not apply, or that the true
intent of the Code has been misconstrued or wrongfully misinterpreted, any
person affected thereby may appeal from the decision of the Bureau of Fire
Prevention within 10 days from the date of such decision and order. Any
such appeal shall be made to the Construction Board of Appeals as provided
in Section 121.1, et seq., of Chapter 10 of the Bloomington City Code.
§ 17-264 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 17-265
1:516
ARTICLE III
Gasoline Service Stations
§ 17-301. [Ch. 17, Sec. 69] Definitions.
GASOLINE SERVICE STATIONS and SERVICE STATION — Any place of
business where gasoline or any highly volatile fuels for motor vehicles or
other internal combustion engines are sold or offered for sale at retail and
dispensed into the fuel tanks of such motor vehicles. This definition shall
also include the private storage and dispensing of fuel products for the
same purposes as those served by a service station, whether the storage is
maintained for the use or benefit of the owner, lessee, agents or employees
of either, or of any others.[Ord. No. 1982-56]
§ 17-302. [Ch. 17, Sec. 70] Permit required.
§ 17-303. [Ch. 17, Sec. 71] Maintenance.
Any person, firm or corporation operating a gasoline service station under
permit as herein provided for, or operating any such station at the time
this article takes effect, shall conduct said station in such a manner that it
will not interfere with traffic or the free passage of pedestrians and shall
at all times maintain the buildings and the station property in a clean, neat
and well painted condition and shall maintain the surrounding streets and
sidewalks in a clean and well kept condition and shall not do or permit
anything to be done which shall cause the operation and maintenance of
said business to become dangerous to life or property or to become a
nuisance in any form.
A. Any person, firm or corporation desiring to erect, install or maintain a
gasoline service station in the City shall first make application to the
Bureau of Fire Prevention for permission to do so. Said application shall
specify the location and ownership and shall be accompanied by
complete set of plans and specifications showing floor plans and floor
elevations; location of buildings and all details of structure, tanks,
pumps, driveways and oiling houses relative to sewer location and
property lines. If, but only if, said location, petition, plans and
specifications do not violate this article or any other provisions of the
Code of the City of Bloomington, the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall
grant a permit. Said permit shall expire 60 days after so granted by
Bureau of Fire Prevention unless the actual construction of the station
has been started within said period.
B. Application for curb cuts may be contained in said petition as a separate
part thereof or may be the subject of a separate petition, but the
granting of a permit for the erection of a service station shall not
include any curb cuts unless specifically authorized by the City
Manager. [Ord. No. 1973-58]
§ 17-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-304
1:517
§ 17-304. [Ch. 17, Sec. 72] Inspection. [Ord. No. 1982-56]
It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief to have the Bureau of Fire Prevention
inspect all gasoline filling stations in the City to ascertain if they are being
conducted and maintained in accordance with the requirements of this
article and all other provisions of the Code of the City and the laws of the
State of Illinois.
§ 17-305. [Ch. 17, Sec. 73] Bulk sales regulated. [Ord. No. 1989-97]
No bulk sales of motor fuels shall be made except in conformity with Illinois
Administrative Code Title 41, Chapter 1, Section 170.
§ 17-306. [Ch. 17, Sec. 74] Type of construction. [Ord. No.
1996-112]
Gasoline service stations shall be built to meet the Code requirements of
the BOCA National Fire Prevention Code of the Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc. which is adopted by reference herein.
§ 17-307. [Ch. 17, Sec. 75] Underground storage. [Ord. No.
1989-97]
All underground storage tanks shall meet the requirements of Illinois
Administrative Code Title 1, Section 170.
§ 17-308. [Ch. 17, Sec. 76] Clearance required. [Ord. No. 1989-97]
All tanks shall be buried in conformity with Illinois Administrative Code Title
41, Chapter 1, Section 170.
§ 17-309. [Ch. 17, Sec. 77] Tanks - material and construction. [Ord.
No. 1989-97]
All tanks shall meet the requirements of Illinois Administrative Code Title
41, Chapter 1, Section 170.
§ 17-310. [Ch. 17, Sec. 78] Venting of tanks. [Ord. No. 1989-97]
All tanks shall be vented as required in Illinois Administrative Code Title 41,
Chapter 1, Section 170.
§ 17-311. [Ch. 17, Sec. 79] Fill pipes. [Ord. No. 1989-97]
All fill pipes shall conform to the requirements of Illinois Administrative
Code Title 41, Chapter 1, Section 170.
§ 17-312. [Ch. 17, Sec. 79.1] Installation, upgrading, testing and
removal of underground storage tanks. [Ord. No. 1989-97]
Installation, upgrading, testing, repair or removal of leaking or abandoned
underground storage tanks shall meet the requirements of Illinois
§ 17-304 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 17-312
1:518
Administrative Code Title 41, Chapter 1, Section 170. Before installing,
upgrading, repairing or removing any underground storage tank or its
associated piping, a permit shall be secured from the Building Safety
Department before work begins.
§ 17-313. [Ch. 17, Sec. 80] Unloading - operations and
requirements. [Ord. No. 1989-97]
All unloading operations shall meet the requirements of Illinois
Administrative Code Title 41, Chapter 1, Section 170.
§ 17-314. [Ch. 17, Sec. 81] Transportation and parking.
A. It shall be illegal for any person, firm or corporation to drive or cause to
be driven upon any City street any tank truck, truck trailer or any other
type of truck or vehicle having a capacity of 500 gallons or more which
is carrying or is used to carry: (1) Class 1, Class II or Class III flammable
liquids as defined by Standard 321, Classification of Flammable and
Combustible Liquids, in the 1993 National Fire Codes of the National
Fire Protection Association (NFPA); or (2) liquefied petroleum gases as
defined by Standard 58, Liquefied Petroleum Gases, Storage and
Handling, in Volume 2 of the 1993 National Fire Codes of the NFPA; or
(3) hazardous chemicals that are highly flammable or highly toxic as
defined by Standard 49, Hazardous Chemicals Data, in Volume 9 of the
1993 National Fire Codes of the NFPA; (4) unless such truck or vehicle
is constructed and maintained pursuant to the standards set forth in
Standard 385, Tank Vehicles for Flammable and Combustible Liquids,
in Volume 6 of the 1993 National Fire Codes of the NFPA; or (5) unless
such truck or vehicle is driven only on those streets which are
necessary to go to or from a location where such products are to be or
have just been delivered.
As a requirement for the health and safety of all persons within the
City, it shall be the responsibility of every person, firm or corporation
to be sure such Standards of the National Fire Codes of the NFPA are
complied with, and it shall not be a defense that the Defendant did not
know of any such Standards or that they were not complied with at
the time in question. The Defendant shall have the burden of proving
that such Standards were complied with and that the vehicle was
being driven on an allowable street after evidence is introduced which
indicates that apparently one or more parts of such Standards were not
complied with or that the vehicle apparently was not being driven on an
allowable street at the time in question. [Ord. No. 1993-80]
B. Except while making such a delivery of such products, it shall be illegal
or any person, firm, or corporation to park or cause to be parked on any
street, alley, public place, or on any residential property in the City any
vehicle having a capacity of 500 gallons and less than 2,400 gallons,
and carrying or having carried any of the hazardous liquids, gases, or
§ 17-312 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-314
1:519
§ 17-315. [Ch. 17, Sec. 82] Pumps. [Ord. No. 1989-97]
All pumps shall meet the requirements of Illinois Administrative Code Title
41, Chapter 1, Section 170.
§ 17-316. [Ch. 17, Sec. 83] Inflammable solutions - handling of.
No gasoline, naphtha, alcohol or any other inflammable antifreeze solution
shall be kept inside of a service station building, but shall be outside.
Storage shall be limited to one sixty-gallon drum, with not more than one
such drum held in reserve, except where underground storage is provided
in conformity with the storage rules for other liquids herein provided. Such
underground storage may be in addition to the limits hereinabove set.
§ 17-317. [Ch. 17, Sec. 84] Greasing pits. [Ord. No. 1989-97]
All greasing pits shall meet the requirements of Illinois Administrative Code
Title 41, Chapter 1, Section 170.
§ 17-318. [Ch. 17, Sec. 85] Self-service stations. [Ord. No. 1989-97]
All self-service gasoline stations shall meet the requirements of Illinois
Administrative Code Title 41, Chapter 1, Section 170.
§ 17-319. [Ch. 17, Sec. 86] Care and attendance. [Ord. No. 1989-97]
The care and attendance of self-service gasoline stations and motor vehicles
being serviced there shall meet the requirements of Illinois Administrative
Code Title 41, Chapter 1, Section 170.
§ 17-320. [Ch. 17, Sec. 88] Bulk storage plants. [Ord. No. 1973-58]
No bulk storage plant for gasoline or any highly volatile fuels for motor
vehicles or internal combustion engines hereafter shall be located within
said City without the permission of the City Council. The application for
such permission shall be in writing and signed by the applicant. It shall be
accompanied by plans and specifications showing the approval thereof by
Fire Marshal of the State of Illinois. They also shall show the details of the
chemicals mentioned in Subsection A of this section. [Ord. No.
1980-11]
C. At all times it shall be illegal for any person, firm or corporation to park
or cause to be parked upon any street, alley, public place, or on any
residential property in the City any vehicle having a capacity of 2,400
gallons or more carrying or having carried any of the hazardous liquids,
liquefied petroleum gases or chemicals referred to in Subsection A of
this section. While deliveries from such trucks are being made, it is
anticipated that they will at all times be parked only on the private
nonresidential property where the delivery is being made. [Ord. No.
1980-11]
§ 17-314 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 17-320
1:520
pump house, storage house, size and capacity of each tank, and provide for
a metal fence enclosure not less than eight feet in height. All electric wiring
shall be in rigid conduits, with explosion proof motors. Switches and vaporproof
globes shall be provided for all light openings, and all electrical work
shall conform to the National Code and the Code of the City of Bloomington.
If said application, plans and specifications are approved by the State Fire
Marshal and do not violate any State law or the Code of the said City, either
as to construction or location, said permit shall be granted by said City
Council.
§ 17-321. [Ch. 17, Sec. 89] Penalty. [Ord. No. 1989-97]
Any person, firm or corporation violating or failing to comply with any of the
terms or requirements of this article shall be fined in a sum not less than
$50 or more than $500. Each day that such violation or failure continues
shall be considered as a separate offense.
§ 17-322. [Ch. 17, Sec. 91] Use of streets, etc. - unlawful.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, use or
maintain in or upon any street, alley, avenue or other public place a gasoline
filling station, gasoline pumping station, oil filling station, or oil pumping
station.
§ 17-320 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-322
1:521

ARTICLE IV
§ 17-401. [Ch. 17, Sec. 92] Emergency medical services.
A. Definitions.
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES — Pre-hospital and inter-hospital
emergency care and non-emergency medical transports at a basic life
support, intermediate life support or advanced life support level as
defined by the Illinois Medical Services Systems Act (210 ILCS 50/1 et
seq.).
MEDICARE ALLOWABLE — The dollar amount or dollar fee amount
for the various types of emergency medical services and related
transportation services as published from time to time by the United
State Department of Health and Human Services Centers for Medicare
and Medicaid Services.
B. Fee for emergency medical services and transportation by the City of
Bloomington. The fees for emergency medical services, related
transportation services and other emergency services provided by the
City of Bloomington shall be as set forth on the Schedule of Fees. The
fees for supplement Fire Department services shall be as set forth on
the Schedule of Fees. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
C. Liability for payment. Any person transported or provided emergency
medical services by the City of Bloomington shall be liable for and pay
the City of Bloomington the fee then currently in effect pursuant to
Subsection B of this section.
D. Failure to pay. All fees for services rendered pursuant to this division
shall be due within 30 days of service. Any person failing to timely remit
payment for such service shall be assessed a late fee as set forth in the
Schedule of Fees plus accruing interest as set forth in Chapter 16 of this
Code. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
E. Medical treatment of those confined. Any person held in custody,
confined or incarcerated by the City or any other governmental entity,
including, but not limited to, individuals who are 1) under arrest, 2)
incarcerated, 3) imprisoned, 4) escaped from confinement, 5) under
supervised release, 6) on medical furlough, 7) residing in a mental
health facility or halfway house, 8) living under home detention, or 9)
confined completely or partially in any way under a penal statute or rule
shall be solely responsible for the payment of any medical services,
including emergency medical services, rendered to and received by
that person from the City during the course of his or her confinement,
including, without limitation, transportation to and from a medical
treatment facility and any treatment deemed necessary by his or her
treating physician, whether or not requested by the person. Such
person shall be required to reimburse the City, in full, for any fees or
charges incurred for such services, if not paid directly to a medical
§ 17-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-401
1:523
facility or practitioner by the person or his or her insurance carrier.
[Ord. No. 2012-9]
F. The fee for other standby services and responding to false alarms shall
be as set forth in the Schedule of Fees. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
§ 17-401 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 17-401
1:524
ARTICLE V
Regulations For The Use Of Liquefied Petroleum Gases
§ 17-501. [Ch. 17, Sec. 99] Definitions.
LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS — Any material which is composed
predominantly of any of the following hydrocarbons, or mixtures of them:
propane, propylene, butane (normal butane or insobutane) and butylenes.
LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS EQUIPMENT — All containers, apparatus,
piping and equipment pertinent to the storage and handling of liquefied
petroleum gas.
§ 17-502. [Ch. 17, Sec. 100] Permit.
A permit shall be obtained from the Bureau of Fire Prevention for each
installation, said permit to be obtained before gas consuming burner or
appliance is installed.
§ 17-503. [Ch. 17, Sec. 101] Requirements as to installation.
No person shall use or permit any liquefied petroleum gas installations
except:
A. In compliance with PA Standard 58; and
B. In an area (which includes container appurtenances) protected by an
industrial type fence not less than six feet high, unless otherwise
adequately protected, and containing not less than two remote means
of emergency access from the fenced area. [Ord. No. 1977-59]
§ 17-501 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-503
1:525

ARTICLE VI
Sprinkler And Alarm Systems
§ 17-601. [Ch. 17, Sec. 102] Sprinkler systems.
All sprinkler systems and alarm or alerting systems hereinafter installed
shall be approved by the Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention before
building for such installation is issued.
§ 17-602. [Ch. 17, Sec. 103] Alarm systems.
Alarm systems transmitted to the Fire Department, now in existence or
hereafter installed, shall be approved by the Chief of the Bureau of Fire
Prevention.
§ 17-601 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-602
1:527

ARTICLE VII
Hazardous Waster Spiller Pay Requirements
§ 17-701. [Ch. 17, Sec. 110] Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meaning shown
in this section:
COSTS — All expenses incurred by the City of Bloomington ("City") or any of
the public agency assisting the City Bloomington, as a result of any removal
or remedial action.
EMERGENCY RESPONSE AGENCY — A unit of local government, volunteer
agency, or others support agency including licensed hazardous waste
contractors that provide one or more of the following services: (1)
firefighting services; (2) emergency medical services; (3) emergency
medical treatment or transportation; (4) hazardous materials response
teams; (5) emergency service, disaster response, or civil defense services;
(6) public works or maintenance; (7) police agencies (federal, state, or
local) or (8) remediation, mitigation, or disposal of hazardous materials by
hazardous waste contractor.
FACILITY — Any building, structure, installation, equipment, pipe or pipe
line, including, but not limited to, any pipe into a sewer or publicly-owned
treatment works, well, pond, lagoon, impoundment, ditch, landfill, storage
container, tank, motor vehicle, truck trailer, rolling stock or aircraft. Also
any site or area where hazardous material has been deposited, stored,
disposed of, abandoned or otherwise come to be located.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any material, substance or mixture of
materials or substances which are toxic, flammable, corrosive, explosive,
carcinogenic or radioactive, including, but not limited to, any substance
or material which is designated as hazardous material, pursuant to the
"Hazardous Material Transportation Act" (49 USCA § 1801 et seq.) in a
quantity and form which may pose as substantial present or potential
hazard to human health, property or the environment when improperly
released, treated, stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed.
MATERIALS INCIDENT — A situation involving an actual, suspected, or
possible hazardous material for which the City of Bloomington Fire
Department or other emergency response agency must respond in order to
ensure the safety of personnel or property.
MUTUAL AID — Any action taken by the City of Bloomington or any other
public agency, pursuant to an Intergovernmental Agreement, including, but
not limited to any agreement that is part of the Mutual Aid Box Alarm
System.
PERSON — Any individual, business, firm, partnership, corporation,
association, trust, estate, joint venture, or other legal entity, or their legal
representative, each of their assign.
RELEASE — Any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, escaping,
emptying, discharging, injecting, leaching, dumping or disposing of a
§ 17-701 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-701
1:529
hazardous material into or on any land, air, water, well, stream, sewer or
pipe so that such hazardous material or any constituent thereof may enter
the environment.
REMEDIAL ACTION — Any action consistent with permanent remedy taken
instead of, or in addition to, removal actions in the event of a release or
threatened release of a hazardous material into the environment, to prevent
or minimize the releases of hazardous materials so that they do not migrate
to cause a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, property
or the environment. The term includes, but is not limited to, such actions
at the location of the release as storage, isolation, confinement, perimeter
protection using dikes, trenches or ditches, clay cover, neutralization,
cleanup of released diversion, destruction, segregation of reactive wastes,
repair or replacement of leaking containers collection of leachate and
runoff, on-site treatment or incineration, provision of alternate water
supplies and any monitoring reasonably required to assure that such actions
protect the public health and welfare and the environment.
REMOVAL — The cleanup or removal of released hazardous materials from
the environment, such actions as may be necessary or appropriate to
monitor, assess and evaluate the release or threat of release of hazardous
materials, the disposal of removed material or the taking of such action as
may be necessary to prevent, minimize or mitigate damage to the public
health or welfare of the environment. The term includes, but is not limited
to, security, fencing, and provision of alternative water supplies and
temporary evacuation of threatened individuals.
RESPONSE — Any removal or remedial action to a materials incident or
other incident.[Ord. No. 2016-65]
§ 17-702. [Ch. 17, Sec. 111] Prohibited acts. [Ord. No. 2016-65]
No person shall cause, threaten or allow the release of hazardous materials
into the environment unless such release is in accordance with an
appropriate permit granted by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency
or other State or Federal agency having primary jurisdiction over the
release and such release is in such place and manner as will not create a
substantial present or potential hazard to human health, property or the
environment.
§ 17-703. [Ch. 17, Sec. 112] Response authority.
A. The Fire Chief of the City of Bloomington or his authorized
representative shall have authority to respond to any release or
threatened release of hazardous materials within the territory of the
City of Bloomington or affecting the public water supply, wells or
sewage treatment works located or servicing the City of Bloomington or
pursuant to any lawful intergovernmental agreement of which the City
of Bloomington is a party. This authority includes, but is not limited to,
remedial action and removal.
§ 17-701 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 17-703
1:530
§ 17-704. [Ch. 17, Sec. 113] Liability for costs.
B. The Fire Chief shall have primary authority to respond to any release or
threatened release of hazardous materials as described above. The Fire
Chief shall report any release or threatened release of hazardous
materials to all appropriate Federal, State, and local public health,
safety, and emergency agencies within 24 hours of any substantial
release of hazardous materials. The Fire Chief shall relinquish their
response authority at such time, if any, as the federal, state or local
public health, safety or emergency agency having primary jurisdiction
over the release or threatened release has assumed responsibility for
response to the release or threatened release.
C. The Fire Chief, during such time as response authority is vested in him,
shall be authorized to utilize all Fire Department personnel and
equipment and he may, in his sole discretion, take such remedial or
removal action as he may deem necessary or appropriate to respond to
the release or threatened release of hazardous material including the
use of material and in accordance with any Mutual Aid Box Alarm
System ("MABAS") agreements.
D. All responding personnel shall cooperate with and operate under the
direction of the Fire Chief or other person then exercising response
authority under this article until such time as the person exercising
such response authority has determined that the response is complete
or responsibility for response is assumed by the Federal, State or local
public health, safety or emergency agency having primary jurisdiction
over the release or threatened release.
E. The person exercising response authority under this article shall
coordinate and/or cooperate with other Federal, State or local public
health, safety or emergency agencies involved in response to the
release or threatened release of hazardous materials. [Ord. No.
2016-65]
A. Notwithstanding any other provision or rule of law, and subject only to
the defenses set forth in this article, the following persons shall be
jointly and severally liable for all costs of removal and remedial action
incurred by the City of Bloomington, as a result of a release or
threatened release of a hazardous material:
(1) The owner and operator of a facility or vessel from which there is a
release or substantial threat of release of hazardous material.
(2) Any person who, at the time of disposal, transport, storage or
treatment of a hazardous material, owned or operated the facility
or vessel used for such disposal, transport, treatment or storage
from which there was a release or substantial threat of a release of
any such hazardous material.
§ 17-703 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-704
1:531
§ 17-705. [Ch. 17, Sec. 114] Defenses. [Ord. No. 2016-65]
There shall be no liability under this article for a person otherwise liable
who can establish by a preponderance of the evidence that the release
or substantial threat of release of a hazardous material and the damages
resulting in accordance with any of the permitted defenses enumerated in
415 ILCS 5/22.2 except for the exception listed in 415 ILCS 22.2(j)(1)(C).
§ 17-706. [Ch. 17, Sec. 115] Costs and penalties.
(3) Any person who by contract agreement, or otherwise has arranged
with another party or entity for transport, storage, disposal or
treatment of hazardous materials owned, controlled or possessed
by such person at a facility owned or operated by another party or
entity from which facility there is a release or substantial threat of
a release of such hazardous materials.
(4) Any person who accepts or accepted any hazardous materials for
transport to disposal, storage, or treatment facilities from which
there is a release or a substantial threat of release of such
hazardous substances.
B. Costs for the remediation action shall be billed by the City within 45
days after the remediation activity. Payment for the costs billed shall be
due back to the City within 30 days after issuance of the bill from the
City. [Ord. No. 2016-65]
A. Any person who is liable for the release or threatened release of a
hazardous material who fails without sufficient cause to pay for or
provide removal or remedial action upon or in accordance with a notice
and request of the City of Bloomington, or in accordance with any order
of any court having jurisdiction on the matter, shall be liable to the City
of Bloomington for any costs incurred by the City of Bloomington as a
result of such failure to provide or take such removal or remedial
action, together with the cost of any removal or remedial action taken
by the City of Bloomington in accordance with this article, and all
attorneys' fees and related legal costs incurred in connection therewith.
B. In addition, any such person shall be guilty of a violation of this article
and shall be fined not less than $100, nor more than $1,000 for each
offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day on
which a violation occurs or continues. Where such violation is found to
be the result of willful and/or wanton conduct or gross negligence, or
the person committing such violation attempts to evade responsibility
hereunder by leaving the scene of the occurrence or by other means,
that person shall be subject to a fine as provided for above or a fine in
an amount equal to three times the costs, including attorneys' fees and
legal costs for which it is liable under this article, whichever is greater.
§ 17-704 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 17-706
1:532
C. Charges for removal or remedial action when rendered by the City of
Bloomington or any other agency rendering mutual aid shall be as
follows:
(1) The reasonable cost of each vehicle responding as determined by
the responding agency, but in no case less than $150 per hour per
vehicle; and
(2) The cost of all personnel, including any overtime cost to the City of
Bloomington or to any responding agency incurred as a result of
the removal or remedial action, but in no case less than $40 per
hour; and
(3) The cost of all materials and equipment used, expended, depleted,
destroyed or remove from service in accordance with Federal,
State or local ordinance, as a result of the mitigation or
containment operations if or at the request of the City of
Bloomington or any responding agency; and
(4) The costs of service and/or goods provided by a private or public
entity which are used, expended, depleted, or destroyed as a result
of the response. [Ord. No. 2016-65]
§ 17-706 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-706
1:533
Chapter 18
FLOODPLAIN AREA DEVELOPMENT CODE
§ 17-706 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 17-706
1:534
ARTICLE I
Authority and Purpose
§ 18-101. [Ch. 18, Sec. 1] Purpose.
This ordinance is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to this City
by the Illinois Municipal Code (65 IL Compiled Statutes 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12,
5/11-30-2, 5/11-30-8, and 5/11-31-2) in order to accomplish the following
purposes:
A. To prevent unwise developments from increasing flood or drainage
hazards to others;
B. To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from
flood damage;
C. To promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of
the citizens from the hazards of flooding;
D. To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control, repairs to public
facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief operations;
E. To maintain property values and a stable tax base by minimizing the
potential for creating blight areas; and
F. To make federally subsidized flood insurance available. [Ord. No.
2001-05]
§ 18-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-101
1:535

ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 18-201. [Ch. 18, Sec. 2] Definitions.
For the purposes of this ordinance, the following definitions are adopted:
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a 1% probability of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also known as the onehundred-
year flood. The base flood elevation at any location is as defined in
Article III of this ordinance.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation in relation to mean sea
level of the crest of the base flood.
BUILDING — A structure that is principally above ground and is enclosed by
walls and a roof including manufactured homes and prefabricated buildings.
The term also includes recreational vehicles and travel trailers to be
installed on a site for more than 180 days.
DEVELOPMENT —
FEMA — Federal Emergency Management Agency.
Any man-made change to real estate including, but not necessarily
limited to:
Construction, reconstruction, placement of a building, or any
addition to a building, exceeding 70 square feet in floor area;
(1)
(2) Substantial improvement of an existing building;
Installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a
manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for more
than 180 days;
(3)
Installation of utilities, construction of roads, bridges, culverts or
similar projects;
(4)
(5) Construction or erection of levees, dams, walls, or fences;
Drilling, mining, filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving, or
other alterations of the ground surface;
(6)
Storage of materials including the placement of gas and liquid
storage tanks; and
(7)
Channel modifications or any other activity that might change the
direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface waters.
(8)
A.
"Development" does not include maintenance of existing buildings and
facilities; resurfacing roads; or gardening, plowing, and similar
practices that do not involve filling, grading, or construction of levees.
B.
§ 18-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-201
1:537
FLOOD — A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and
rapid accumulation, or the runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD FRINGE — That portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory
flood way.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP — A map prepared by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency that depicts the floodplain or special flood
hazard area (SFHA) within a community. This map includes insurance rate
zones and may or may not depict flood ways and show base flood elevations.
FLOODPLAIN and SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — Those lands
within the jurisdiction of the City that are subject to inundation by the
base flood. The floodplains of the City are generally identified as such
on the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of the McLean County and
Incorporated Areas prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency and dated July 16, 2008. The floodplains of those parts of
unincorporated McLean County that are within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the City or that may be annexed into the City are generally
identified as such on the Flood Insurance Rate Map prepared for McLean
County by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated July 16,
2008.
FLOOD PROOFING — Any combination of structural or nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate, property and their contents.
FLOOD PROOFING CERTIFICATE — A form published by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency that is used to certify that a building has
been designed and constructed to be structurally dry flood proofed to the
flood protection elevation.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION or FPE — The elevation of the base flood
plus one foot of freeboard at any given location in the floodplain.
FLOOD WAY — That portion of the floodplain required to store and convey
the base flood. The flood way for the floodplains of Sugar Creek, Little
Kickapoo Creek, Skunk Creek and Goose Creek shall be as delineated on the
countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of McLean County and Incorporated
Areas prepared by FEMA and dated July 16, 2008. The flood ways for each
of the remaining floodplains of the City shall be in accordance with the best
data available from Federal, State, or other sources.[Ord. No. 2008-27]
IDNR/OWR — Illinois Department of Natural Resources/Office of Water
Resources.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure transportable in one or more
sections, that is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used
with or without a permanent foundation when connected to required
utilities.
NFIP — National Flood Insurance Program.
SFHA — See definition of floodplain.
§ 18-201 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 18-201
1:538
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT —
TRAVEL TRAILER (or RECREATIONAL VEHICLE) — A vehicle which is:
Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost
of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure
either:
(1) Before the improvement or repair is started, or
If the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before
the damage occurred.
(2)
A.
"Substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the
building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include
either:
Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
(1)
Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or the Illinois Register of Historic Places.
(2)
B.
A. Built on a single chassis;
B. Four hundred square feet or less in size;
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
C.
Not designed primarily for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use. [Ord. No. 2001-05]
D.
§ 18-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-201
1:539

ARTICLE III
Base Flood Elevations
§ 18-301. [Ch. 18, Sec. 3] Base flood elevation.
This ordinance's protection standard is the base flood. The best available
base flood data are listed below. Whenever a party disagrees with the best
available data, the party may finance the detailed engineering study needed
to replace the existing data with better data and submit it to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency for approval.
A. The base flood elevation for the floodplains of the Sugar Creek, Little
Kickapoo Creek, Skunk Creek and Goose Creek shall be as delineated
on the one-hundred-year flood profiles in the countywide Flood
Insurance Study of the McLean County and Incorporated Areas
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated
July 16, 2008.
B. The base flood elevation for each floodplain delineated as an "AH Zone"
or "AO Zone" shall be that elevation (or depth) delineated on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map of the City.
C. The base flood elevation for each of the remaining floodplains
delineated as an "A Zone" on the Flood Insurance Rate Map of the City
shall be in accordance with the best data available from federal, state or
other sources. Should no other data exist, an engineering study must be
financed to determine base flood elevations.
D. The base flood elevation for the floodplains of those parts of
unincorporated McLean County that are within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the City, or that may be annexed into the City, shall be as
delineated on the one-hundred-year flood profiles of the Flood
Insurance Study of McLean County prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency and dated July 16, 2008. [Ord. No. 2008-27]
§ 18-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-301
1:541

ARTICLE IV
General Administration
§ 18-401. [Ch. 18, Sec. 4] Duties of the Director of Engineering.
The Director of Engineering shall be responsible for the general
administration of this ordinance and ensure that all development activities
within the floodplains under the jurisdiction of the City meet the
requirements of this ordinance. Specifically, the Director shall:
A. Process development permits in accordance with Article V;
B. Ensure that all development in a floodway (or a floodplain with no
delineated floodway) meets the damage prevention requirements of
Article VI;
C. Ensure that the building protection requirements for all buildings
subject to Article VII are met and maintain a record of either the "asbuilt"
elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) or the foolproof
certificate;
D. Assure that all subdivisions and annexations meet the requirements of
Article VIII;
E. If a variance is requested, ensure that the requirements of Article IX are
met and maintain documentation of any variances granted;
F. Inspect all development projects and take any and all actions outlined
in Article XI as necessary to ensure compliance with this ordinance;
G. Assure that applicants are aware of and obtain any and all other
required local, state, and federal permits;
H. Notify IDNR/OWR and any neighboring communities prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse;
I. Provide information and assistance to citizens upon request about
permit procedures and floodplain construction techniques;
J. Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to
coordinate base flood data and improve the administration of this
ordinance; and
K. Maintain for public inspection base flood data, floodplain maps, copies
of state and federal permits, and documentation of compliance for
development activities subject to this ordinance. [Ord. No. 2008-27]
§ 18-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-401
1:543

ARTICLE V
Permits
§ 18-501. [Ch. 18, Sec. 5] Development permit.
No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not exempted by state
law shall commence any development in the floodplain without first
obtaining a development permit from the Engineering Department of City
of Bloomington. The Director shall not issue a development permit if the
proposed development does not meet the requirements of this ordinance.
A. The application for development permit shall be accompanied by:
(1) Scale drawings of the site, showing property line dimensions;
(2) Existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from
excavation or filling;
(3) The location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to
buildings; and
(4) The elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
proposed buildings subject to the requirements of Article VII of this
ordinance.
B. Upon receipt of an application for a development permit, the Director
shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood elevation. Any
development located on land that can be shown by survey data to have
been higher than the base flood elevation as of the date of the site's first
Flood Insurance Rate Map identification is not in the floodplain and
therefore not subject to the requirements of this ordinance. The
Director shall maintain documentation of the existing ground elevation
at the development site and certification that this ground elevation
existed prior to the date of the site's first Flood Insurance Rate Map
identification. [Ord. No. 2001-05]
§ 18-501 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-501
1:545

ARTICLE VI
General Standards
§ 18-601. [Ch. 18, Sec. 6] Preventing increased flood heights and
resulting damages.
Within the floodway identified on the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map,
and within all other floodplains where a floodway has not been delineated,
the following standards shall apply:
A. Except as provided in Subsection B of this section, no development shall
be allowed which, acting in combination with existing and anticipated
development, will cause any increase in flood heights or velocities or
threat to public health and safety. The following specific development
activities shall be considered as meeting this requirement:
(1) Barge fleeting facilities meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit No. 3;
(2) Aerial utility crossings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit No. 4;
(3) Minor boat docks meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide
Permit No. 5;
(4) Minor, non-obstructive activities meeting the conditions of IDNR/
OWR Statewide Permit No. 6;
(5) Out fall structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting the
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 7;
(6) Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the conditions
of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 8;
(7) Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit No. 9;
(8) Accessory structures and additions to existing residential buildings
meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 10;
(9) Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting the conditions of
IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 11; and
(10) Any development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located entirely
in a flood fringe area. [Ord. No. 2008-27]
B. Other development activities not listed in Subsection A may be
permitted only if:
(1) A permit has been issued for the work by IDNR/OWR (or written
documentation is provided that an IDNR/OWR permit is not
required); and
§ 18-601 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-601
1:547
(2) Sufficient data has been provided to FEMA when necessary, and
approval is obtained from FEMA for a revision of the regulatory
map and base flood elevation. [Ord. No. 2001-05]
§ 18-601 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 18-601
1:548
ARTICLE VII
Specific Requirements
§ 18-701. [Ch. 18, Sec. 7] Protecting buildings.
A. In addition to the damage prevention requirements of Article VI, all
buildings to be located in the floodplain shall be protected from flood
damage below the flood protection elevation. This building protection
requirement applies to the following situations:
(1) Construction or placement of a new building valued at more than
$1,000;
(2) Substantial improvements made to an existing building;
(3) Structural alterations made to an existing building that increase
the floor area by more than 20%;
(4) Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new
manufactured home on an existing site (the building protection
requirements do not apply to returning a manufactured home to
the same site it lawfully occupied before it was removed to avoid
flood damage); and
(5) Installing a travel trailer on a site for more than 180 days. [Ord.
No. 2001-05]
B. Residential or nonresidential buildings can meet the building protection
requirements by one of the following methods:
(1) The building may be constructed on permanent land fill in
accordance with the following:
(a) The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the
flood protection elevation;
(b) The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than one foot before
compacting and should extend at least 10 feet beyond the
foundation before sloping below the flood protection elevation;
(c) The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during
flooding by vegetative cover, rip rap, or other structural
measure;
(d) The fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not incorporate
debris or refuse materials; and
(e) The fill shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage
from or onto neighboring properties and when necessary,
stormwater management techniques such as swales or basins
shall be incorporated; or
(2) The building may be elevated in accordance with the following:
§ 18-701 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-701
1:549
(a) The building or improvements shall be elevated on stilts, piles,
walls, or other foundation that is permanently open to flood
waters;
(b) The lowest floor and all electrical, heating, ventilating,
plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility meters
shall be located at or above the flood protection elevation;
(c) If walls are used, all enclosed areas below the flood protection
elevation shall address hydrostatic pressures by allowing the
automatic entry and exit of flood waters. Designs must either
be certified by a registered professional engineer or by having
a minimum of one permanent openings on each wall no more
than one foot above grade. The openings shall provide a total
net area of not less than one square inch for every one square
foot of enclosed area subject to flooding below the base flood
elevation;
(d) The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored and
aligned in relation to flood flows and adjoining structures so as
to minimize exposure to hydrodynamic forces such as current,
waves, ice and floating debris;
(e) The finished interior grade shall not be less than the finished
exterior grade;
(f) All structural components below the flood protection elevation
shall be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage;
(g) Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines,
submersible pumps, and other service facilities may be located
below the flood protection elevation provided they are
waterproofed; and
(h) The area below the flood protection elevation shall be used
solely for parking or building access and not occupied as
habitable space. [Ord. No. 2001-05]
C. Manufactured homes, or travel trailers to be installed on site for more
than 180 days, shall be:
(1) Elevated to or above the flood protection elevation; and
(2) Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by being
tied down in accordance with the Rules and Regulations for the
Illinois Mobile Home Tie-Down Act31 issued pursuant to 77 IL Adm.
Code 870. [Ord. No. 2001-05]
D. Nonresidential buildings may be structurally dry flood proofed (in lieu
of elevation) provided a registered professional engineer or architect
certifies that:
31.Editor's Note: See 210 ILCS 120/1 et seq.
§ 18-701 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 18-701
1:550
(1) Below the flood protection elevation the structure and attendant
utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the effects
of the base flood;
(2) The building design accounts for flood velocities, duration, rate of
rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy,
and the impact from debris and ice; and
(3) Flood proofing measures will be incorporated into the building
design and operable without human intervention and without an
outside source of electricity.
E. Levees, berms, flood walls and similar works are not considered flood
proofing for the purpose of this subsection. [Ord. No. 2001-05]
§ 18-701 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-701
1:551

ARTICLE VIII
Additional Requirements
§ 18-801. [Ch. 18, Sec. 8] Subdivision and other development
requirements.
The City Council shall take into account flood hazards, to the extent that
they are known, in all official actions related to land management, use and
development.
A. New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements,
planned unit developments, and additions to manufactured home parks
and subdivisions shall meet the damage prevention and building
protection standards of Articles VI and VII of this ordinance. Any
proposal for such development shall include the following data:
(1) The base flood elevation and the boundary of the floodplain (where
the base flood elevation is not available from an existing study, the
applicant shall be responsible for calculating the base flood
elevation);
(2) The boundary of the floodway when applicable; and
(3) A signed statement by a Registered Professional Engineer that the
proposed plat or plan accounts for changes in the drainage of
surface waters in accordance with the Plat Act (765 IL Compiled
Statutes 205/2). [Ord. No. 2008-27]
B. Public health standards must be met for all floodplain development. In
addition to the requirements of Articles VI and VII the following
standards apply:
(1) No development in the floodplain shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids,
pollutants, or other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood
protection elevation unless such materials are stored in a storage
tank or flood proofed building constructed according to the
requirements of Article VII of this ordinance.
(2) Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, and electric shall
be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage;
(3) Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into
flood waters;
(4) New and replacement on-site sanitary sewer lines or waste disposal
systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding. Manholes or
other above ground openings located below the flood protection
elevation shall be watertight. [Ord. No. 2001-05]
§ 18-801 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-801
1:553
C. All other activities defined as development shall be designed so as not
to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages. [Ord. No.
2001-05]
§ 18-801 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 18-801
1:554
ARTICLE IX
Variances; Penalties; Additional Provisions
§ 18-901. [Ch. 18, Sec. 9] Variances.
Whenever the standards of this ordinance place undue hardship on a
specific development proposal, the applicant may apply to the Engineering
Department of City of Bloomington for a variance. The Director shall review
the applicant's request for a variance and shall submit his recommendation
to the Board of Zoning Appeal. The Board may attach such conditions to
granting of a variance as it deems necessary to further the intent of this
ordinance.
A. No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that:
(1) The development activity cannot be located outside the floodplain;
(2) An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not
granted;
(3) The relief requested is the minimum necessary;
(4) There will be no additional threat to public health or safety, or
creation of a nuisance;
(5) There will be no additional public expense for flood protection,
rescue or relief operations, policing, or repairs to roads, utilities, or
other public facilities;
(6) The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not establish a
pattern inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP; and
(7) All other required state and federal permits have been obtained.
B. The Director shall notify an applicant in writing that a variance from the
requirements of the building protection standards of Article VII that
would lessen the degree of protection to a building will:
(1) Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to $25 for
$100 of insurance coverage;
(2) Increase the risks to life and property; and
(3) Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks
and that the applicant acknowledge in writing the assumption of
the risk and liability.
C. Variances to the building protection requirements of Article VII of this
ordinance requested in connection with the reconstruction, repair or
alteration of a site or building included on the National Register of
Historic Places or the Illinois Register of Historic Places may be
granted using criteria more permissive than the requirements of
§ 18-901A(1) through (5). [Ord. No. 2001-05]
§ 18-901 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-902
1:555
§ 18-902. [Ch. 18, Sec. 10] Disclaimer of liability. [Ord. No.
2001-05]
The degree of protection required by this ordinance is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information
derived from engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may
occur or flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This ordinance does not imply that development either inside or outside of
the floodplain will be free from flooding or damage. This ordinance does not
create liability on the part of the City or any officer or employee thereof for
any flood damage that results from proper reliance on this ordinance or any
administrative decision made lawfully thereunder.
§ 18-903. [Ch. 18, Sec. 11] Penalty.
Failure to obtain a permit for development in the floodplain or failure to
comply with the conditions of a permit or a variance shall be deemed to
be a violation of this ordinance. Upon due investigation, the Director may
determine that a violation of the minimum standards of this ordinance
exists. The Director shall notify the owner in writing of such violation.
§ 18-904. [Ch. 18, Sec. 12] Abrogation and greater restrictions.
[Ord. No. 2008-27]
This ordinance repeals and replaces other ordinances adopted by the City
Council to fulfill the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program
including FIRM dated February 9, 2001. However, this ordinance does not
repeal the original resolution or ordinance adopted to achieve eligibility
in the program. Nor does this ordinance repeal, abrogate, or impair any
existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. Where this ordinance
A. If such owner fails after 10 days' notice to correct the violation:
(1) The City shall make application to the circuit court for an injunction
requiring conformance with this ordinance or make such other
order as the court deems necessary to secure compliance with the
ordinance;
(2) Any person who violates this ordinance shall upon conviction
thereof be fined not less than $25 nor more than $200; and
(3) A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
B. The Director shall inform the owner that any such violation is
considered a willful act to increase flood damages and therefore may
cause coverage by a Standard Flood Insurance Policy to be suspended.
C. Nothing herein shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful
action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected
therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible. [Ord. No.
2001-05]
§ 18-902 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 18-904
1:556
and other ordinance easements, covenants, or deed restrictions conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 18-905. [Ch. 18, Sec. 13] Separability. [Ord. No. 2008-27]
The provisions and sections of this ordinance shall be deemed separable and
the invalidity of any portion of this ordinance shall not affect the validity of
the remainder.
§ 18-906. [Ch. 18, Sec. 14] Effective date. [Ord. No. 2008-27]
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect on July 16, 2008 after its
passage and approval and publication, as required by law.
§ 18-904 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-906
1:557
Chapter 19
CITY FORESTER
§ 18-906 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 18-906
1:558
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 19-101. [Ch. 19, Sec. 1] Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Shade Tree Ordinance
of the City of Bloomington, Illinois."
§ 19-102. [Ch. 19, Sec. 2] Definitions and scope.
§ 19-103. [Ch. 19, Sec. 3] City Forester. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
There is hereby established in the Department of Parks, Recreation and
Cultural Arts the office of City Forester. Until otherwise designated, the
Director of Parks, Recreation and Cultural Arts shall serve as the City
Forester.
§ 19-104. [Ch. 19, Sec. 4] Authority of City Forester.
The City Forester shall have exclusive jurisdiction and supervision over all
trees planted or growing in public places.
A. For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and
words in the singular number include the plural number. Terms
connoting a particular gender shall include the other gender when used
in connection with the action of a person other than the City, its officers
or agents. All provisions of this chapter imposing duties upon the City,
its officers or agents shall be construed as directory, unless the context
clearly requires them to be construed as mandatory; otherwise the
word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
CITY — The City of Bloomington, Illinois.
CITY FORESTER — The City Forester of the City of Bloomington.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation.
SHADE TREE or TREE — A tree in a public place, except where
otherwise indicated and includes trees, shrubs, bushes and all other
woody vegetation.[Ord. No. 1986-13]
B. The Section of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically stated herein,
shall apply only to public streets, parkways, boulevards, alleys, parks,
lawns, and other land publicly owned or controlled by the City. [Ord.
No. 1986-13]
A. Preserve or remove. The City Forester shall have authority to plant,
trim, spray, preserve and remove trees in public places to insure safety
or preserve the symmetry and beauty of such public places and to
maintain health and vigor of shade trees. [Ord. No. 1986-13]
§ 19-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-104
1:559
§ 19-105. [Ch. 19, Sec. 5] Permits required.
B. Order to preserve or remove. The City Forester shall have the authority
to order the trimming, preservation or removal of trees upon private
property when he shall find such action necessary to public safety or to
prevent the spread of disease or insects to public trees and places.
[Ord. No. 1986-13]
C. Supervision. The City Forester shall have the authority to supervise all
work done under a permit issued in accordance with the terms of this
chapter. [Ord. No. 1986-13]
D. Issue conditional permit. The City Forester shall have the authority to
affix reasonable conditions to the granting of a permit hereunder, based
upon the necessity for public safety or the prevention of spread of
disease or insects to public trees and places. [Ord. No. 1986-13]
A. Preserve or remove. No person shall trim any limbs on a tree five inches
diameter breast height or greater or remove trees in public places
without first filing an application and procuring a permit from the City
Forester.
(1) Application date. The application required herein shall state the
number and kind of trees to be trimmed or removed; the kind and
condition of nearest trees upon the adjoining property; and such
other information as the City Forester shall find reasonably
necessary to a fair determination of whether a permit should be
issued hereunder.
(2) Standards for issuance. The City Forester shall issue the permit
provided for herein when he finds that the desired action or
treatment is necessary and that the proposed method and
workmanship are satisfactory. [Ord. No. 1986-13]
B. Plant. Any plant or tree set out on public land or a public thoroughfare
is subject to removal by the City at any time unless an application for
such planting is first filed and a permit to so plant shall be issued by the
City Forester and all planting is subject to the following restrictions and
regulations:
(1) Application data. The application required herein shall state the
number of trees set out; the location, grade and variety of each
tree; the method of planting, including the supplying of suitable
soil; the amount of surface soil area in square feet in which the
roots can develop and on which rain may fall; and such other
information as the City Forester shall find reasonably necessary to
a fair determination of whether a permit should be issued
hereunder.
(2) Standards for issuance. The City Forester shall issue the permit
provided for herein when he finds that the proposed plantings are
suitable as to species and location.
§ 19-104 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 19-105
1:560
(3) Regulations for planting in a public place. Work done under a
permit issued hereunder shall be performed in strict accordance
with the terms thereof and with the following regulations
established for the planting, trimming and care of trees in public
rights-of-way:
(a) Trees must not be less than one inch in diameter of trunk one
foot above the ground.
(b) No tree shall be placed so as in the opinion of the Director of
Engineering and Water to cause a traffic hazard.
(c) In felling trees, the same must be removed with the stump
grubbed out when so required by the City Forester.
(d) Trees shall be planted a minimum of 15 feet apart, except
where special permission is obtained from the City Forester.
(e) No tree shall be planted where the clear space between the
curb and sidewalk is less than four feet.
(f) No tree shall be planted within five feet of any underground
utility connection.
(g) No tree shall be planted directly below overhead utility lines
unless special permission is obtained from the City Forester.
(h) Prohibited species. No person shall plant any of the following
species within a public right-of-way:
Acer negundo Boxelder
Acer
saccharinum
Silver Maple
Ailanthus
altissima
Tree of Heaven
Elaeagnus
angustifolia
Russian Olive
Ginkgo biloba Ginkgo - female
Gleditsia
triacanthos
Honeylocust
Platanus sp. Sycamore
Populus sp. Poplars
Robinia sp. Locust
Rhus sp. Sumac
Salix sp. Willow
Ulmus sp. Elms
Quercus
palustris
Pin Oak
§ 19-105 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-105
1:561
§ 19-106. [Ch. 19, Sec. 6] Duties of private owners.
It shall be the duty of any person growing a tree on property abutting on
public areas supporting trees:
Maclura
pomifera
Osage Orange
Sorbus sp. Mountainash
Betula sp. Birch
Morus sp. Mulberry
Alnus Alder
Non-Ornamental fruit trees
Catalpa
speciosa
Catalpa
Juniperus sp. Junipers
Pinus sp. Pines
Abies sp. Firs
Picea sp. Spruces
Psuedotsuga
menziesii
Douglas Fir
Tsuga sp. Hemlocks
Taxus sp. Yews
All scrub type planting material
(i) No tree shall be planted nearer than two feet from, the
curbline Or outer line of the sidewalk unless special permission
is granted by the City Forester.
(j) If any planting or tree in the opinion of the Director of
Engineering and Water becomes a hazard to traffic, including
vehicular or pedestrian traffic or the same interferes with an
extension of any public street, sidewalk or duly authorized
utility use, the same may be removed by the City at any time.
(k) To deposit, store or maintain on City right-of-way any stone,
brick, sand, concrete, lumber, tile, pipe or other material which
reasonably may be expected to impede the passage of water,
air or fertilizer to the roots of any trees is a violation of this
Ordinance. [Ord. No. 1986-13]
A. Trim. To trim his trees so as not to cause a hazard to public places or
interfere with the proper lighting of public roadways by the streetlights,
and so that minimum clearance or any overhanging portion thereof
shall be nine feet.
§ 19-105 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 19-106
1:562
§ 19-107. [Ch. 19, Sec. 7] Procedure upon order to preserve or
remove.
When the City Forester shall find it necessary to order the trimming,
preservation or removal of trees upon private property as authorized in
§ 19-104B herein, he shall serve a written Order to correct the dangerous
condition upon the owner, operator, occupant or other person responsible
for its existence.
B. Treat or remove. To treat or remove any tree so diseased or insectridden
as to constitute a hazard to the other trees in the public areas.
C. To inform the City of trees within the public right-of-way that require
trimming, treatment or removal. [Ord. No. 1986-13]
A. Method of service. The Order required herein shall be served in one of
the following ways:
(1) By making personal delivery of the Order to the person responsible.
(2) By leaving the Order with a person 10 years of age or older who is a
member of the household of the person responsible.
(3) By affixing a copy of the Order in a conspicuous spot upon the
premises in violation and mailing a copy or said Order to the person
responsible at his last known address by registered or certified
mail.
(4) By publishing a copy of the Order at least once a week, for three
successive weeks, in a local newspaper of general circulation and
mailing a copy of the Order to the last known address of the person
responsible by registered or certified mail. [Ord. No. 1986-13]
B. Time for compliance. The Order required herein shall set forth a time
limit for compliance, dependent upon the hazard and danger created by
the violation. In cases of extreme danger to persons or public property,
the City Forester shall have the authority to require compliance
immediately upon service of the order. [Ord. No. 1986-13]
C. Appeal from order. A person to whom an Order hereunder is directed
shall have the right, within 10 days of the service of such Order, to
appeal to the City Manager who shall review such Order within five
days and file his decision therein. Unless the Order is revoked or
modified it shall remain in full force and be obeyed by the person to
whom directed. No person to whom an order is directed shall fail to
comply with such order within five days after appeal shall have been
determined. [Ord. No. 1986-13]
D. Disposition of removed trees. Trees that have been removed voluntarily
or within the terms of this chapter due to infection with any disease, the
existence of said disease having been established in said trees by a
positive sample test thereof, shall be disposed of by whatever method
§ 19-106 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-107
1:563
§ 19-108. [Ch. 19, Sec. 8] Abuse or mutilation of trees.
No person shall:
§ 19-109. through § 19-112. (Reserved) [Repealed 6-26-1972 by
Ord. No. 1972-44]
§ 19-113. [Ch. 19, Sec. 13] Penalties. [Ord. No. 1998-43]
Any person violating any portion of this article shall be fined in a sum of not
less than $25 nor more than $100.
determined to be the most suitable by the City Forester. [Ord. No.
1986-13]
E. Trees which have been removed by private owned and operated
persons, firms or corporations rendering such service for any reason,
whether by authority or direction of the property owner or the City
Forester, or without any such authority or order, shall be disposed of
and the area thereafter cleaned up by said company rendering such
service at its own expense and other direction of the City Forester who
shall see that said operation is in conformity with the terms of this
chapter. [Ord. No. 1986-13]
F. Failure to comply. When a person to whom an Order is directed shall fail
to comply within the specified time, the City Forester shall remedy the
condition or contract with others for such purpose and charge the cost
thereof to the person to whom the Order is directed. The person
remedying a condition under a contract made hereunder shall be
authorized to enter premises for that purpose. [Ord. No. 1986-13]
G. The City shall have the authority and duty to proceed by all legal means
to collect cost of remedying such a condition from the person
responsible if not paid within 30 days after receipt or a statement
therefor from the City Forester. [Ord. No. 1986-13]
A. Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or injure the bark;
B. Pick seeds of any tree;
C. Attach any rope, wire, or other contrivance to any tree;
D. Dig in or otherwise disturb grass areas, or in any other way injure or
impair the natural beauty or usefulness of any area;
E. Cause or permit any wire charged with electricity to come in contact
with any tree or allow any gaseous, liquid, or solid substance which is
harmful to such trees to come in contact with them; and
F. Build fires on soil under trees.
§ 19-107 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 19-113
1:564
ARTICLE II
Tree Trimming By Public Utilities
§ 19-201. [Ch. 19, Sec. 14] Tree trimming by utilities - notice to
City. [Ord. No. 1998-43]
Except as otherwise set forth in this article, the officers, employees, or
agents of any public utility may trim trees in the public right-of-way as
necessary based on the guidelines laid out by Dr. Alex Shigo in Pruning
Trees Near Electric Utility Lines, copyright 1990 and the National Arborist
Association in Pruning Standards for Shade Trees, revised 1988. Prior to
performing any tree trimming pursuant to this article, the public utility shall
give advance notice to the City Forester of the areas and approximate dates
of any tree trimming activities.
§ 19-202. [Ch. 19, Sec. 15] OSHA and ANSI standards. [Ord. No.
1998-43]
Nothing in this article shall be interpreted as requiring a deviation from any
applicable OSHA or ANSI standards regulating the manner trees may be
trimmed in the proximity of power lines.
§ 19-203. [Ch. 19, Sec. 16] Electric line clearance standards.
A. The following species of trees located in the City right-of-way will be
trimmed according to the Table of Recommended Line Clearances and
the accompanying notes set forth in this section: [Ord. No. 1998-43]
American Hophornbeam
American Sweetgum
Ash, Blue
Ash, White
Baldcypress
Black Walnut
Blue Beech
Buckeye
Catalpa
Elm, American
Ginko, Male
Hickory
Ironwood
Kentucky Coffeetree
Linden, Littleleaf
Linden, Silver
Maple, Black
§ 19-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-203
1:565
Maple, Norway
Maple, Red
Maple, Sugar
Oak species (except Pin Oak)
Tulip Tree
B. Standard clearance.
(1) The following table gives clearances adequate to protect the wires
under normal operating conditions. Special clearances may be
needed sometimes because of field conditions. The City Forester is
authorized to grant waivers from the following table in light of such
field conditions as set forth in Subsection B(5) of this section.
(2) Electric wires will sag due to hot weather or swing sideways in
strong winds. The greatest wire sag and sway occurs at mid span.
The following line clearance will be measured from the maximum
distances power lines will sag and sway.
Table of Recommended Line Clearances
(in feet)
Clearance
From
Trees
120 to
600 V
750 to
5,000 V
7,200
to
12,500
V
Aerial
Cable
2,400
to
12,500
V
34,500
V
69,000
V and
Above
Side 1 - 2 3 - 4 4 - 6 2 - 4 8 - 10 (d)
Through 1 2 2 - 3 2(a) (b) (d)
Over
Conductors
1 - 2 2 - 4 6 - 8 4 - 6 (c)
Under
Conductors
2 - 4 4 - 6 5 - 7 5 - 7 6 - 8 (d)
Notes:
(a) Remove limbs over two inches in diameter which may sway into
or otherwise contact line for a minimum clearance of two feet.
(b) Not permitted through trees.
(c) All overhead should be kept to a minimum.
(d) Remove all trees that could grow or fall into line before they
become a hazard.
(e) The letter "V" refers to volts.
(3) No permit shall be required of any official, employee or agent of a
public utility by the City Forester for trimming of any tree located
§ 19-203 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 19-203
1:566
§ 19-204. [Ch. 19, Sec. 17] Exceptions. [Ord. No. 1998-43]
Nothing in this article shall be interpreted as preventing an electric utility
from trimming to remove trees or portions of trees for the purpose of
restoring electric power which has been interrupted by reason of such trees
or portions thereof having come in contact with electric power lines.
§ 19-205. [Ch. 19, Sec. 18] Penalty for violation. [Ord. No. 1998-43]
In the event any tree located on a public right-of-way of the City is trimmed
by any official, employee or agent of a public utility in a manner other than
as set forth in this article, the person or entity violating such Sections shall
pay a fine of $1,000 per tree.
in the City right-of-way which is not included in the list set forth
in Subsection A of this section. However, any official, employee or
agent of a public utility shall still trim according to the standards
set forth in § 19-201 of this chapter.
(4) No permit shall be required of any official, employee or agent of a
public utility by the City Forester for trimming of any tree located
in the City right-of-way included in the list set forth in § 19-203A so
long as the trees are trimmed according to the line clearance
standards set forth in § 19-203A.
(5) Trees located in the City right-of-way included in the list set forth in
§ 19-203A may need to be trimmed to clearances in excess of the
standards set forth in § 19-203A for aesthetic or safety reasons. In
such cases, the City Forester is authorized by the City to issue a
permit to any official, employee or agent of a public utility
permitting such person to deviate from such clearance standards in
a manner set forth by the City Forester in such permit. No fee shall
be charged for such permit. No tree trimming shall be done by any
official, employee or agent of a public utility for trees as set forth in
this Subsection B(5) except pursuant to the authorization of the
City Forester. [Ord. No. 1998-43]
§ 19-203 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-205
1:567
Chapter 20
GAMBLING
§ 20-101. [Ch. 20, Sec. 1] Gambling house - penalty.
Whoever keeps a common gaming house or in any building, booth, yard,
or garden by him or his agent used and occupied, procures, or permits
any persons to frequent or to come together to play for money or other
valuable thing at any game or keeps or suffers to be kept any tables or other
apparatus for the purpose of playing at any game or sport for money or
other valuable thing or knowingly rents any such place for such purposes
shall be fined not less than $25 and not exceeding $100 for each offense.
§ 20-102. [Ch. 20, Sec. 2] Gambling - penalty.
A. Whoever shall be an inmate of or connected with any gambling room or
shall play for money or other valuable thing at any game with cards,
dice, checks, or at billiards, or with any other article, instrument, or
thing whatsoever which may be used for the purpose of playing or
betting upon or winning or losing money or any other valuable thing or
article of value or shall bet on any game that others may be playing
shall be fined not less than $5 nor more than $50 for each offense.
B. Participants in any of the following activities shall not be convicted of
gambling:
(1) Agreements to compensate for loss caused by the happening of
chance including without limitation contracts of indemnity or
guaranty and life or health or accident insurance; and
(2) Offers of prizes, award or compensation to the actual contestants in
any bona fide contest for the determination of skill, speed, strength
or endurance or to the owners of animals or vehicles entered in
such contest; and
(3) Pari-mutuel betting as authorized by the law of this State; and
(4) Manufacture of gambling devices, including the acquisition of
essential parts therefor and the assembly thereof, for
transportation in interstate or foreign commerce to any place
outside this State when such transportation is not prohibited by
any applicable Federal law; and
(5) The game commonly known as "bingo" when conducted in
accordance with "An Act making lawful the conducting of bingo by
certain nonprofit organizations, requiring licensing and prescribing
regulations therefor,"32 and
32.Editor's Note: See 230 ILCS 25/1 et seq.
§ 19-205 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 20-102
1:568
§ 20-103. [Ch. 20, Sec. 3] Bringing into City or possessing gaming
device - penalty.
No person shall bring into the City or have in his, her, or their possession
in said City for the purpose of gaming any table, thing, or device of any
kind or nature whereon or with which money or any other thing of value in
any manner can be played for, under penalty of not less than $25 for each
offense.
§ 20-104. [Ch. 20, Sec. 4] Gaming device on street penalty.
No person shall expose in any street, alley, or other public place within the
City any table or device of any kind whatever upon or by which any game of
chance or hazard can be played or shall play at or upon any such table or
device, under the penalty of $25 for each offense.
§ 20-105. [Ch. 20, Sec. 5] Gambling - possessing federal wagering
stamp.
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess within the corporate limits
of the City a Federal wagering stamp issued under the provisions of the
Internal Revenue Code enacted by the Congress of the United States.
Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this section shall be
punished as provided in Section 14 of this chapter.
§ 20-106. [Ch. 20, Sec. 6] Visitor - frequenter - runner, etc. -
penalty.
Any person who is a frequenter, visitor, inmate, doorkeeper, solicitor,
runner, agent, or abettor of or for any house, store, grocery, hall, room, or
any other place where is kept any device, instrument, or other thing used
for gambling, whereon or with which money or any other thing of value shall
be played for shall be fined in a sum not less than $25 nor more than $200.
§ 20-107. [Ch. 20, Sec. 7] Lottery tickets and chances.
(6) Lotteries when conducted by the State of Illinois in accordance
with the "Illinois Lottery Law" enacted by the 78th General
Assembly.33 [Ord. No. 1974-78]
(7) Video gaming when licensed by the State and conducted in
accordance with the Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq. [Ord.
No. 2012-50]
A. Except as provided in Subsection B of this section, no person shall keep
an office, room, or place for the sale or other disposition of lottery
tickets, nor shall any person in the City sell or dispose of, in any manner
whatsoever, any tickets, figures, numbers, or characters for any "prize
gift," "present," "gift distribution," "chance," or for anything of like
33.Editor's Note: See 20 ILCS 1605/1 et seq.
§ 20-102 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-107
1:569
§ 20-108. [Ch. 20, Sec. 8] Tape, slot, etc., machines prohibited.
No person shall keep, own, operate, use, or cause to be kept, operated, or
used, in any room, inn, tavern, shed, booth, building, enclosure, or upon any
premises, or any part thereof, any clock, "joker," tape or slot machine or
other device of any kind or nature whatsoever upon, in or by, or through
which money is staked or hazarded or into which money is paid or played
upon chance or upon the result of the action of such clock, "joker," tape,
or slot machine or other device, money, or other valuable thing is staked,
bet, hazarded, won, or lost. Each and every day on which any person shall
operate, keep, own, or have in his charge, possession or control any such
clock, "joker," tape, or slot machine, or other device in violation of the
provisions of this section shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense.
§ 20-109. [Ch. 20, Sec. 9] Policy games prohibited.
name or nature, where money or other property is directly or indirectly
pledged, paid, or to be pledged or paid for a share or a chance or for any
participation in the same or where numbers, figures, characters, gifts,
prizes, presents, or donations are to be drawn, disposed of, or received
by any person in any manner whatsoever.
B. Subsection A above shall not apply to any activity authorized by the
Illinois Lottery Law of an agent licensed under III. Rev. Stat. ch. 24, Sec.
1160 to sell Illinois State Lottery tickets.34 [Ord. No. 1974-78]
A. No person shall keep, occupy, or use or permit to be kept, occupied, or
used a place, building, room, establishment, table, or apparatus for
policy playing or for the purchase, sale, exchange, or redemption of
what are commonly called policy tickets.
B. No person shall deliver or receive money or other valuable
consideration in playing policy or in aiding in the playing thereof or for
policy tickets, or for any writing, paper, or document in the nature of a
bet, wager, or insurance upon the drawing or drawn numbers of any
policy game, whether such drawing be real or imaginary.
C. No person, other than a public officer, shall have in his possession,
custody or control any paper, print, writing, numbers, device, policy
slip, policy sheet, or article of any kind such as is commonly used in
carrying on, promoting or playing the game commonly called policy.
D. No person, except a public officer, shall have in his possession, custody
or control any writing, paper, or document representing or being a
record of any chance, share, or interest in numbers sold, drawn, or to
be drawn, in what is commonly called policy or in the nature of a bet,
wager, or insurance upon the drawing or drawn numbers of any public
or private policy game, whether such drawing be real or imaginary. No
person shall sell, offer for sale, vend, barter, exchange, give away, deal
34.Editor's Note: See 20 ILCS 1605/1 et seq.
§ 20-107 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 20-109
1:570
in, or in any way dispose of or redeem any ticket, order, slip, or device of
any kind for or representing any number of shares or any interest in any
policy or scheme of chance of any kind or description by whatsoever
name, style, or title the same may be denominated or known, and
whether located or to be drawn, paid, or carried on within or without
the limits of the City, or whether such purported drawing be real or
imaginary.
E. No person shall either publicly or privately, as owner or agent,
establish, open, set on foot, carry on, promote, make, draw, or act as
"backer" or "vendor" for or on account of any policy or scheme of
chance of any kind or description, by whatsoever name, style, or title
the same may be denominated or known, whether located or to be
drawn, paid, or carried on within or without the limits of the City, and
whether such drawings be real or imaginary; and no person shall be in
any way concerned in any such policy or scheme of chance as aforesaid.
F. No person who is the owner, lessor, lessee, agent, superintendent,
janitor, or caretaker of any place, building, or room shall permit policy
playing or the barter, sale, exchange, or redemption of what are
commonly called policy tickets or slips or the sale of any chances in
alleged drawings in policies to be carried on in such place, building, or
room, whether such drawings be real or imaginary.
G. No person shall patronize, frequent or be found in any place, building,
room, or establishment kept, occupied, or used for policy playing for
policy or lottery drawings, or for the sale of what are commonly called
policy tickets or slips or in which are kept any papers, prints, writings,
numbers, devices, policy slips, policy tickets, policy sheets, or articles
of any kind, such as is commonly used in carrying on, promoting, or
playing the scheme or game commonly called policy.
H. No person shall write, print, publish, circulate, or distribute in any way
an account of any policy or scheme of chance of any kind or description
by whatsoever name, style, or title the same may be denominated or
known; and no person shall write, print, publish, circulate, or distribute
any book, pamphlet, circular, or sheet of paper whatsoever containing
or purporting to contain information concerning any policy or scheme
of chance, or where the same is to be or has been drawn or the prices
therein on any of them or the price of a ticket or where any such ticket
may be or has been obtained or in any way give publicly to any such
policy or scheme of chance, whether the drawings therein referred to
be real or imaginary.
I. No person shall aid, assist, or abet in any manner or be a party to any of
the offenses, acts, or matters specified in this section.
§ 20-109 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-110
1:571
§ 20-110. [Ch. 20, Sec. 10] Betting, wagering, speculating, etc.,
upon horse races.
All betting, wagering, speculating, pool selling, or bookmaking upon any
horse race, or the result thereof, and all gambling and every game of any
chance of any nature whatsoever, within or upon any and all race tracks
and race courses, or in any building within any race track or race course
within the City is hereby prohibited. Any person found violating any of the
provisions of this section shall be punished as provided in § 20-102 of this
Code.
§ 20-111. [Ch. 20, Sec. 11] Pool selling prohibited - penalty.
Any person or corporation who keeps any room, shed, tenement, tent,
booth, or building, or any part thereof, or who occupies any place upon
any public or private grounds within the City with any book, instrument,
or device for the purpose of recording or registering bets or wagers or of
selling pools or any person who records or registers bets or wagers or sells
pools upon the results of any trial or contest of skill, speed, or power of
endurance of man or beast or upon the result of any political nomination,
appointment or election or being the owner, lessee or occupant of any room,
shed, tenement, tent, booth, or building, or part thereof, knowingly permits
the same to be used or occupied for any of these purposes or therein keeps,
exhibits, or employs any device or apparatus for the purpose of recording or
registering such bets or wagers or the selling of such pools or becomes the
custodian or depository for hire or privilege of any money, property, or thing
of value staked, wagered, or pledged upon any such result shall be fined in
a sum of not less than $50 nor exceeding $200.
§ 20-112. [Ch. 20, Sec. 12] Places kept for gambling declared
nuisance, etc. [Ord. No. 2012-50]
Every house, room, yard, boat, vessel, or other structure, or premises
kept or used for the purpose of permitting persons to gamble for any
valuable thing is hereby declared to be a common nuisance, except for
licensed establishments operated in accordance with the Video Gaming Act,
230 ILCS 40/1, et seq. No person shall own, keep, maintain, manage, or
conduct or shall be interested in owning, keeping, maintaining, managing,
or conducting any such place.
§ 20-113. [Ch. 20, Sec. 13] Seizure of implements, etc. - resistance -
penalty. [Ord. No. 2012-50]
It is hereby made the duty of every member of the police force to seize any
table, instrument, device, or thing used for the purpose of gaming, except
for devices and equipment licensed and operated in accordance with the
Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/1, et seq. Any person or persons obstructing
or resisting any member of the police force in any act authorized by this
section shall be subject to a fine of not less than $50 for each offense.
§ 20-110 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 20-114
1:572
§ 20-114. [Ch. 20, Sec. 14] Penalty.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, unless some
other penalty is provided, be punished by a fine of not less than $10 nor
more than $200.
Chapter 21
REFUSE CODE
§ 20-114 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-114
1:573

ARTICLE I
Administration and Enforcement
§ 21-101. [Ch. 21, Sec. 100.1] Title - general. [Ord. No. 1995-63]
These regulations shall be known as the Refuse Code of the City of
Bloomington herein-after referred to as "this Code."
§ 21-102. [Ch. 21, Sec. 100.2] Scope.
The purpose of this Code is to protect the public health, safety and welfare
on all existing premises, both residential and nonresidential, as hereinafter
provided by:
§ 21-103. [Ch. 21, Sec. 100.3] Intent. [Ord. No. 1995-63]
This Code shall be construed liberally and justly to insure public health,
safety and welfare insofar as it pertains to refuse standards.
§ 21-104. [Ch. 21, Sec. 101.1] Validity - general. [Ord. No. 1995-63]
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this
Code shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such decision
shall not affect the remaining portions of this Code which shall continue in
full force and effect and to this end the provisions of this Code are hereby
declared to be severable.
§ 21-105. [Ch. 21, Sec. 101.2] Saving clause. [Ord. No. 1995-63]
This Code shall not affect violations of any other ordinance, code or
regulation existing prior to the effective date hereof, and any such violation
shall be governed and shall continue to be punishable to the full extent of
the law under the provisions of those ordinances, codes or regulations in
effect at the time the violation was committed.
§ 21-106. [Ch. 21, Sec. 101.3] Other regulations. [Ord. No. 1995-63]
The provisions in this Code shall not be construed to prevent the
enforcement of other ordinances or regulations which prescribe standards
other than those provided herein. In the event of conflict, the most
restrictive provision shall apply.
§ 21-107. [Ch. 21, Sec. 102.1] Authority of Director.
A. Establishing minimum refuse collection and disposal standards for all
structures and premises;
B. Fixing the responsibilities of owners, operators and occupants of all
structures as it relates to refuse operations; and
C. Providing for administration, enforcement and penalties. [Ord. No.
1995-63]
§ 21-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-107
1:575
§ 21-108. [Ch. 21, Sec. 102.2] Duties and powers of Code Official -
general.
§ 21-109. [Ch. 21, Sec. 102.3] Notices and orders. [Ord. No.
1995-63]
The Code Official shall issue all necessary notices and orders to abate illegal
or unsafe conditions to insure compliance with the requirements of this
Code for the safety, health and general welfare of the public.
§ 21-110. [Ch. 21, Sec. 102.4] Inspections. [Ord. No. 1995-63]
In order to safeguard the safety, health and welfare of the public, the Code
Official is authorized to access any property at any reasonable time for the
purpose of making inspections and performing duties under this Code.
A. The Director of Public Works is hereby authorized to:
(1) Plan, establish, add to, or alter refuse collection routes;
(2) Supervise, regulate and direct conduct of City refuse collectors;
(3) Take such other and further steps as are necessary to insure the
efficient collection of refuse within the City. [Ord. No. 2012-58]
B. The Director of Community Development is hereby authorized to:
(1) Plan and establish inspection and reporting procedures;
(2) Supervise refuse inspections;
(3) Take such other and further steps as are necessary to insure
efficient refuse inspections within the City. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
A. The Code Official shall enforce all the provisions of this Code relative to
property maintenance and enforcement of refuse standards outlined
below, except as may otherwise be specifically provided for by other
regulations as contained in § 21-106.
B. The Code Official shall perform the following duties under the direction
of the Director of Community Development:
(1) Make the necessary inspections to detect violations of the
provisions of this Code;
(2) Issue all notices required by this Code;
(3) Issue tickets in accordance with the provisions of this Code;
(4) Cause to have abated violations of this Code in accordance with the
provisions of this Code;
(5) Take all other actions to secure successful prosecution of violators
of the provisions of this Code. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
§ 21-107 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 21-111
1:576
§ 21-111. [Ch. 21, Sec. 102.5] Right of entry. [Ord. No. 1995-63]
If any owner, occupant or other person in charge of a structure or premises
subject to the provisions of this Code refuses, impedes, inhibits, interferes
with, restricts, or obstructs entry and free access to any part of the
structure or premises where inspection authorized by this Code is sought,
the administrative authority shall seek, in a court of competent jurisdiction,
an order that such owner, occupant or other person in charge shall permit
an inspection of his premises.
§ 21-112. [Ch. 21, Sec. 102.6] Credentials. [Ord. No. 1995-63]
The Code Official and authorized representatives shall carry and disclose
proper credentials of their respective office in the performance of duties
under this Code.
§ 21-113. [Ch. 21, Sec. 102.7] Coordination of enforcement. [Ord.
No. 1995-63]
Inspection of premises, the issuance of notices and orders and enforcement
thereof, shall be the responsibility of the Code Official so charged by the
City. Whenever inspections are necessary by any other department, the
Code Official shall coordinate such inspections to minimize the number of
visits by inspectors, and to confer with other departments for the purpose
of eliminating conflicting orders before any are issued.
§ 21-114. [Ch. 21, Sec. 102.8] Rule making authority. [Ord. No.
1995-63]
The Code Official shall have powers as may be necessary in the interest of
public safety, health and general welfare to adopt and promulgate rules and
regulations to interpret and implement the provisions of this Code to secure
the intent thereof and to designate requirements applicable because of local
climatic or other conditions.
§ 21-115. [Ch. 21, Sec. 102.9] Organization. [Ord. No. 1995-63]
The Code Official, subject to the approval of the City Manager, shall appoint
such number of officers, technical assistants, inspectors and other
employees as shall be necessary for the administration of this Code and as
authorized by the City Council.
§ 21-116. [Ch. 21, Sec. 102.10] Relief from personal liability. [Ord.
No. 1995-63]
Any Code Official, officer or employee who acts in good faith in the
discharge of duties of enforcement of this Code is relieved of all personal
liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of such
acts or alleged failure to act to the extent permitted by state and federal law.
Further, the Code Official shall not be held liable for any costs, in any action,
suit, or proceedings that may be instituted by him in the enforcement of this
§ 21-111 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-116
1:577
Code. In any of these actions, the official or employee shall be defended or
represented by the City's attorney at law until the final termination of the
proceedings.
§ 21-117. [Ch. 21, Sec. 102.11] Official records. [Ord. No. 1995-63]
An official record shall be kept of all business and activities of the
department specified in the provisions of this Code, and all such records
shall be open to public inspection, as provided by the Illinois Freedom of
Information Act,35 at all appropriate times and under reasonable regulations
to maintain the integrity and security of such records.
§ 21-118. [Ch. 21, Sec. 102.12] Penalty for violation of chapter.
[Ord. No. 1995-63]
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall upon conviction be fined not less than $25 nor more than
$500.
35.Editor's Note: See 5 ILCS 140/1.
§ 21-116 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 21-118
1:578
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 21-201. [Ch. 21, Sec. 200.1] Scope - general. [Ord. No. 1995-63]
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the terms of § 21-204 shall, for the
purpose of this Code, have the meanings indicated in this article. The word
"shall" is always mandatory.
§ 21-202. [Ch. 21, Sec. 200.2] Interchangeability. [Ord. No.
1995-63]
Words used in the present tense include the future; words in the masculine
gender include the feminine and neuter; the singular number includes the
plural and the plural the singular.
§ 21-203. [Ch. 21, Sec. 200.3] Terms described in other codes. [Ord.
No. 1995-63]
Where terms are not defined in this article and are defined in other related
Codes, they shall have the same meanings ascribed to them in those Codes.
§ 21-204. [Ch. 21, Sec. 200.4] Terms defined.
ANIMAL FECES — Solid waste excrement from animals.
APPROVED — Approved as applied to a device shall mean approved by
the Code Official under the provisions of this Code, or approved by other
authority designated by law to give approval in the matter in question.
APPROVED COMPOST BINS —
APPROVED RECYCLE CONTAINERS — Wheeled carts of 65 gallons, 95
gallons or other volumes issued exclusively by the City of Bloomington
Public Works Department and its designees and vendor for the sole
purposes of recycling, and excluding blue, hand-carried bins previously
issued by the City. The carts are issued to addresses and remain the
property of the City of Bloomington.[Ord. No. 2012-59]
Approved bins for composting include, and are limited to:
(1) Snow fence bins;
(2) Metal bins;
(3) Block or brick bins;
(4) Wooden bins;
(5) Plastic bins.
A.
The compost bin is not to exceed 36 square feet in area nor 108 cubic
feet in volume.
B.
§ 21-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-204
1:579
APPROVED REFUSE CONTAINER —
BRUSH — Tree branches and/or trimmings, shrubbery branches and/or
trimmings.
BUCKET — An end loader or knuckleboom bucket for loading bulk waste,
brush, or tree debris that has a volume of approximately 2.5 cubic yards. It
is hereby established as the base unit for billing the collection of bulk waste,
brush, or tree debris.[Ord. No. 2018-12]
BUILDING — Interchangeable with structure.
BUILDING WASTE — All waste or residue resulting from building
construction, reconstruction, repair, demolition, or replacement.
BULK WASTE — The following types of waste:
Wheeled garbage carts issued exclusively by the City through the
Department of Public Works or its designee or vendor. These carts
remain the property of the City of Bloomington and shall be used in
locations designated by the City.
A.
Plastic refuse bags meeting specifications established by the Director of
Public Works and approved by the City Manager. The bag, when placed
for collection, shall not weigh more than 35 pounds and shall be sealed.
Effective May 1, 2014, the bag shall be tagged with a City-approved
sticker acknowledging purchase of the sticker from the City or a Cityapproved
vendor.
B.
A heavy duty plastic container of not more than 30-33 gallon capacity or
a can made of galvanized iron or lined with galvanized iron of not more
than 30-33 gallon capacity. Each container shall be watertight, have
a tight fitting cover and two handles and, when full, shall not weigh
more than 35 pounds. Containers as described in this Subsection C,
shall be used in a location deemed by the Director of Public Works to
be unsuited for wheeled cart use. An area may be deemed unsuited for
wheeled cart use where conditions in the collection area do not allow
automated collection equipment to work effectively and efficiently.
[Ord. No. 2014-40]
C.
Indoor furniture, including, but not limited to: bed springs, mattress,
carpet, couch, chair, cushions;
A.
Car parts, including, but not limited to: wheel rims, hub caps, truck cap,
junk metal, but NOT including batteries or tires;
B.
C. Other items exposed to the elements not designed for exterior use; or
D. Firewood, etc. not neatly stacked 18 inches above the ground.
Appliances, including, but not limited to: washers, dryers, refrigerators,
freezers, stoves, and water heaters. Computers and televisions shall not
be considered bulk waste and will not be collected by the City. [Ord.
No. 2014-40]
E.
§ 21-204 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 21-204
1:580
CODE OFFICIAL — The official who is charged with the administration
and enforcement of this Code or any duly authorized representative. The
Director of Community Development Enforcement, the Director of Public
Works, or their authorized representatives.[Ord. No. 2017-96]
COMMERCIAL BUILDING — A building which is used for any commercial
or industrial purpose whatever, and shall include hotel and motels.
COMPOSTING — The controlled decomposition of organic materials using
aerobic bacteria.
DEBRIS — A generic term which includes rubbish, building waste, bulk
waste, brush, garden waste and landscape waste.
DEPARTMENT — The Departments of Public Works and Community
Development of the City of Bloomington.[Ord. No. 2017-96]
DIRECTOR — The Directors of Public Works and Community Development
of the City of Bloomington, or the authorized representative of either.[Ord.
No. 2017-96]
DWELLINGS — A building designed, arranged, used or intended to be
used principally for residential occupancy (except a mobile home), including
single-family, two-family and/or multifamily dwellings.
EXTERIOR PROPERTY — The open space on the premises and on adjoining
property under the control of owners or operators of such premises.
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal or vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food; animal or
vegetable products used as bait for hunting, fishing and trapping purposes;
or animal carcasses of any size.
GARDEN WASTE — Remains of garden vegetation at the end of the growing
season.
LANDSCAPE WASTE — Tree trimmings, grass clippings, leaves, flower
trimmings, ornamental bush trimmings, house plant clippings and other
vegetation trimmings.
ONE-FAMILY DWELLING (SINGLE) — A building containing no more
than one dwelling unit.
A.
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING (DUPLEX) — A building containing no more
than two dwelling units.
B.
MULTIPLE FAMILY DWELLING — A building containing more than two
dwelling units.
C.
ROOMING HOUSE — A building arranged or used for lodging, with or
without meals, for compensation and occupied as a one-family dwelling
and more than two other unrelated by blood, adoption or marriage
living in a dwelling unit.
D.
§ 21-204 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-204
1:581
LICENSED WASTE COLLECTOR — A person who obtains a license from the
City of Bloomington to collect or transport public or private refuse over the
streets of the City.
MOSQUITO HARBORAGE — Any land, vegetation, stagnant or fresh water
(water standing in excess of five days), or other condition which in the
opinion of the Code Official constitutes a breeding area for mosquitoes.
OCCUPANT — Any person living or sleeping in a building; or having actual
possession of a space within a building.
OPERATOR — Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or
premises which is let or offered for occupancy.
OWNER — Any person, agent, operator, firm, or corporation having legal or
equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the
state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise
having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any
such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, partnership or any other group
acting as a unit; except that for purposes of defining a dwelling unit, or
occupancy limits, "person" shall be defined as an individual.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land, if any, including the buildings or
structures.
PUBLIC NUISANCE — Includes the following:
PUBLIC WAY — Any street, alley or other parcel of land open to the
outside air leading to a public street, which has been deeded, dedicated or
otherwise permanently appropriated to the public for public use and which
has a clear width and height of not less than 10 feet (3,048 mm).
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Aluminum and steel cans, glass bottles and
jars, plastic bottles (#1 and #2), food boxes, cardboard and paper collected
for the purposes of recycling.[Ord. No. 2012-59]
The physical condition, or use of any premises regarded as a public
nuisance at common law; or
A.
Any condition or action declared to be a public nuisance by any
provision of the Bloomington City Code; or [Ord. No. 2014-40]
B.
Any premises which are unsanitary, or which are littered with animal
feces, or which are littered with garbage and/or debris, or which has
an uncontrolled growth of weeds, grass and/or other vegetation, or has
improperly maintained vegetation, or has conditions which constitutes
a mosquito harborage; or
C.
Any premises which has garbage and/or debris stored in such a manner,
number or quantity that it has a potential of becoming an insect or
rodent harborage or has an adverse or degrading effect on the
surrounding areas or neighborhoods. [Ord. No. 2014-40]
D.
§ 21-204 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 21-204
1:582
REFUSE — The entire scope of several categories of natural and man-made
waste including garbage and debris.
REFUSE CODE — The refuse Code officially adopted by the City Council, or
other such Codes officially designated by the City Council for the regulation
of refuse collection and enforcement.
REFUSE COLLECTOR — An employee of the City of Bloomington assigned
to pick up refuse or any person, including any employees, authorized by
the Director of Public Works to pick up recyclable materials.[Ord. No.
2012-59]
RUBBISH — Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage, and the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood,
coal, coke, and other combustible materials, paper, rags, bedding, cartons,
boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tin cans, metals, mineral matter,
glass, crockery and dust and other similar materials.
SOLID WASTE — The entire scope of several categories of natural and manmade
waste including garbage and debris.
STREET — All publicly dedicated streets in the City of Bloomington.
"Street" shall also include streets in a mobile home park which possesses
the following characteristics:
STRUCTURE — That which is built or constructed, including without
limitation because of enumeration, buildings for any occupancy or use
whatsoever, fences, signs, billboards, fire escapes, railings, water tanks,
towers, open grade steps, sidewalks or stairways, tents or anything erected
and framed of component parts which is fastened, anchored or rests on a
permanent foundation or on the ground.
TREE EXPERT — For purposes of this chapter, a "tree expert" means any
person, partnership, corporation, firm or any other entity of any description
who trims or removes trees or stumps for hire.
YARD — An open space on the same lot with a building extending along the
entire length of a street, or rear or interior lot line.[Ord. No. 2003-91]
A. Pavement of not less than 10 feet in width;
Freedom from all obstructions not less than two feet on each side of the
pavement;
B.
Absence of overhanging tree limbs which could interfere with any City
refuse collection vehicle;
C.
Configuration which allows City refuse collection vehicles convenient
ingress and egress. [Ord. No. 2014-40]
D.
§ 21-204 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-204
1:583

ARTICLE III
Refuse Services
§ 21-301. [Ch. 21, Sec. 300.1] Scope of refuse collection service.
A. The City shall provide refuse collection service to all single family
residential buildings and to multifamily residential buildings with six or
fewer units, but only for refuse generated by occupants of said
residential buildings. The City will not pick up refuse from premises
with more than six residential units. Refuse generated at another
premise or business location will not be collected. An owner of a
multifamily property having two or more units may decline City refuse
service and contract for private solid waste collection service, provided
that written notice of the owner's decision to opt out of the City's refuse
collection program is filed with the Public Works Department. Refuse
shall be collected only under circumstances provided for herein. [Ord.
No. 2014-113]
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A above, §§ 21-302 and
21-303, the City will provide refuse collection service from a mobile
home if, but only if, the following requirements are met:
(1) The mobile home is located in a licensed mobile home park licensed
by the City of Bloomington;
(2) The street adjacent to said mobile home is a street as defined in
§ 21-204 of this chapter;
(3) The owner or operator of the mobile home park containing such
mobile home agrees, in writing, to hold the City harmless from any
liability which might arise due to the size and weight of City refuse
collection vehicles. [Ord. No. 1995-63]
C. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A above, §§ 21-302 and
21-303, the City will provide refuse collection within the Downtown
Service Area (defined as the area west of East Street, east of Madison
Street, north of Front Street and south of Locust Street; and Front
Street from East Street to Prairie Street) if, but only if, the following
requirements are met:
(1) Garbage collection day will commence on Wednesdays at 6:00 a.m.
(2) Residents will be required to use tied plastic bags only; other
refuse containers or loose material is unacceptable.
(3) Residents are prohibited from placing garbage outside for
collection earlier than 6:00 p.m. on Tuesdays or later than 6:00
a.m. on Wednesdays.
(4) Residents are required to place their garbage adjacent to the
downtown trash receptacle nearest their residence behind the curb
in a neat and orderly manner.
§ 21-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-301
1:585
§ 21-302. [Ch. 21, Sec. 300.2] Quantity of refuse collected. [Ord.
No. 1995-63]
The City shall collect from residential buildings all refuse produced by the
occupant at said building properly placed in approved refuse containers,
plus other refuse from said building properly prepared for collection, as
hereinafter provided for.
§ 21-303. [Ch. 21, Sec. 300.3] Collection from streets. [Ord. No.
1995-63]
Except as hereinafter provided, all City Refuse collection shall be made
from the street in front of residential buildings.
§ 21-304. [Ch. 21, Sec. 300.4] Present alley collection.
The following paved alleys shall be used for collection of garbage:
§ 21-305. [Ch. 21, Sec. 300.5] Frequency of collection.
§ 21-306. [Ch. 21, Sec. 300.6 ] Holiday collection.
(5) Bulk waste collection and recycle collection will not be provided.
Residents are permitted to transport bulk waste to the Public
Works Yard or the southwest corner of Jackson and East Streets.
[Ord. No. 2018-93]
A. The alley between White Place and the Illinois Central Railroad right-ofway,
from Empire to Emerson;
B. The alley between White Place and Clinton Boulevard from University
to Emerson;
C. The alley between Empire Street and Walnut Street from Clinton
Boulevard to Elder Street;
D. The alley between Indianapolis Street and McClun Street from Oakland
Avenue to Bell Street. [Ord. No. 2012-59]
A. Garbage shall be collected once per week according to a collection
schedule established by the Director of Public Works, except for such
holidays as hereinafter provided.
B. Debris shall be collected on a schedule established by the Director of
Public Works which shall ensure collection every other week, with the
following exception. No brush or tree debris containing limbs, logs,
branches, leaves from Ash trees commonly known as White Ash, Green
Ash and Blue Ash will be collected between April 30th and September
1st in any year when there is an Emerald Ash Borer Quarantine in effect
in McLean County. [Ord. No. 2012-58]
§ 21-301 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 21-306
1:586
§ 21-307. [Ch. 21, Sec. 300.7 ] Bulk waste collection.
§ 21-308. [Ch. 21, Sec. 300.8 ] Disposal of waste from tree expert.
A. The City shall collect refuse on all holidays which fall within the weekly
calendar for collection, except Christmas Day or the day designated by
the City for observance of Christmas.
B. Refuse shall not be collected on Christmas Day or the day designated by
the City for observance of Christmas, but shall be collected on the
following day on which refuse is regularly scheduled to be collected.
[Ord. No. 2014-88]
A. Bulk waste and building waste may be collected by the City under rules
established by the Director of Public Works and approved by the City
Manager, but only with respect to bulk waste or building waste
generated or created by the occupant or owner of residential property,
served by the solid waste program, with proper permits, at least twice
per year. The collection shall take place once in the season of spring and
once in the season of fall within each calendar year. The time periods
shall be determined under rules established by the Director of Public
Works and approved by the City Manager. The City shall not charge the
occupant or owner of residential property served by the solid waste
program for bulk waste or building waste collection during these time
periods.
B. The City shall not collect bulk waste or building waste outside of the
aforementioned time periods unless the occupant or owner of
residential property served by the solid waste program requests a
pickup of bulk waste or building waste. After such a request is made,
the City shall pick up such bulk waste or building waste and shall
charge the resident the sum of $25 per bucket of bulk waste.
C. The City shall not collect bulk waste or building waste generated or
created by any work performed by any contractor, subcontractor or
other person for hire and/or bartering.
D. The City will not collect any sod, concrete, bricks or shingles unless the
resident who participates in the bulk waste collection program requests
a pickup of such sod, concrete, bricks or shingles. After such a request
is made, the City will pick up such sod, concrete, or shingles and will
charge the resident for the actual cost of the pickup and disposal of
such material for anything beyond 35 pounds of material. The
determination by the City of the weight of the material shall be final.
E. Notwithstanding any of the provisions contained herein, the City shall
collect landscape waste and bulk waste from locations within the City
designated as a National Historic Landmark, without charge, in
accordance with rules and procedures adopted by the Department of
Public Works. [Ord. No. 2018-12]
§ 21-306 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-308
1:587
§ 21-309. [Ch. 21, Sec. 300.9] Leaf collection. [Ord. No. 2012-58]
Leaves may be collected by the City from time to time as directed by the
Director of Public Works and approved by the City Manager. No person shall
rake or store leaves on any street.
§ 21-310. [Ch. 21, Sec. 300.10] Abuse of containers. [Ord. No.
1995-63]
Refuse collectors shall not damage, deface, or physically abuse any refuse
container.
§ 21-311. [Ch. 21, Sec. 301.1 ] Transportation of refuse over streets
generally. [Ord. No. 1995-63]
No garbage or rubbish shall be transported over any of the streets or alleys
in the City except in vehicles so constructed as to prevent the dropping or
falling of any part of the contents therefrom during transportation.
§ 21-312. [Ch. 21, Sec. 301.2 ] Garbage collectors - license
required; fee; issuance; etc. [Ord. No. 2012-58]
All persons, before collecting garbage, rubbish, or ashes within the City
shall procure annually a license from the City Manager upon the payment
of a fee of $100.
A. All tree experts must, as part of any contract to trim or cut down one or
more trees or remove any stump, remove all limbs, branches or stumps
or parts thereof (hereinafter referred to as "tree waste") from the work
site. [Ord. No. 1995-63]
B. It shall be unlawful for any tree expert to:
(1) Place any tree waste on public right-of-way for disposal as bulk
waste by the City of Bloomington; or
(2) Suggest that the owner of the property place any tree waste on
public right-of-way for disposal as bulk waste by the City of
Bloomington; or
(3) Offer or agree to reduce the contract price by the amount of costs
of disposal of tree waste. [Ord. No. 1995-63]
C. Penalty. Any tree expert who violates this section shall upon conviction
be fined not less than $50 nor more than $200 for the first offense; and
not less than $200 nor more than $500 for subsequent offenses. In
addition, if the City of Bloomington has disposed of tree waste placed
for disposal in violation of this section, the defendant shall be ordered
to reimburse the City for the cost of collection. [Ord. No. 1995-63]
§ 21-308 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 21-313
1:588
§ 21-313. [Ch. 21, Sec. 301.3 ] Same - license plate to be issued;
attaching to vehicle. [Ord. No. 1995-63]
Upon the issuance of the license required by the preceding Section, the
licensee shall receive a metal license plate bearing a number and the words
"Refuse Collector" and the year for which it is issued. Such plate shall be
securely fastened to the vehicle to be used in such a manner as to be readily
discernible.
§ 21-314. [Ch. 21, Sec. 301.4 ] Same - requirements as to vehicles;
revocation of license for failure to comply. [Ord. No. 1995-63]
All vehicles used in the collection of garbage, ashes, or rubbish shall have a
tight cover for that portion of the vehicle in which the garbage is contained.
Such cover may be of metal or canvas or similar material but shall be
so designed and constructed as to prevent odor from escaping from the
garbage and rubbish and flies from entering that portion of the truck where
the garbage and rubbish is contained. Such cover shall be closed at all times
while the vehicle is in transit anywhere within the limits of the City.
§ 21-315. [Ch. 21, Sec. 301.5 ] Penalty for violation of this section.
[Ord. No. 1995-63]
Any violation of this section shall subject the offender to revocation of the
license provided for herein. The penalty of revocation of the license shall be
in addition to any other penalty imposed for a violation of this chapter. Each
day that any truck shall be operated in violation of provisions of this section
shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 21-316. [Ch. 21, Sec. 301.6 ] Refuse fee.
A. There shall be a charge for refuse collection of refuse to the owner and/
or occupant of every dwelling unit for which refuse service is actually
provided by the City. Effective May 1, 2016, such fee shall be in the
amount of $16 per month per single-family dwelling and for each unit in
a two family or multifamily dwelling for one thirty-five-gallon refuse
cart; $21 per month, per single-family dwelling and for each unit in a
two family or multifamily dwelling for one sixty-five-gallon refuse cart;
and $25 per month, per single-family dwelling and for each unit in a two
family or multifamily dwelling for a ninety-five-gallon refuse cart. [Ord.
No. 2018-12]
B. Effective May 1, 2018, there shall be a charge for refuse collection of
refuse to the owner and/or occupant of every dwelling unit for which
refuse service is actually provided by the City. For a single-family
dwelling and for each unit in a two family or multifamily dwelling, such
fee shall be based on the size of the refuse cart as follows: $16 per
month, per single-family dwelling and for each unit in a two-family
multifamily dwelling for one thirty-five-gallon refuse cart; $25 per
month, per single-family dwelling and for each unit in a two family or
multifamily dwelling for one sixty-five-gallon refuse cart; and $29 per
§ 21-313 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-316
1:589
month, per single-family dwelling and for each unit in a two family
or multifamily dwelling for a ninety-five-gallon refuse cart. [Ord. No.
2018-12]
C. Effective and beginning May 1, 2019, the refuse fees outlined above
shall increase annually on May 1 of each year, at a compounding rate of
3% over the rate from the previous year. [Ord. No. 2018-12]
D. Effective May 1, 2014, the owner of a multiple-family dwelling may
elect to have multiple tenants share garbage carts. The tenants must all
live within a building or buildings located on a single lot or on lots
abutting one another. In such cases, the property owner shall notify the
Department of Public Works in writing and the property owner shall
decide upon the number of carts and the size of carts to be used by the
tenants. The Director of Public Works has the discretion to approve,
amend or refuse the request and his/her judgment is final. If the cartsharing
request is approved by the Director, the Refuse Fee will be
assessed for each residential unit at the lowest residential fee, as if
each unit has individually ordered one thirty-five-gallon cart. The fee
will be assessed as such regardless of whether the property owner or
the tenant has assumed primary responsibility for payment of the
Refuse Fee. [Ord. No. 2014-14]
E. Effective May 1, 2014, residents of Bloomington Housing Authority
units who are excluded from the wheeled cart collection process shall
pay the lowest residential fee set by the City. [Ord. No. 2014-14]
F. Effective May 1, 2014, residents living within the Downtown Service
Area (defined as the area west of East Street, east of Madison Street,
north of Front Street and south of Locust Street; and Front Street from
East Street to Prairie Street) who are excluded from the wheeled cart
collection process shall pay the lowest residential fee set by the City.
[Ord. No. 2014-14]
G. The refuse fee shall be payable on a monthly basis. There shall be a $30
fee for an exchange or substitution of an ordered and delivered refuse
cart provided by the City if the substituted cart is larger than the
original cart. There shall be no charge for substitution of refuse carts if
the substituted cart is smaller than the original cart. Failure to pay the
fee upon billing by the City may result, at the City's option, in the
placement of a lien against the real estate or may result in the filing of a
complaint in Circuit Court seeking a personal judgment against the
owner or persons interested in the property subject to such refuse fee,
termination of refuse services, termination of water service or other
remedies. The election of a particular remedy shall not constitute a
waiver of any other remedy available to the City for collection of the
refuse fee. The owner(s) and tenants of multifamily housing properties
shall be exempt from the upsizing fee if their upsizing is a direct result
of City-approved cart-sharing arraignments described above in this
section. [Ord. No. 2014-14]
§ 21-316 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 21-316
1:590
§ 21-317. [Ch. 21, Sec. 301.7 ] Pay as you throw refuse sticker. [Ord.
No. 2013-91]
An owner and/or occupant of a dwelling unit for which refuse service is
provided by the City may purchase a refuse sticker in the amount of $3
per bag to pay for overflow bags of refuse set outside the automated refuse
carts. These stickers shall be sold at designated locations to be determined
by the City.
§ 21-318. [Ch. 21, Sec. 301.8 ] Low-income refuse fee discount.
H. The owner of the dwelling unit, the occupant thereof and the user of the
services shall be jointly and severally liable to pay such refuse fee and
the services are furnished to the dwelling unit by the City only on the
condition that the owner of the dwelling unit, occupant thereof and user
of the refuse service are jointly and severally liable. The refuse fee for
such refuse collection shall be paid in advance, for which the City of
Bloomington shall provide refuse collection service to the dwelling unit
at least once each week. [Ord. No. 2011-18]
A. The City may offer a discounted rate for refuse collection based on an
individual's income. The qualifying criteria for this discount shall be
based on the federal poverty guidelines as provided in the Federal
Register issued by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
each year.
B. Effective May 1, 2014, an owner and/or occupant of a dwelling unit for
which refuse service is provided by the City, whose income level falls
within the poverty guidelines, shall pay a fee in the amount of $16 per
month, per single-family dwelling. [Ord. No. 2013-91]
C. Effective and beginning May 1, 2019, the refuse fee outlined above
shall increase annually on May 1 of each year, at a compounding rate of
3% over the rate from the previous year. [Ord. No. 2018-12]
§ 21-316 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-318
1:591

ARTICLE IV
Citizen's Refuse Obligations
§ 21-401. [Ch. 21, Sec. 400.1 ] Preparation of refuse.
§ 21-402. [Ch. 21, Sec. 400.2 ] Sealing of containers.
§ 21-403. [Ch. 21, Sec. 400.3 ] Storage of refuse.
§ 21-404. [Ch. 21, Sec. 400.4 ] Placement of refuse for collection.
A. Garbage and applicable debris. All garbage and applicable debris shall
be placed in approved refuse containers as that term is defined in
§ 21-204 of this chapter. [Ord. No. 2014-40]
B. Brush not in approved refuse containers shall be cut in lengths not to
exceed six feet in length and stacked neatly for collection. [Ord. No.
2012-59]
C. Bulk waste shall be prepared so as not to be a hazard. Doors must be
removed from refrigerators, and other large appliances. [Ord. No.
2012-59]
D. Doors must be removed from refrigerators, and other large appliances
that are taken to the Drop-Off Facility outlined in § 21-407. [Ord. No.
2018-12]
A. Metal and plastic containers approved under § 21-204 shall be tightly
covered at all times. [Ord. No. 1995-63]
B. Plastic bags approved under § 21-204 shall be securely sealed so as to
prevent contents from spilling or scattering. [Ord. No. 1995-63]
A. Except for a period of time beginning at 2:00 p.m. on the day prior to
the scheduled collection day and ending at 9:00 a.m. on the day
following the collection day, all refuse and refuse containers shall be
stored on the owner's premises, screened so as to prevent their being
viewed from the street.
B. Refuse stored on the exterior of any property must be stored in either
an approved galvanized iron refuse container or an approved heavy
duty durable plastic container, being not more than 30-33 gallon
capacity, and which is watertight, has a tight fitting cover and two
handles, as specified in § 21-204, or in a City-issued wheeled garbage
cart. Refuse stored on the exterior of the property shall not be stored in
plastic or paper bags of any kind. [Ord. No. 2012-59]
A. Street collection. Not earlier than 2:00 p.m. on the day prior to the
scheduled collection day, all refuse to be collected shall be placed so as
not to present a hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic. Placement of
refuse on the owner's property shall constitute authorization for refuse
§ 21-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-404
1:593
§ 21-405. [Ch. 21, Sec. 400.5 ] Condition of containers. [Ord. No.
1995-63]
All refuse containers shall be kept in a safe, clean and sanitary condition
and in compliance with § 21-204.
§ 21-406. [Ch. 21, Sec. 400.6 ] Elimination of substandard refuse
containers.
collectors to enter onto said property for the purpose of collecting
refuse deposited thereon. [Ord. No. 1995-63]
B. Alley collection. Where alley pick up is authorized under this chapter,
all refuse to be collected shall be placed within five feet of the alley, or
in the alley in such a manner as to be readily collectible and not to
present a hazard to vehicular traffic. Placement of refuse on the
owner's property shall constitute authorization of refuse collectors to
enter onto said property for the purpose of collecting refuse deposited
thereon. [Ord. No. 1995-63]
C. Collection in general. During the period of time beginning at 2:00 p.m.
on the day prior to the scheduled collection day and ending at 6:00 a.m.
on the day of the collection, garbage placed for collection may be
placed in any of the approved refuse containers specified in § 21-204,
including plastic refuse bags established by the Director of Public
Works. [Ord. No. 2012-58]
D. No person shall place any brush or tree debris of any kind, including but
not limited to limbs, logs, branches, leaves; from Ash trees commonly
known as White Ash, Green Ash and Blue Ash for collection by the City
of Bloomington between April 30th and September 1st in any year when
there is an Emerald Ash Borer Quarantine in effect in McLean County.
[Ord. No. 2012-58]
A. City collectors shall have the authority to condemn defective refuse
containers. A container may be considered defective if it:
(1) Has no cover or the cover fits so badly as to allow insects or animals
access to the contents;
(2) Has no handle or the handle is broken;
(3) Is rotted or has any holes in the top, side or bottom;
(4) Has ragged or sharp edges or any other defect liable to hamper or
injure a refuse collector; or
(5) Is in an unsanitary condition. [Ord. No. 2014-40]
B. A container may be condemned by placing a red tag or sticker on it in a
conspicuous place. If such container is defective according to
Subsection A(1), (2), (3) or (4), above, and is not a City-owned wheeled
cart, it shall be replaced by the refuse service user prior to the next
§ 21-404 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 21-406
1:594
§ 21-407. [Ch. 21, Sec. 400.7 ] Drop-off facility.
scheduled collection of refuse. If the container is a City-owned wheeled
cart, it shall be replaced by the City. If such container is defective
according to Subsection A(5), above, it shall be cleaned by the refuse
service user or his designee prior to the next scheduled refuse
collection. [Ord. No. 2014-40]
C. Any condemned container not replaced or cleaned pursuant to
Subsection B above, shall be collected with the refuse at the next
scheduled refuse collection. The City shall not be held liable for the
collection of any defective container. Upon replacement of an
unsanitary City-owned cart, the refuse service user may be charged a
replacement cost. The user also may be charged for replacement of a
defective City-owned cart and fined as provided in § 21-506 if the user
damages the cart. [Ord. No. 2014-40]
D. Any person may dispute the condemnation of a container by calling the
Director of Public Works, whose judgment shall be final. Failure to
contact the Director within 24 hours of condemnation shall constitute
an admission that the container was defective. [Ord. No. 2012-58]
A. The occupant or owner of residential property served by the solid waste
program may take appliances, bulk waste, or building waste to the
City's Drop-Off Facility at the southeast corner of East and Jackson
Streets, providing that they meet all criteria outlined in § 21-401. The
City shall not charge the occupant or owner of residential property
served by the solid waste program for this service.
B. The City shall not allow any contractor, subcontractor or other person
for hire and/or bartering to take appliances, bulk waste, or building
waste to the City's Drop-Off Center at the southeast corner of East and
Jackson Streets if the appliances, bulk waste, or building waste has
been generated or created by any paid work performed by the
contractor, subcontractor, or other person for hire and/or bartering.
[Ord. No. 2018-12]
§ 21-406 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-407
1:595

ARTICLE V
Refuse Preparation and Storage Violations
§ 21-501. [Ch. 21, Sec. 500.1 ] Improper refuse preparation. [Ord.
No. 1995-63]
A person commits the offense of improper refuse preparation if he prepares
refuse other than in compliance with Chapters 21 and/or 45.
§ 21-502. [Ch. 21, Sec. 500.2 ] Improper refuse packaging. [Ord.
No. 1995-63]
A person commits the offense of improper refuse packaging if he deposits
refuse in containers other than allowed in Chapters 21 and/or 45, or leaves
refuse or containers thereof in a condition other than allowed in Chapters
21 and/or 45.
§ 21-503. [Ch. 21, Sec. 500.3 ] Improper storage of refuse. [Ord. No.
1995-63]
A person commits the offense of improper refuse storage if he stores,
deposits or leaves refuse containers in any place other than in compliance
with Chapters 21 and/or 45.
§ 21-504. [Ch. 21, Sec. 500.4 ] Improper placement of refuse. [Ord.
No. 1995-63]
A person commits the offense of improper placement of refuse if he places
refuse for collection at a time other than in compliance with Chapters 21
and/or 45.
§ 21-505. [Ch. 21, Sec. 500.5 ] Interference with refuse collection.
[Ord. No. 1995-63]
A person commits the offense of interference with refuse collection if he
obstructs, interferes with, or hampers any refuse collector in the process of
collecting refuse.
§ 21-506. [Ch. 21, Sec. 500.6 ] Damage to refuse containers.
A. A person commits the offense of damage to refuse containers if he:
(1) Damages, defaces, or renders fit for condemnation, any refuse
container other than his own. A City-issued wheeled cart remains
the property of the City, rather than the property of the owner of
the premises to which it has been issued; [Ord. No. 2014-40]
(2) Allows an animal he owns to render fit for condemnation, tear, or
rip any collectible refuse container not his own. [Ord. No.
1995-63]
§ 21-501 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-506
1:597
§ 21-507. [Ch. 21, Sec. 500.7 ] Accumulation of garbage.
§ 21-508. [Ch. 21, Sec. 500.8 ] Accumulation of debris.
§ 21-509. [Ch. 21, Sec. 500.9 ] Accumulation of animal feces. [Ord.
No. 1995-63]
A person commits the offense of accumulation of animal feces if he permits
animal feces to remain on his property for more than one day. The feces
shall be disposed of in a sanitary manner, by placing in a closed or sealed
container and depositing in a trash receptacle, said feces.
B. Failure of an owner to keep any owned animal on his own property or on
a leash shall be deemed prima facie evidence of consent of any acts of
such animal as outlined in Subsection A(2) above. [Ord. No. 1995-63]
C. The offense of damage to a refuse container is punishable by:
(1) A fine of from $50 to $500 for each container damaged; and
(2) Payment of the replacement cost of each damaged container. [Ord.
No. 2014-40]
A. A person commits the offense of accumulation of garbage if he permits
to remain longer than one day on the exterior of his property, either on
or beneath a porch, or in the yard, any item which:
(1) Constitutes garbage as defined in Chapters 21 and/or 45 of the
Bloomington City Code;
(2) Is nonfunctional; or
(3) Has no apparent value.
B. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day the violation
continues. [Ord. No. 1995-63]
A. A person commits the offense of accumulation of debris if he permits to
remain longer than one week on the exterior of his property, either on
or beneath a porch, or in the yard, any item which:
(1) Constitutes debris as defined in Chapters 21 and/or 45 of the
Bloomington City Code;
(2) Is nonfunctional; or
(3) Has no apparent value.
B. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day the violation
continues. [Ord. No. 1995-63]
§ 21-506 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 21-510
1:598
§ 21-510. [Ch. 21, Sec. 500.10 ] Disruption of refuse.
A person other than a refuse collector in performance of his duties commits
the offense of disruption of refuse if he:
A. Opens or removes refuse from any bag, can, box or container which has
been set out for collection; or
B. Disassembles or removes any parts from an appliance or piece of
furniture which has been set out for collection. For purposes of this
section, the term "appliance" includes but is not limited to televisions,
refrigerators, stoves, washers, dryers, dishwashers, air conditioners,
microwave ovens and similar items. [Ord. No. 1995-63]
§ 21-510 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-510
1:599

ARTICLE VI
Recycling
§ 21-601. [Ch. 21, Sec. 600.1] Scope of services.
Recycling is encouraged in the City of Bloomington. This section will serve
to establish approved containers and locations for storing recyclable
materials prior to collection.
§ 21-602. [Ch. 21, Sec. 600.2] Approved recycle containers. [Ord.
No. 2012-59]
Wheeled carts of 65 gallons, 95 gallons or other volumes issued exclusively
by the City of Bloomington Public Works Department and its designees and
vendor for the sole purposes of recycling, and excluding blue, hand-carried
bins previously issued by the City. The carts are issued to addresses and
remain the property of the City of Bloomington.
§ 21-603. [Ch. 21, Sec. 600.3] Holiday collection.
§ 21-604. [Ch. 21, Sec. 600.4] Storage of recycling.
A. The City shall provide curbside recycling collection service from
residential buildings every other week on the day of the week serving
the residences according to a collection schedule established by the
Director of Public Works.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A above, the City will not
provide curbside recycling collection within the Downtown Service
Area. For purposes of this section, the Downtown Service Area is
defined as the area from Madison Street west to East Street, from Front
Street north to Locust; and Front Street from East Street to Prairie
Street.
C. The City may provide recycling collection services additional to those
described in Subsection A, above, at the discretion of the Director of
Public Works. [Ord. No. 2014-40]
A. The City shall collect recycling on all holidays which fall within the
weekly calendar for collection, except Christmas Day or the day
designated by the City for observance of Christmas.
B. Recycling shall not be collected on Christmas Day or the day designated
by the City for observance of Christmas, but shall be collected on the
following day on which recycling is regularly scheduled to be collected.
[Ord. No. 2014-88]
A. Except for a period of time beginning at 2:00 p.m. on the day prior to
the scheduled collection day and ending at 9:00 a.m. on the day
following the collection day, all recycling containers shall be stored on
the owner's premises, screened so as to prevent their being viewed
from the street.
§ 21-601 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-604
1:601
§ 21-605. [Ch. 21, Sec. 600.5] Placement of recycling for collection.
§ 21-606. [Ch. 21, Sec. 600.6] Condition of containers. [Ord. No.
2014-40]
All recycling containers shall be kept in a safe, clean and sanitary condition.
§ 21-607. [Ch. 21, Sec. 600.7] Elimination of substandard recycling
containers.
B. Recycling stored on the exterior of any property must be stored in
either a City-issued wheeled cart or in a watertight container with a
tight-fitting cover. Recycling stored on the exterior of the property shall
not be stored in plastic or paper bags of any kind. [Ord. No. 2014-40]
A. Street collection. Where street pick up is authorized in this chapter,
recycling may be placed in the parkway or on the curb no earlier than
2:00 p.m. on the day prior to the scheduled collection day. All recycling
shall be placed as too not create a hazard to pedestrian and vehicular
traffic. Placement of recycling on the owner's property shall constitute
authorization for recycling collectors to enter onto said property for the
purpose of collecting recycling deposited thereon.
B. Alley collection. Where alley pick up is authorized under this chapter,
all recycling to be collected shall be placed within five feet of the alley,
or in the alley, in such manner as to be readily collectible and not a
hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic. Placement of recycling on the
owner's property shall constitute authorization of recycling collectors
to enter onto said property for the purpose of collecting recycling
deposited thereon.
C. The City will not be required to take recycling that has not been placed
in the appropriate collection area on or before 6:00 a.m. on the
scheduled collection day. [Ord. No. 2014-40]
A. City collectors shall have the authority to condemn defective recycling
containers. A container may be considered defective if it:
(1) Has no cover or the cover fits so badly as to allow insects or animals
access to the contents;
(2) Has no handle or the handle is broken;
(3) Or has any holes in the top, side or bottom;
(4) Has ragged or sharp edges or any other defect liable to hamper or
injure a recycling collector; or
(5) Is in an unsanitary condition.
B. A container may be condemned by placing a red tag or sticker on it in a
conspicuous place. If such container is defective according to
Subsection A(1), (2), (3) or (4) above it shall be replaced by the City. If
§ 21-604 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 21-607
1:602
§ 21-608. [Ch. 21, Sec. 600.8] Damage to recycling containers.
§ 21-609. [Ch. 21, Sec. 600.9] Violation of this section. [Ord. No.
2014-40]
A person is in violation of the Recycling section of this chapter if recyclable
material is stored or located other than in accordance to the provisions of
this section.
such container is defective according to Subsection A(5) above, it shall
be cleaned by the recycling service user or his designee prior to the
next scheduled recycling collection.
C. The user may be fined or charged for replacement of a condemned City
owned cart according to Subsection A(1), (2), (3) or (4) if there is clear
evidence of abuse of the equipment or negligent misuse of the
equipment by the user, as provided in § 21-608C of this chapter.
D. Any condemned container not cleaned pursuant to Subsection B, above,
shall be collected with the recycling at the next scheduled recycling
collection. Upon replacement of an unsanitary City-owned cart, the
recycling service user may be charged a replacement cost for issuance
of a new wheeled recycling cart.
E. Any person may dispute the condemnation of a container by calling the
Director of Public Works, whose judgment shall be final. Failure to
contact the Director within 24 hours of condemnation shall constitute
an admission that the container was defective. [Ord. No. 2014-40]
A. A person commits the offense of damage to recycling containers if he:
(1) Damages, defaces, or renders fit for condemnation, any City-issued,
City-owned wheeled recycling cart;
(2) Allows an animal he owns to render fit for condemnation, tear, or
rip any City-issued, City-owned wheeled recycling cart.
B. Failure to an owner to keep any owned animal on his own property or on
a leash shall be deemed prima facie evidence of consent of any acts of
such animal as outlined in Subsection A(2), above.
C. The offense of damage to a recycling container is punishable by:
(1) A fine of from $50 to $500 for each container damaged; and
(2) Payment of the replacement cost of each damaged container. [Ord.
No. 2014-40]
§ 21-607 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-609
1:603

ARTICLE VII
Composting
§ 21-701. [Ch. 21, Sec. 700.1] Scope.
Composting is permitted in the City of Bloomington under the following
conditions:
§ 21-702. [Ch. 21, Sec. 700.2] Approved organic material for
composting. [Ord. No. 1995-63]
§ 21-703. [Ch. 21, Sec. 700.3] Location of compost bin. [Ord. No.
1995-63]
All composting bins shall be placed in rear of property at least three feet
from the side and rear property lines screened so as to prevent their being
viewed from the street.
§ 21-704. [Ch. 21, Sec. 700.4] Maintenance of compost. [Ord. No.
1995-63]
All compost shall be properly maintained so as to prevent any odor. It
shall be the responsibility of the property owner to ensure the proper
maintenance of all compost.
A. Compost must be contained in approved bins;
B. Compost must consist of approved organic material;
C. Compost must be properly maintained;
D. Compost must be properly located on property. [Ord. No. 1995-63]
A. Only the following organic material grown on the property containing
the compost bin is permitted for composting. The transferring of
organic material from another property for composting is not
permitted, nor is store purchased material permitted for composting.
B. Approved material for composting include, and are limited to:
(1) Leaves.
(2) Wood chips and twigs.
(3) Raw fruit or raw vegetable waste.
(4) Sawdust.
(5) Cornstalks.
(6) Grass clippings.
§ 21-701 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-705
1:605
§ 21-705. [Ch. 21, Sec. 700.5] Violation of this section. [Ord. No.
1995-63]
A person is in violation of the Composting section of this chapter if compost
is stored, located or maintained other than in accordance to the provisions
of this section.
§ 21-705 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 21-705
1:606
ARTICLE VIII
Weeds and Other Vegetation
§ 21-801. [Ch. 21, Sec. 800.1] Scope. [Ord. No. 1995-63]
The provisions of this article shall govern the maintenance of weeds and
other vegetation in the City of Bloomington.
§ 21-802. [Ch. 21, Sec. 800.2] Weeds - declared a nuisance. [Ord.
No. 1995-63]
Any weeds such as jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur, other
weeds of a like kind, including such weeds that may occur in association
with the production of agricultural crops including, but not limited to, corn,
soybeans, wheat and hay found growing on any lot or tract of land in
the City are hereby declared to be a nuisance as endangering the health,
safety and welfare of the public. It shall be unlawful for any owner of
such real estate to permit any such weeds to grow or remain on any such
property to the extent that it shall be each owner's responsibility to prohibit
such growth and an owner of any such real estate shall not have to have
knowledge of such prohibited growth to be in violation of this Ordinance.
§ 21-803. [Ch. 21, Sec. 800.3] Improperly maintained vegetation -
declared a nuisance. [Ord. No. 1995-63]
Any vegetation, including but not limited to, trees, bushes, grass, flowers
and other plants, found to be dead, overgrown or improperly maintained
as set forth in the provisions of §§ 21-804 and 21-805 or the waste of
such vegetation found to remain on any real estate in the City other than
provided for in § 21-808 is hereby declared to be a nuisance as endangering
the health, safety, welfare and property value of the public. It shall be
unlawful for any owner of such real estate to permit dead, overgrown
and improperly maintained vegetation to remain on any such property to
the extent that it shall be each owner's responsibility to maintain such
vegetation under the provisions of §§ 21-806 and 21-807, and an owner of
such real estate shall not have to have knowledge of improper maintenance
of vegetation to be in violation of this Ordinance.
§ 21-804. [Ch. 21, Sec. 800.4] Grass and other plants. [Ord. No.
2003-91]
It shall be unlawful for any owner of real estate in the City to permit any
grass or plants, other than trees, bushes, flowers, agricultural or other
ornamental plants, to grow to a height exceeding eight inches anywhere in
the City to the extent that it shall be each owner's responsibility to prohibit
such excessive growth, and an owner of any such real estate shall not have
to have knowledge of such growth to be in violation of this Ordinance.
Any such grass or plants exceeding such height are hereby declared to be
nuisance.
§ 21-801 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-805
1:607
§ 21-805. [Ch. 21, Sec. 800.5] Overgrown vegetation. [Ord. No.
1995-63]
It shall be unlawful for any owner of real estate in the City to permit
the overgrowth of vegetation on any such property causing detriment to
neighboring properties or property values or causing a hazardous condition
to pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic, and/or likely to harbor rats, vermin,
mosquitoes and other nuisances. It shall be each owner's responsibility
to remove such overgrowth, and an owner of any such real estate shall
not have to have knowledge of such overgrowth to be a violation of this
Ordinance.
§ 21-806. [Ch. 21, Sec. 800.6] Dead vegetation. [Ord. No. 1995-63]
It shall be unlawful for any owner of real estate in the City to permit to
remain on any such property any dead trees, dead bushes, dead weeds,
or other dead vegetation. It shall be each owner's responsibility to remove
such dead vegetation, and an owner of any such real estate shall not have to
have knowledge of such dead vegetation to be a violation of this Ordinance.
§ 21-807. [Ch. 21, Sec. 800.7] Landscape vegetation. [Ord. No.
1995-63]
It shall be unlawful for any owner of real estate in the City to fail to maintain
in a neat orderly manner as a condition to use any landscape vegetation.
It shall be each owner's responsibility to maintain landscape vegetation in
a neat and orderly manner, and an owner of any such real estate shall not
have to have knowledge of failure to maintain such landscape vegetation in
an orderly manner to be in violation of this Ordinance.
§ 21-808. [Ch. 21, Sec. 800.8] Landscape and garden waste. [Ord.
No. 1995-63]
It shall be unlawful for any owner of real estate in the City to permit to
remain upon any such property, landscape or garden waste. It shall be each
owner's responsibility to remove such waste, and an owner of any such real
estate shall not have to have knowledge of such prohibited waste to be in
violation of this Ordinance.
§ 21-809. [Ch. 21, Sec. 800.9] Mosquito harborage. [Ord. No.
1995-63]
It shall be unlawful for any owner of property in the City to permit a
mosquito harborage to exist upon said property. It shall be each owner's
responsibility to remove such mosquito harborage, and an owner of any
such real estate shall not have to have knowledge of such prohibited
mosquito harborage to be in violation of this Ordinance.
§ 21-805 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 21-810
1:608
§ 21-810. [Ch. 21, Sec. 800.10] Violation of this section. [Ord. No.
1995-63]
A person is in violation of the Weed and Vegetation section of this chapter if
weeds or other vegetation is maintained other than in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
§ 21-811. [Ch. 21, Sec. 800.11] Nuisance abatement.
A. In the event of a violation of Article VIII of this chapter, the Director of
the Community Development Department, the Director of the Public
Works Department or their designates, shall notify, in writing, such
owner to cut, destroy, or remove such growth or objects as are
prohibited by said Section. In the event such owner cannot be located
after reasonable inquiry, posting shall be sufficient notice. The notice
shall state that unless such nuisance is so abated or removed by a
specific date, the City will cause it to be abated or removed, the cost
thereof will be charged to the owner, and that such cost shall be a lien
upon the real property where the nuisance was abated or removed.
Such notice shall also state that the failure of such owner to abate the
nuisance as required by such notice shall be deemed an implied consent
for the City to abate or remove such nuisance. Such implied consent
shall be deemed to form a contract between such owner and the City. If
such owner fails to abate any nuisance within the time limit specified in
such notice, the City may proceed to abate such nuisance, keeping an
account of the expense of the abatement as to each particular lot or
tract, and such expense shall be charged and paid by such owner. [Ord.
No. 2017-96]
B. Administrative expense. In addition to the expenses set forth in
Subsection A, the City shall charge a $100 per lot or $400 per acre fee
to cover a portion of the administrative costs incurred for removal of
the nuisance. This expense shall be assessed against the owner of any
property which received a notice from the City as set forth in
Subsection A, regardless of whether the City or its agents are required
to mow the property involved. [Ord. No. 1995-63]
C. Lien or personal judgment. If the costs of abating or removing the
nuisance remain unpaid, the City, at its option, may file a lien upon the
real property where the nuisance was abated or removed, or commence
proceedings in the Circuit Court seeking a personal judgment from the
owner of such property where the nuisance was abated or removed.
[Ord. No. 1995-63]
(1) Lien. When the City exercises its right to file a lien upon the real
property where the nuisance was abated or removed, the City must
file a Notice of Lien in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of
McLean County. Such notice shall consist of a sworn statement
setting out:
(a) A description of the real estate, sufficient for identification;
§ 21-810 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-811
1:609
§ 21-812. [Ch. 21, Sec. 800.12] Foreclosure of lien. [Ord. No.
1995-63]
Property subject to a lien for unpaid weed mowing and/or abatement
charges shall be subject to foreclosure in equity in the name of the City
to be sold for nonpayment of same and the proceeds of such sale shall be
applied to pay the expenses and costs of the City related thereto including
all attorney fees and expenses associated with time spent by members of
the City's Legal Department on such cases, court costs and other expenses
associated with the foreclosure proceedings. The Legal Department of the
City is hereby authorized and directed to institute such proceedings in the
name of the City in any court having jurisdiction over such matters against
any property and/or owners thereof and all persons having an interest
therein for which such bill has remained unpaid for more than 30 days after
it has been sent to the owner and to execute release(s) of said lien(s) upon
payment of all expenses and all costs incurred by the City.
(b) The amount of money representing the cost and expense
incurred or payable for the service; and
(c) The date or dates when such cost or expense was incurred by
the municipality. This lien shall be superior to all other liens
except taxes, provided, however, it shall not be valid as to any
purchaser whose right in and to such real estate have risen
subsequent to the date on which such costs were incurred and
prior to the filing of such notice, and a lien of the City shall not
be valid as to any mortgages, judgment, creditor or other lien
or whose rights in and to such real estate arise prior to the
filing of such notice. Upon payment of the costs and expenses
by the owner of any other person interested in such property,
after the Notice of Lien has been filed, the lien shall be
released by the City and the release may be filed of record as in
the case of filing the Notice of Lien. The lien may be enforced
by proceeding to foreclosure, as provided by law. Interest on
the lien shall accrue at the rate of 6% per year.
(2) Personal judgment. When the City exercises its right to obtain a
personal judgment against an owner for the cost of abatement or
removal of a nuisance, the City shall file an action in the Circuit
Court against any person or persons to whom notice was sent as
authorized in § 21-811A. Said action shall be used upon the implied
consent by said persons to form a contract with the City for the
abatement or removal of said nuisances. The action authorized by
this paragraph shall be in addition to, and without waiver, of any
other remedy. [Ord. No. 1995-63]
D. Definition of "owner." For the purpose of Chapter 21, the term "owner
shall mean the person, partnership or entity paying property taxes on
the real estate on which a violation of this chapter occurs. [Ord. No.
1995-63]
§ 21-811 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 21-813
1:610
§ 21-813. [Ch. 21, Sec. 800.13] Penalty for violation of this article.
[Ord. No. 1995-63]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article of the Code
shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding less
than $25 nor more than $500 for each offense. Any such penalty shall be
in addition to the expenses and related costs of mowing and/or abating the
substances hereinbefore referred to in addition to the costs of the filing and
releasing of liens on such property and in addition to any costs or expenses
associated with any foreclosure proceeding.
§ 21-813 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-813
1:611

ARTICLE IX
Penalties for Violation of this chapter
§ 21-901. [Ch. 21, Sec. 900.1] Penalties for violation of this chapter.
Any violation of this chapter will, unless otherwise specified, result in:
§ 21-902. [Ch. 21, Sec. 900.2] Abatement notice and proceeding.
[Ord. No. 2006-112]
The Code Official shall notify and direct, by First Class mail, any property
owner who violates any provision of this chapter to abate such violation
on his property. If any owner fails to abate said violation on his property
within seven calendar days from such notice, the Code Official may order
the abatement of the violation. The cost thereof shall be charged against the
real estate upon which the violation is located and there shall be a lien upon
such real estate. In addition to the filing of a lien upon such real estate,
the City shall have the authority to collect for the costs by filing a personal
collection action against the owner in court.
§ 21-903. [Ch. 21, Sec. 900.3] Lien.
Charges for the cost incurred by the City for the abatement of a violation
from any property pursuant to this chapter shall be a lien upon the premises
with priority as provided in 65 ILCS 5/11-20-13, as heretofore or hereafter
amended. At any time after a bill has been sent to the owner for abatement
of the violation a lien may be filed with the Recorder of Deeds in the manner
provided by Paragraph 1 of 65 ILCS 5/11-20-13. The failure of the City to
record such lien claimed or to mail notice or the failure of the owner to
receive notice of such lien shall not affect the right to foreclose on the lien
for such charges as provided in § 21-901 of this chapter. For purpose of this
section, the City shall be deemed to incur the cost of the abatement:
A. Abatement of the violation; or
B. The issuance of a citation; or
C. The filing of an ordinance violation complaint; or
D. Subsections A, B and C, or any combination thereof. [Ord. No.
1995-63]
A. (If the abatement is done by a private contractor,) at the time the City
pays for such abatement; or
B. (If abatement is done by City personnel,) at the time the Director of
Public Works transmits to the Finance Department a calculation of the
cost of the abatement. [Ord. No. 2012-58]
§ 21-901 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-904
1:613
§ 21-904. [Ch. 21, Sec. 900.4] Foreclosure of release of lien. [Ord.
No. 1995-63]
Property subject to a lien for an unpaid abatement shall be sold for
nonpayment of the same and the proceeds of such sale shall be applied to
pay the charges after deducting costs as provided in 65 ILCS 5/11-20-13,
as heretofore and hereafter amended. Such foreclosure shall be in equity
in the name of the City. The Legal Department is hereby authorized and
directed to institute such proceedings in the name of the City in any court
having jurisdiction over such matter against any property for which such
bill has remained unpaid after it has been rendered, and to release said lien
upon payment of the costs incurred by the City.
§ 21-905. [Ch. 21, Sec. 900.5] Issuance of citation. [Ord. No.
1995-63]
Upon observing a violation of any provision of this chapter, the Code Official
shall issue a citation according to the procedure set forth in Bloomington
City Code, Chapter 28, [Section 200].
§ 21-904 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 21-905
1:614
Chapter 22
HEALTH AND SANITATION
§ 21-905 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-905
1:615

ARTICLE I
Health Department
§ 22-101. [Ch. 22, Sec. 1] Definitions.
BOARD OF HEALTH — The Board of Health of the McLean County Health
Department.
BOARD OF SURVEY — A board composed of the Sanitary Officer of the
Health Department, the Fire Inspector, Building Inspector, and Plumbing
Inspector of the City.
HEALTH DEPARTMENT — The McLean County Health Department.
HEALTH OFFICE — Any duly authorized representative of the McLean
County Board of Health.
§ 22-102. [Ch. 22, Sec. 2] Jurisdiction.
The Health Department shall have general supervision over the health of
the inhabitants residing within the limits of said City, together with those
who reside or occupy premises owned by said City, lying without said City
limits, and also over those residing within a point 1/2 mile beyond the
limits of said City of Bloomington. It shall take such steps and employ
such measures as are necessary to secure and maintain the sanitation
and hygienic salubrity of such territory. It shall have full charge of the
prevention, restriction, and suppression of epidemics of contagion and
infectious diseases within such area.
§ 22-103. [Ch. 22, Sec. 3] Same.
All provisions and rules and regulations of the Code of the City of
Bloomington relating to public health and sanitation shall apply to and be in
force over the territory embraced in the preceding Section.
§ 22-104. [Ch. 22, Sec. 4] Powers and duties.
The Health Department shall have power and it shall be its duty to enforce
all provisions of this Code within the territory embraced in § 22-102 of
this Code and to make all necessary health and sanitary investigations and
inspections within such area, to abate all public health nuisances of every
description on public and private property to prevent the introduction into
the City of contagious or infectious diseases and to remove or otherwise
dispose of any person attached by any such disease and to adopt in
reference to such person any regulations, restrictions, or measures deemed
advisable. The Board of Health shall have the power and authority granted
to and vested in the Health Department by the ordinances of the City and
by the laws of the State. The Health Department may make such rules and
regulations not in conflict with the laws of the State or the Code of the City
as it or they deem necessary for making or keeping the City sanitary, for the
proper inspection of all food products kept or offered for sale within the City
and for the prevention and suppression of contagious or infectious diseases.
§ 22-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-104
1:617
When an emergency is found and declared to exist, rules and regulations
appertaining thereto shall be effective upon their adoption by the Health
Department and shall continue during such emergency, although not made
an ordinance of the City. The rules and regulations adopted in conformity
with this section shall be enforced in the same manner as the Code of the
City. Each day any such violation continues shall be deemed a separate
offense.
§ 22-105. [Ch. 22, Sec. 5] Right of entry.
Any member or employee of the Board of Health or Health Department, in
order to prohibit any offensive or unwholesome business or establishment
within the City or within one mile of the limits of the corporation, may enter
at any and all times any store, stable, house, or other building and cause
the floors thereof to be raised, if the Board may deem it necessary in order
to make a thorough examination of cellars, vaults, sinks, or drains, and
cause all dead animals, carrion, filth, or other nauseous, and unwholesome
substance to be removed, buried, or otherwise disposed of as the Board may
direct. Any member or employee of the Board may compel the owner of any
grocery, cellar, tannery, privy, sewer, or other unwholesome, or nauseous
house or place to cleanse, abate, or remove the same and regulate the
location thereof, if the Board may deem it necessary.
§ 22-106. [Ch. 22, Sec. 6] Police powers.
Members of the Board of Health or of the Health Department shall have full
police powers and shall have the right to arrest or cause to be arrested any
person who violates any of the provisions of this Code which it is the duty of
the Board to enforce.
§ 22-104 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 22-106
1:618
ARTICLE II
Building And Places Of Employment
§ 22-201. [Ch. 22, Sec. 7] Same - authority as to public buildings
generally.
The Health Department shall have and exercise general supervision of
the sanitary conditions of all premises, hotels, lodging houses, theaters,
public halls, or other places where public gatherings of any kind are held;
restaurants, bakeries, livery stables, dairies, milk depots, meat markets,
ice cream factories or any other places in the City and territory under the
health jurisdiction of the City and shall advise such improvements in the
sanitary conditions as in its judgment are necessary.
§ 22-202. [Ch. 22, Sec. 8] May enter house - penalty.
The said Board of Health or any member thereof is hereby authorized and
empowered at any and all times to enter all houses and other places in
said City and within 1/2 mile of the boundaries thereof and in the Lake
Bloomington area in the discharge of any duty empowered upon the Board
by law or the Code of said City, whenever, in its judgment, the public
interest requires it so to do; and any person who shall interrupt, interfere
with, or prevent the Board from complying with this section shall forfeit and
pay not less than $5 nor more than $50 for every offense.
§ 22-203. [Ch. 22, Sec. 9] Duty of owner, manager, etc. of
lodginghouse or boardinghouse.
Every owner, lessee, tenant, or manager of any tenement house,
lodginghouse, or boardinghouse shall cause every part thereof and its
appurtenances to be put and shall thereafter cause the same to be kept in
a clean and wholesome condition and shall speedily cause every apartment
thereof in which any person may sleep or dwell to be adequately lighted and
ventilated.
§ 22-204. [Ch. 22, Sec. 10] Sleeping in unhealthy places.
No person having the right and power to prevent the same shall knowingly
cause or permit any person to sleep or remain in any place dangerous or
prejudicial to health by reason of a want of ventilation or drainage or by
reason of the presence of any poisonous, noxious, or offensive substance, or
otherwise.
§ 22-205. [Ch. 22, Sec. 11] Renters to disclose names of owners or
premises.
Every agent or other person having charge, control, or management, or who
collects or receives the rents on any lands, premises or other property in
the City shall disclose the names of the owners of such land, premises, or
property, or the names of the persons for whom such agent or other person
§ 22-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-205
1:619
is acting, upon application being made therefor by any inspector, agent, or
officer of the Department of Health.
§ 22-206. [Ch. 22, Sec. 12] Same - sewage disposal; separate water
closets for male and female employees.
Manufacturing plants where workmen are employed for wages shall be
kept in a cleanly condition, free from the effluvia of a sewer, drain, privy,
stable, or other nuisance; also, free as far as practicable from all gases,
vapors, dust, or other impurities generated by manufacturing processes
or otherwise, which are injurious to the health of the employees of any
such manufacturing plant. Sufficient and separate water closets shall be
provided for male and female employees and such water closet
compartments shall be properly ventilated.
§ 22-207. [Ch. 22, Sec. 14] Same - inspections.
The Health Department shall visit or cause to be visited by an officer all
places of employment or service referred to in § 22-206 of this chapter
within the City as often as he shall deem necessary to see that the provisions
of this article are complied with, and if he finds such premises in an
unsanitary condition, it shall require such alterations or arrangements to be
made as may be necessary for the health of the employees, pursuant to the
terms of this article and such laws and provisions of the Code of the City as
may be in force concerning health and sanitary measures.
§ 22-208. [Ch. 22, Sec. 15] Cleaning, fumigation, and ventilation of
theaters.
It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee, or manager of every motion-picture
theater in the City to keep said premises reasonably clean and free from
vermin. Every motion-picture theater shall be efficiently ventilated, either
by natural or mechanical means.
§ 22-205 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 22-208
1:620
ARTICLE III
Communicable Diseases
§ 22-301. [Ch. 22, Sec. 16] Adoption of rules and regulations for the
control of communicable diseases.
The rules and regulations relating to the control of communicable diseases
adopted, prescribed, promulgated, and published by the Department of
Public Health August 1, 1952, as amended, through July 1, 1959, by
authority of the State of Illinois, and the whole thereof, of which at least
three copies have been and now are filed in the office of the City Clerk,
and of which not less than three copies have been and now are filed in
the Health Department, and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated
in this article as fully as if set out at length herein and shall, unless
otherwise provided in this Code, be controlling within the limits of the City
of Bloomington and within a point 1/2 mile beyond the limits of said City.
§ 22-302. [Ch. 22, Sec. 17] Duties of Health Department generally
in connection with communicable diseases.
It shall be the duty of the Health Department to enforce all state laws
and all rules and regulations of the State Department of Public Health
pertaining to the control of communicable diseases and in particular the
"Rules and Regulations for the Control of Communicable Diseases," revised
and enforced throughout the State August 1, 1952, issued by the State
Department of Public Health, being Circular No. N. 200, as amended
through July 1, 1959, and to enforce the provisions of this Code and all
rules, regulations, and orders of the Health Department pertaining to the
control of communicable diseases.
§ 22-303. [Ch. 22, Sec. 18] Destruction and removal of placards.
No person or persons shall deface, alter, mutilate, destroy, or tear down
any communicable disease placard without the permission of the Health
Department, such person or persons so doing shall be liable for each offense
to pay a fine of not less than $5 nor more than $50. The occupant of any
house upon which such placard shall be placed or posted, as aforesaid,
shall be responsible for the removal of the same, and if the same shall be
removed without the permission of the Health Department, such occupant
shall be subject to a like line of not less than $5 nor more than $50, unless
he shall at once notify the said Department of such removal.
§ 22-304. [Ch. 22, Sec. 19] Penalty.
All rules and regulations for the control of communicable diseases of the
Department of Public Health of the State of Illinois shall be obeyed by all
persons within a territory described in § 22-301 of this article, and whoever
shall refuse or neglect to obey any such rule or regulation shall be subject
to a fine of not less than $10 nor more than $200 for each offense.
§ 22-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-304
1:621

ARTICLE IV
Nuisances And Abatement
§ 22-401. [Ch. 22, Sec. 21] Policy.
It is hereby declared to be the policy and intention of the City of
Bloomington by enactment of this Article IV:
§ 22-402. [Ch. 22, Sec. 22] Definitions and interpretation.
A. To define, prevent and provide for the abatement of nuisances as herein
defined; and
B. To establish responsibility for creation and maintenance of nuisances
and establish penalties therefor; and
C. To make provision for dealing with nuisances as swiftly and as flexibly
as is possible consistent with the requirements of due process. [Ord.
No. 1976-80]
A. Interpretation. The provisions of this article are intended to be
severable. The invalidity of any one provision shall not affect the
validity of other provisions hereof. [Ord. No. 1976-80]
B. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
CITY — The City of Bloomington, including all departments and
members thereof;
INSPECTING AUTHORITY —
NUISANCE —
(1) The McLean County Health Department;
(2) Peace Officer of the City of Bloomington;
Any employee or agent of the City of Bloomington authorized by
law or by ordinance to make inspections.
(3)
(1) Any condition or action declared to be a nuisance by law;
Any condition or action declared to be a nuisance by any provision
of Bloomington Code other than this article;
(2)
(3) Any condition or action which is a nuisance at common law;
Any building determined under any law or ordinance to be unfit for
human habitation, whether by unsanitary condition or otherwise;
(4)
(5) Any mosquito harborage;
Any condition described in Bloomington City Code Chapter 37,
§ 37-108A;
(6)
§ 22-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-402
1:623
§ 22-403. [Ch. 22, Sec. 23] Creation or perpetuation of nuisances
unlawful.
§ 22-404. [Ch. 22, Sec. 24] Remedies.
Whenever any nuisance is created, maintained or perpetuated in violation
of this article, the City may take one or more of the following steps:
§ 22-405. [Ch. 22, Sec. 25] Procedure.
The procedure for dealing with nuisances shall apply in the absence of other
procedures dictated by law or by ordinance.
An accumulation of bird droppings on a public sidewalk. [Ord. No.
1986-23]
(7)
A. It shall be unlawful for any person:
(1) To perform any act or create or cause to exist any condition or
situation defined as a nuisance in this article; or
(2) Who has caused or created a nuisance to refuse or fail to abate said
nuisance upon notice to do so from the City of inspecting authority;
or
(3) Who owns property which constitutes a nuisance or upon which a
nuisance exists, to refuse or fail to abate said nuisance upon notice
to do so from the City or inspecting authority. [Ord. No. 1976-80]
B. A separate violation of this section shall be deemed committed each day
the violation exists or continues. [Ord. No. 1976-80]
A. Prosecute any person violating this article to obtain a conviction and
assessment of a penalty therefor;
B. Where not otherwise authorized by statute or ordinance, initiate a
proceeding in court to obtain a court order authorizing the City of
Bloomington to abate such nuisance and recover the cost of abatement
by placing a lien on the property upon which the nuisance exists and
foreclosing thereon, in the manner herein provided;
C. Initiate a proceeding in court to obtain a court order directing the
defendant or defendants to abate the nuisance under such conditions
and circumstances as the court may direct;
D. Follow any other procedure authorized by law or by ordinance for the
abatement of the nuisance;
E. In any case where the nature of the nuisance is such that it may cause
injury to the person or property of another prior to the time it may be
abated, the City may summarily abate the nuisance. [Ord. No.
1976-80]
§ 22-402 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 22-405
1:624
A. Notice. Upon learning of the existence of a nuisance, the City or the
inspecting authority shall notify by certified mail the creator of the
nuisance, if known, or the owner of the property of the existence of the
nuisance. The notice shall contain a brief description of the character of
the nuisance, the provisions of law or ordinance which it violates and
the date by which such nuisance is to be abated, which date shall be 10
days from the date of such notice. Where the character of the nuisance
warrants summary abatement, the City or inspecting authority shall,
where practical, notify the creator of the nuisance or the owner of the
property which constitutes the nuisance or on which the nuisance
exists, of its existence and direct such person to abate such nuisance
within a reasonable time. Such notice may be oral and may be given by
any means reasonable under the circumstances. Nothing in this section
shall prohibit the City or inspecting authority from summarily abating a
nuisance without notice where notice is impractical due to:
(1) Difficulty or delay required in ascertaining the identity of or
contacting the person to be notified;
(2) Probable inability of the person to be notified to abate the nuisance
in time;
(3) Delay occasioned by attempts to contact the person to be notified
would interfere with the ability of the City or inspecting authority
to abate the nuisance in time. [Ord. No. 1976-80]
B. Abatement; complaint; hearing.
(1) Upon failure of the person to be notified as provided above to abate
the nuisance, the City shall abate the nuisance where authorized by
law or by ordinance to do so, or file a complaint with the Circuit
Court as provided in § 22-404A, B and C of this chapter or as
otherwise provided by law or by ordinance;
(2) It shall not be a defense to prosecution for violation of this article
that the nuisance has been abated by the City;
(3) If the court determines that a nuisance exists and has not been
abated, upon application by the City it shall order the Defendant to
abate such nuisance, or authorize the City to abate it and recover
the cost therefor as provided by law or by ordinance. [Ord. No.
1976-80]
C. Lien. Charges for the cost incurred by the City of Bloomington for
abatement of nuisances pursuant to this article shall be a lien upon the
property on which the nuisance existed. At any time after a bill has been
sent to the owner of the property for nuisance abatement, a lien may be
filed with the Recorder of Deeds within 60 days of the time the cost is
incurred. The failure of the City to record such lien or to mail notice
thereof, or the failure of the owner to receive such notice shall not
affect the right of the City to foreclose thereon. For purposes of this
§ 22-405 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-405
1:625
§ 22-406. [Ch. 22, Sec. 26] Penalty. [Ord. No. 1976-80]
Upon conviction of a violation of § 22-403 of this chapter, a person shall
be fined for the first offense not less than $25 nor more than $200; for
subsequent offenses, not less than $100.
section, the City shall be deemed to incur the cost of nuisance
abatement:
(1) (If abatement is done by a private contractor at the direction of the
City) at the time the City pays for such abatement; or
(2) (If abatement is done by the City) at the time the head of the
department accomplishing such abatement transmits to the
Finance Department a calculation of the cost of abatement. [Ord.
No. 1976-80]
D. Foreclosure of lien. Property subject to a lien for unpaid nuisance
abatement charges shall be sold for nonpayment of same and the
proceeds of such sale shall be applied to pay the charges after
deducting costs. Such foreclosure shall be in equity in the name of the
City. The Legal Department is hereby authorized and directed to
institute such proceedings within two years of the time the costs are
incurred in the name of the City in any court having jurisdiction over
such matter against any property for which such bill has remained
unpaid after it has been rendered; and to release said lien upon
payment of the costs incurred by the City.
§ 22-405 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 22-406
1:626
ARTICLE V
In General
§ 22-501. [Ch. 22, Sec. 34] Spitting.
Spitting is hereby prohibited either on the sidewalk or crosswalk of any
street or upon the floor of any hall, office, hotel, apartment house, tenement
or lodginghouse, restaurant, store, any public conveyance or upon the floor,
platform, steps or stairs of any public building, church, theater, railway
station or factory.
§ 22-502. [Ch. 22, Sec. 35] Sample medicine.
No person shall be permitted to give away, deposit or otherwise distribute
any sample medicine or material of an alleged medicinal character
purporting to be a curative agency, by any means of depositing or leaving
same in any hallway, private area, yard, or upon any porch or doorstep or in
any place in any street, alley or public or private ground within the City.
§ 22-503. [Ch. 22, Sec. 36] Offensive businesses.
Whoever shall, within the limits of the City, establish or maintain any tallow
chandlery, tannery, bone or soap factory or shall steam, boil or render any
tainted lard, tallow, offal, or other unwholesome animal substance shall be
deemed guilty of a nuisance; or whoever shall without the City limits, and
within one mile thereof, establish or maintain any such chandlery, factory,
tannery or rendery, without first obtaining the consent of the City Council;
or whoever, having obtained such permission and consent, shall so conduct
or carry on any such business as to taint the air and render it offensive or
unwholesome or so as to affect the health or comfort of persons residing
in the neighborhood thereof shall be deemed guilty of a public health
nuisance.
§ 22-504. [Ch. 22, Sec. 37] Offensive, nauseous or dangerous
things.
Anything which is made, permitted, used, kept, maintained, or operated
or any building or any animal that is kept in the City or outside the City
but within 1/2 mile of its limits in a manner which is offensive, nauseous,
dangerous to life, limb or property or detrimental to the health of the
persons residing in that area shall be a public health nuisance.
§ 22-505. [Ch. 22, Sec. 38] Discharge of offensive matter.
Whoever shall, within the City, throw or place, or permit to be discharged,
or to flow from or out of any house or premises any filthy, foul or offensive
matter or liquor of any kind into any street, alley or public place or upon any
adjacent lot or ground or shall allow or permit the same to be done by any
person connected with the premises, under this control, shall be deemed
guilty of a public health nuisance.
§ 22-501 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-506
1:627
§ 22-506. [Ch. 22, Sec. 39] Building, etc. - causing nuisance,
prohibited.
No building, vehicle, structure, receptacle, or thing used or to be used for
any purpose whatever shall be made, used, kept, maintained, or operated
in the City if the use, keeping, maintaining or operating of such building,
vehicle, structure, receptacle, or thing shall be the occasion of any public
nuisance or shall be dangerous or detrimental to health.
§ 22-507. [Ch. 22, Sec. 40] Premises offensive - penalty.
Any store, house, factory, building, or structure of any kind or any grounds
or premises kept, permitted or suffered to remain for 24 hours in such
condition as to be offensive to the neighborhood or dangerous or prejudicial
to the health or safety of the occupants or other persons is hereby declared
a public health nuisance; and the owner, proprietor, lessee, or agent of such
store, house, factory, building, or structure, or grounds, or premises, shall
be subject to a fine of not less than $10 nor more than $100 for each offense
and to a like fine for every 24 hours such nuisance shall continue after the
first conviction.
§ 22-508. [Ch. 22, Sec. 41] Business causing nuisance - prohibited.
No substance, matter or thing of any kind whatever which is dangerous or
detrimental to health, save materials used in connection with extermination
work or plant disease control, shall be permitted to exist in connection
with any permitted business or be used therein or to exist in connection
therewith or to be used in any work or labor carried on or to be carried on
or prosecuted in said City and no public health nuisance shall be permitted
to exist in connection with any such business or in connection with any such
work or labor.
§ 22-509. [Ch. 22, Sec. 42] Enforcing of this article - duty of officer.
It shall be the duty of the Health Department and the Chief of Police to
cause this article to be enforced and to make complaint against and cause
to be prosecuted all persons violating the provisions of this article.
§ 22-510. [Ch. 22, Sec. 43] Abatement of nuisances upon
conviction.
When judgment shall be rendered against any person for erecting, keeping,
or maintaining any public health nuisance, it shall be the duty of the court
before whom such conviction is had to order the defendant in such suit
forthwith to abate and remove such nuisance, and if the same is not done
by such defendant within 24 hours that the same be abated and removed by
the Chief of Police. Said order shall be entered upon the docket of the court
and be made a part of the judgment in the case.
§ 22-506 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 22-511
1:628
§ 22-511. [Ch. 22, Sec. 44] Maintaining nuisance after conviction.
Any person having been found guilty of creating, keeping, or maintaining
any public health nuisance who shall neglect or fail to abate and remove
such nuisance within 24 hours next after his conviction shall for each 24
hours thereafter while such nuisance is continued be subject to a like
penalty as what originally incurred for keeping, creating, or maintaining the
same.
§ 22-512. [Ch. 22, Sec. 45] Diseased or sickly animal - not to be
brought in.
No diseased or sickly animal of any kind or nature nor any animal that
has been exposed to any disease that is contagious among animals of its
kind, shall be brought into the City. Provided, that any such animals may
be brought into the City for the purpose of being treated or destroyed by a
licensed veterinarian.
§ 22-513. [Ch. 22, Sec. 46] Stables, etc. - cleanliness of - infected
animal.
Every owner or other person in control of a stable or place where any
cows, horses, or other animals may be to keep it at all times in a clean
and wholesome condition and shall not allow any animal to be therein while
infected with any disease that is contagious or pestilential among such
animals.
§ 22-514. [Ch. 22, Sec. 47] Animal or thing occasioning nuisance -
exposure prohibited.
No person shall take, carry, or expose, or place or induce any other person
so to do in or upon any street or public place any substance, animal, or thing
which shall imperil the safety or health of any person who is or may properly
be in such street or place.
§ 22-515. [Ch. 22, Sec. 48] Animal or thing occasioning nuisance -
keeping prohibited.
No person shall bring into said City or keep therein, for sale or otherwise,
either for food or for any other purpose or purposes whatever, any animal,
dead or alive, matter, substance or thing which shall be or which shall
occasion a nuisance in said City or which may be dangerous or detrimental
to health.
§ 22-516. [Ch. 22, Sec. 49] Slaughter or exposure on streets
prohibited.
No cattle, sheep hogs, or other animals shall be slaughtered or the meat or
any part thereof dressed or hung within said City, wholly or partly within
any street, avenue, sidewalk, alley, or public place.
§ 22-511 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-517
1:629
§ 22-517. [Ch. 22, Sec. 50] Carrying meat through streets.
No slaughtered meat shall be carried or conveyed upon or along any of
the streets, alleys, or public places of the City unless the same is protected
in such manner as to conceal it from public view. No blood or dirty water
from any such meat or place of killing or the appurtenances thereof shall be
allowed to run, fall, or be in any street, alley, or public place.
§ 22-518. [Ch. 22, Sec. 51] Offal or butcher's refuse - conveyance of.
No offal or butcher's refuse shall be conveyed through any street, alley, or
other public place at any time unless the same be in tight boxes, barrels, or
vessels from which no odor shall escape.
§ 22-519. [Ch. 22, Sec. 52] Dead animals - place and manner of
burial - penalty.
No dead animals shall be buried within the corporate limits of the City nor
be buried within 1/2 mile of said corporate limits.
§ 22-520. [Ch. 22, Sec. 54] Deposit of offensive matters - prohibited
- manure.
No pile or deposit of offal, garbage, or accumulation of an offensive or
nauseous substance shall be made within the limits of said City; nor shall
any person contribute to the making of any such accumulations; nor shall
any straw, hay, or other substance which has been used as bedding for
animals be placed or dried upon any street, alley, or sidewalk or kept
deposited or accumulated in such manner as to become offensive; nor shall
any person or corporation unload, discharge or put upon or along the
line of any railroad, street, highway, or public place within said City any
manure, offal, garbage, or other offensive, or nauseous substance; nor shall
railroad cars or flats with or having in or upon them any such substance or
substances be allowed to remain or stand on any railroad track or siding
within the limits of said City.
§ 22-521. [Ch. 22, Sec. 55] Manure - receptacles - removal - penalty.
It shall be the duty of the occupant or owner of or agent for any premises
where stable manure is placed, stored, or allowed to remain to provide
for the same a tight box or receptacle which shall be so constructed and
covered as to prevent the entrance of flies. Between the first day of May
and the last day of October of each year, the said occupant, owner, or agent,
at his own expense, shall cause the contents of said box or receptacle to be
removed at least once in each two weeks and oftener if made necessary by
reason of the said receptacle being filled. Any person violating any provision
of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less
than $5 nor more than $50 for each offense.
§ 22-517 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 22-522
1:630
§ 22-522. [Ch. 22, Sec. 56] Garbage, etc. - not to fall upon street.
No garbage swill, offal, manure, or other offensive substance nor any ashes
or dirt shall be allowed to run or fall out of any building, vehicle, or
structure into or upon any street or public place.
§ 22-523. [Ch. 22, Sec. 57] Depositing garbage - penalty.
It shall not be lawful for any person to throw or deposit or cause to
be thrown or deposited at any place in said City any vegetables, meats,
slops, animal matter, suds, garbage, filth, stable drippings, or offal of any
kind which will produce an offensive smell or whereby the health of any
portion of the community may be affected or endangered; and every person
violating the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of
perpetrating a nuisance and shall forfeit and pay not less than $1 nor more
than $50 for each offense.
§ 22-524. [Ch. 22, Sec. 58] Offensive liquids - depositing on streets,
etc., prohibited - penalty.
It shall not be lawful for any person in said City to throw or deposit or cause
to be thrown or deposited any slops, suds, swill, or other liquid substance
upon the ground nor upon any street, alley, or public place. Any person
violating this section shall be deemed guilty of perpetrating a nuisance and
shall be fined not less than $3 nor more than $50 for each offense.
§ 22-525. [Ch. 22, Sec. 59] Offensive matter - disinfected before
removal.
All putrid or offensive matter and all night soil and the contents of sinks,
privies, vaults, and cesspools, and all noxious substances in said City shall
before their removal or exposure be disinfected and rendered inoffensive by
the person who removes or is about to remove the same.
§ 22-526. [Ch. 22, Sec. 60] Matter offensive - not to be opened, etc.
- when - permit.
No ground or material filled with offensive substance or matter or that will
emit or allow to arise through or from the same any offensive smell or
deleterious exhalation shall be opened, turned up, or the surface thereof
removed between the first day of May and the first day of October any year,
except according to a permit first obtained from the Health Department.
§ 22-527. [Ch. 22, Sec. 61] Intramural burial - prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to bury the body of a human being within
the corporate limits of said City or to deposit any such body in any vault
within the limits of the City except within an established cemetery in said
City.
§ 22-522 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-528
1:631
§ 22-528. [Ch. 22, Sec. 62] Rendering - deodorizing.
All persons engaged in the business of boiling or rendering of fat, lard,
or other animal matter shall cause the scraps or residium to be so dried
or otherwise prepared immediately after the removal therefrom from the
receptacle in which the rendering process may be conducted as to
effectually deprive such material of all offensive odors and to preserve the
same entirely inoffensive.
§ 22-529. [Ch. 22, Sec. 63] Rendering - how conducted.
No fat, tallow, or fart shall be rendered except when fresh from the
slaughtered animal and in a condition free from sourness and taint and
all other cause of offense. All melting and rendering shall be done in
steam tight vessels, the gases and odors therefrom to be destroyed by
combustion or other means equally effective and according to the best
and most approved means and processes; and everything preceding and
following and in connection with such melting and rendering, and the
premises where the same shall be conducted shall be free from all offensive
odors and other cause of detriment to the public health and comfort.
§ 22-530. [Ch. 22, Sec. 64] Manufactory generating offensive gases,
etc.
No person, firm, or corporation shall erect, start, or establish in said City
without the consent of the City Manager any manufactory or place of
business for boiling any varnish or oil or for making any lampblack,
turpentine, or tar or for conducting any other business that will or does
generate any unwholesome, offensive, or deleterious gas, smoke, deposit,
or exhalation, or any business that is or would be dangerous to life or
detrimental to health. Whenever any manufactory or place of business
already established in said City does hereafter generate any unwholesome,
offensive, or deleterious gas, smoke, deposit, or anything that is detrimental
to health or dangerous to life, the owners or operators thereof shall at once
take all necessary care and precaution to abate the same and shall comply
with all reasonable orders and regulations of the Health Department in
reference thereto. Any violation of this section shall subject the offender to
a fine of not less than $10 and not more than $100.
§ 22-531. [Ch. 22, Sec. 65] Manufactories, etc. - removal of ashes -
smoke, cinders, etc., not to escape.
The owners, lessees, tenants, and managers of every blacksmith shop or
other shop, forge, coal yard, foundry, manufactory, and premises where
any similar business is done shall cause all ashes, cinders, rubbish, dirt,
and refuse to be removed to some proper place so that the same shall
not accumulate at any of the above-mentioned premises or in the
appurtenances thereof nor the same become filthy or offensive; nor shall
any smoke, cinders, dust, gas, or offensive odor be allowed to escape from
§ 22-528 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 22-531
1:632
any such building, place, or premises to the detriment or annoyance of any
person not being therein or thereupon engaged.
§ 22-532. [Ch. 22, Sec. 66] Polluting water supply - penalty.
Any person who shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the open
ditch of the Bloomington-Normal Sanitary District, within the limits of
said City, any dead animal or offensive substances which will produce an
offensive or nauseous smell or endanger the health of any portion of the
citizens shall be deemed guilty of creating a nuisance; and every person so
offending shall forfeit and pay not less than $1 nor more than $50 for each
offense. It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to cause the same to be
removed immediately, if practicable, and charge the expense thereof to the
offender or offenders and sue for and collect the same by action of debt in
the name of the City of Bloomington.
§ 22-533. [Ch. 22, Sec. 67] Cuspidors not to be emptied on streets,
etc.
It shall be unlawful for any person to empty the contents of any cuspidor,
or other like receptacle, upon any of the street, alleys, or public ways of the
City.
§ 22-534. [Ch. 22, Sec. 68] Privy - offensive - penalty.
Whenever any privy in said City shall be kept in such condition that the
smell arising therefrom shall become offensive to any portion of the citizens,
the same shall be deemed and declared a nuisance, and the owner,
occupant, or agent of the lot or premises on which any such privy is located
shall be fined in any sum not exceeding $10 nor less than $5 and the further
sum of $10 for every day he shall suffer said nuisance to continue after the
first conviction.
§ 22-531 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-534
1:633

ARTICLE VI
Construction And Operation Of Swimming Pools
§ 22-601. [Ch. 22, Sec. 69] Definitions.
PRIVATE POOL — Any swimming pool or wading pool at a private residence
intended only for the use of the individual owner, his family, and friends.
This includes portable or temporary type pools of plastic, rubberized cloth
or similar materials installed either above or below ground elevation.
PUBLIC POOL — All swimming pools and wading pools other than private
residence installations. This includes municipal, park district, association,
club, camp, and school pools, as well as those at motels and hotels.
SWIMMING POOL or WADING POOL — An artificial pool of water and
auxiliary structures including dressing and locker rooms, toilets, showers,
and other areas and enclosures that are intended for the use of persons
using the pool.
§ 22-602. [Ch. 22, Sec. 70] Permit to construct.
No person or organization shall proceed to construct a swimming pool or
make major alterations at an existing pool without first having obtained a
permit therefor, issued and signed by the City Manager or his authorized
representative upon approval of the application. No permit is required for
erection of a portable pool if the capacity of such pool is 1,000 gallons or
less. Application for a permit shall be in writing in the form prescribed
by the City Manager. Such application shall contain such information and
drawings, plans, and specifications as shall be required by the City Manager
for a proper understanding of the proposed work. Each application for
permit to construct a public pool shall be accompanied by an approval
permit for the construction issued by the State Department of Public Health
in accordance with provisions of the State Swimming Pool Law.
§ 22-603. [Ch. 22, Sec. 71] Investigation.
Upon the receipt of an application for a permit to construct a swimming pool
hereunder, the application shall be referred by the City Manager to such of
the building, electrical, plumbing, or health officers of the City as it may be
deemed necessary, for investigation to be made of the proposed swimming
pool and if satisfied that the standards prescribed by the building, electrical,
plumbing, health officer, and Zoning Code of the City, if they are applicable,
are met, the City Manager shall issue a permit. All such officials to whom
an application is referred shall cooperate with and comply with requests
of the City Manager relative to such referrals. If the proposed swimming
pool complies with the requirements of this article, the laws of the State of
Illinois and with the requirements of a Code of the City affecting the public
health and safety which may be applicable, the officials of the City to whom
such application has been referred shall so certify on the application and
return the application to the City Manager.
§ 22-601 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-604
1:635
§ 22-604. [Ch. 22, Sec 72] Reopening, inspections.
Public pools closed for a period of one year or longer shall obtain approval
for opening from the State Department of Public Health. A copy of such
approval letter shall accompany the application to the City Manager for a
permit to operate. Inspections of any pool shall be made as desired by the
City Manager.
§ 22-605. [Ch. 22, Sec. 73] Water supply.
§ 22-606. [Ch. 22, Sec. 74] Drainage from pool.
Drain outlet fittings from a pool shall not be directly connected to a sewer
line. Drainage shall be by gravity or by pumping or siphoning out into the
top of a basin or sump located ahead of the sewer.
§ 22-607. [Ch. 22, Sec. 75] Recirculation systems.
Pools with a capacity of 5,000 gallons or more shall be equipped with a
water recirculation and filtration system. The equipment shall be capable of
effecting one turnover of the pool volume in 12 hours or less at a rate of
filtration not exceeding three gallons per square foot per minute.
§ 22-608. [Ch. 22, Sec. 76] Inlets and outlets.
Pools of permanent construction shall be provided with filtered water inlet
supply fittings permanently installed on about eight feet o.c. in the shallow
end of the pool six inches to 18 inches below normal water level. The outlet
fitting which connects to the recirculation system shall be permanently
A. Requirements for public pools. Public pools, their equipment and
operation shall comply with the State Department of Public Health
Minimum Sanitary Requirements for Swimming Pools and Bathing
Places.
B. Requirements for private pools. The water supply for the pool shall
meet the bacteriological standards of the State Department of Public
Health for a safe drinking water.
C. The water supply is adequate and can be delivered at a rate to enable
the pool to be operated satisfactorily.
D. The water supply when in the pool meets the following clarity criteria: a
black disc 12 inches in diameter on the bottom of the pool at the
deepest point is clearly visible from the sidewalks of the pool at all
distances up to 10 yards, measured from a line drawn across the pool
through the object.
E. The fresh water supply point of discharge to the pool whether through a
hose or pipe shall be firmly fixed at a point at least six inches above the
overflow level of the pool and so locates so as not to be a hazard to the
pool users.
§ 22-604 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 22-608
1:636
installed at the lowest point in the pool. It shall be ample in size with a free
grating area sufficient to minimize chances of clogging or occurrences of
suctions dangerous to the safety of bathers. The grating openings shall be
such that bathers' fingers or toes will not be caught or injured.
§ 22-609. [Ch. 22, Sec. 77] Water disinfection.
Chlorine disinfectant in the form of sodium or calcium hypochlorite or
chlorine gas or bromine shall be applied daily as frequently as needed to
maintain a definite residual throughout the pool while the pool is in use. A
test kit with permanent color standards shall be provided at all pools and be
used at frequent intervals to check on the adequacy of chlorine treatment.
§ 22-610. [Ch. 22, Sec. 78] Pool area.
A fence or wall shall be installed and maintained to surround completely a
pool except in the case of a portable, aboveground installation. The fence or
wall shall be an effective barrier to small children and be at least 42 inches
high. Gates shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching devices
placed at the top of the gate.
§ 22-611. [Ch. 22, Sec. 79] Walks.
A walk area not less than four feet wide shall be provided to extend entirely
around a pool, except in the case of a portable, aboveground installation.
The walk area shall be of impervious materials, shall be easily cleaned and
have a definite pitch away from the pool edge. A foot-rinse unit should
be available for cleansing of feet before entrance onto the pool walks. At
portable, aboveground pools, an area of impervious material four feet wide
by about a feet long shall be constructed around the point where swimmers
climb into the pool. A foot-rinse unit should be available for cleansing of feet
before entrance into the pool water.
§ 22-612. [Ch. 22, Sec. 80] Steps or ladders.
There shall be two or more means of egress in the form of steps, ladders, or
step holes at each pool.
§ 22-613. [Ch. 22, Sec. 81] Permit fees. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
The permit fee for a private and public pools shall be as set forth in the
Schedule of Fees.
§ 22-614. [Ch. 22, Sec. 82] Inspections and testing.
A. All electrical installations provided for, installed, or used in conjunction
with swimming pools, shall be in conformity with the Electrical Code of
the City.
§ 22-608 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-614
1:637
§ 22-615. [Ch. 22, Sec. 83] Authority to close.
If the City Manager or his authorized representative shall find, after
inspection, that the operation of the pool does not meet the sanitary and
safety requirements of this ordinance, he shall direct that the pool be closed
until the sanitary an safety requirements are met.
§ 22-616. [Ch. 22, Sec. 84] Penalty.
Any person or organization who violates, omits, neglects, or refuses to
comply with the provisions of this ordinance, shall, upon conviction thereof,
be fined not less than $10 nor more than $200 for each offense and every
day such violation is not corrected or made to conform to the provisions
hereof shall be a separate and distinct offense.
B. All plumbing installations, provided for, installed or used in conjunction
with swimming pools shall be in conformity with the Plumbing Code of
the City.
C. Before any water is initially turned into a swimming pool and before any
electrical current shall be turned on into any electric installation
provided for or used in conjunction with a swimming pool, the same
shall be inspected by the Plumbing and Electrical Inspector,
respectively, of the City,
D. The City Manager or his authorized representative shall have the right
and authority to inspect any pool or to check the operation thereof
during reasonable daylight hours.
§ 22-614 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 22-616
1:638
ARTICLE VII
Septic Tanks
DIVISION 1
Regulating Sewage Disposal and the Erection, Construction or
Alteration of any Septic Tank, Privy Vault, Sink Drain or Sewage
Disposal System
§ 22-701. [Ch. 22, Sec. 85] Sewage defined.
Sewage is defined as a solid and liquid body discharge from human beings
and the liquid wastes from bathing facilities, lavatories, kitchen sink, septic
tanks, floor drains, and all laundry wastes.
§ 22-702. [Ch. 22, Sec. 86] Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to construct or
alter any means of sewage or excreta disposal in the City (such as septic
tank, privy, sink drain, or cesspool) without having first obtained a permit
from the McLean County Board of Health; provided, however, that where
connection is to be made to a public sewer, arrangement shall be made with
the municipality owning the sewer rather than the McLean County Board of
Health.
§ 22-703. [Ch. 22, Sec. 87] Application for permit.
Applications for such permits shall be in writing and in such form as shall be
prescribed by the McLean County Board of Health. Every such application
shall be accompanied by a plat showing the location of all wells, septic
tanks, subsurface tile systems, grease traps, cesspools, privy vaults, sewers,
and other drain lines and sewage disposal facilities constructed, or to be
constructed, upon the lot or premises or neighboring premises within a
radius of 100 feet of proposed sewage disposal system.
§ 22-704. [Ch. 22, Sec. 88] Fee. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
Any fee for permits shall be as set forth in the Schedule of Fees.
§ 22-705. [Ch. 22, Sec. 89] Larger disposal system.
If any sewage disposal system located within the limits of this City serves
or is to serve more than 15 persons and it is proposed to discharge the
wastes therefrom into any stream or other waters of the State, a written
permit therefor shall first be obtained from the Illinois Sanitary Water
Board, Springfield, Illinois, according to the provisions of the Sanitary
Water Board Law. Where a permit is not obtained from the Illinois Sanitary
Water Board, such wastes shall be treated or disposed of in accordance with
these regulations and a permit therefor shall be obtained according to the
provisions of this article.
§ 22-701 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-706
1:639
§ 22-706. [Ch. 22, Sec. 90] To connect where sewer and watermains
laid.
§ 22-707. [Ch. 22, Sec. 91] Construction.
The construction, erection, or alteration of septic tanks and sewers and the
disposal of tank effluents shall be governed by the following requirements:
A. In areas where sewer mains are laid in any street, all buildings located
or accessible to such street shall connect with said mains not later than
six months after such mains are ready for connections; all septic tanks,
vaults, cisterns, or cesspools used on such premises shall be
disconnected at the time of the connection with the sewer main.
Disconnected receptacle shall be filled with sand or limestone
screenings.
B. In areas where water mains are laid in any street, all buildings located
on or accessible to said street shall connect with such mains not later
than six months after such water mains are ready for connection; all
wells used on said premises shall be abandoned and shall be filled and
sealed in accordance with the requirements of the State Geological
Survey, Urbana, Illinois.
A. The construction, erection, or alteration of septic tanks shall be in
accordance with the provisions of this article and with the Building and
Zoning Codes of the City.
B. Sewers. Sewers from the house to the septic tank shall be of extra
heavy cast iron pipe with water tight joints when within 50 feet of a well
and shall be a minimum of 10 feet from any well or suction tile;
otherwise, they shall be either vitrified clay having oakum and cement
joints or other material approved by the McLean County Board of
Health. Slope of four-inch (minimum diameter to be used) sewers and of
six-inch sewers shall not be less than 1/4 inch per foot.
C. Septic tanks.
(1) Septic tanks and subsurface disposal systems will not be approved
in locations where the normal ground water table is less than two
feet below the bottom of the proposed seepage trench for
residences or buildings having community water systems. Where
residences or buildings are to be provided with individual dug or
other shallow wells or where such wells are in use in the immediate
vicinity, approval will not be given for septic tanks and subsurface
disposal systems unless there is a minimum of 10 feet between the
bottom of the seepage trench and the normal ground water level.
Approval will not be given for septic tanks and subsurface disposal
systems where the percolation rate is greater than 60 minutes
average for one-inch drop of water. Normal ground water level
shall be considered to be at that depth below the ground surface
where water is encountered during a normal dry period between
§ 22-706 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 22-707
1:640
the dates of June 1 and October 1 in any year. Septic tanks shall be
located no closer than 10 feet from any occupied building, lot line,
or other drain lines; except when a basement is not provided in a
building, a septic tank may be located five feet from the building
provided ground conditions are satisfactory. Septic tanks shall not
be located closer than 50 feet from any drinking water well. They
shall be installed close to the surface of the ground so that the
maximum depth of the seepage trench will not be greater than 18
to 24 (maximum 30) inches. All tanks shall have a minimum liquid
capacity of 500 gallons. If multiple compartment tanks are used, 2/
3 of the total capacity shall be in the inlet compartment but this
compartment shall not be less than 500 gallons. All tanks shall
have a minimum liquid depth of four feet, all tanks shall meet the
following minimum specifications:
(a) Liquid capacity: 500 gallons (67 cubic feet);
(b) Minimum liquid depth: 48 inches;
(c) Minimum distance between outlet and inlet: 54 inches;
(d) Inlet baffle shall extend at least nine inches but not more than
12 inches below liquid level to within two inches below top of
tank;
(e) Outlet baffle shall extend at least 12 inches but not more than
16 inches below liquid level to within two inches below top of
tank;
(f) Baffles shall be placed six to eight inches from the inlet and
outlet. (Sanitary "Tees" meeting specifications in (d) and (e)
above may be used in lieu of baffles);
(g) Air space above water level - minimum of 12 inches;
(h) Inlet and outlet be on opposite ends of the same diameter on
circular tanks and centered at opposite ends of rectangular
tanks;
(i) Access openings for inspection and servicing - all septic tanks
shall have means of access for cleaning and inspection;
(j) Those tanks having a removable cover shall have an eight-inch
inspection opening provided over both the inlet and outlet.
(2) Those tanks not having a removable cover shall have a manhole 20
inches in diameter in addition to the above inspection openings.
(3) Additional tank capacities shall provide according to the following
table:
§ 22-707 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-707
1:641
Number of Bedrooms
Minimum Liquid Capacity of
Tank in Gallons*
3 or less 500
4 750
5 900
6 1100
Notes:
* Increase minimum liquid capacity by 50% when household
garbage grinder discharges into system.
(4) Septic tank capacities for buildings other than residential shall be
determined in accordance with facilities to be used and population
served. Construction of the tank shall be such as to assure its being
watertight to prevent the entrance of rain water, surface drainage
or ground water. The tank shall be constructed of some durable
material not subject to excessive corrosion or decay. If a metal tank
is used, a properly applied protective coating shall be provided on
both the interior and exterior surface. A metal thickness of less
than 14 gauge shall not be used.
D. Disposal of Tank Effluents, Septic tank effluents shall be treated and
disposed of in accordance with one of the types of disposal systems
described below. The type of system to be used shall be determined by
the McLean County Board of Health and shall be based largely upon the
results of one or more soil seepage teats performed by the individual
property owner in accordance with instructions from the McLean
County Board of Health. Additional ground water table determinations
and seepage tests may be made by the McLean County Board of Health.
E. Subsurface tile field.
(1) If the results of the soil seepage and ground water table tests are
satisfactory, a subsurface tile system is recommended for tank
effluents. The area of the effective absorption field needed shall be
determined from the following table:
Average Time Required For
Water to Fall One Inch in
Minutes
Effective Absorption Area
(Area in Bottom of Disposal
Trench) in Square Feet Per
Bedroom
2 or less 50*
3 60*
4 70*
5 80*
10 100*
§ 22-707 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 22-707
1:642
Average Time Required For
Water to Fall One Inch in
Minutes
Effective Absorption Area
(Area in Bottom of Disposal
Trench) in Square Feet Per
Bedroom
15 120*
30 180*
60 240*
Over 60 unsuitable except for special design with seepage pits
* Note: A minimum of 200 square feet of effective absorption area
(100 lineal feet of 24-inch trench) shall be provided per living
unit.
(2) If an automatic washing machine is installed in the residence, the
effective absorption area shall be increased by 35% to take care of
the extra water used.
(3) A distribution box shall be provided between the septic tank and
the subsurface disposal field. Every individual seepage line in the
subsurface tile system shall be connected individually to the
distribution box. The box shall be not less than 18 inches square
and 12 inches deep and shall be provided with a removable cover.
The inlet line from the septic tank shall enter the distribution box
six inches above the bottom and all outlet tiles shall leave the
distribution box four inches above the bottom. The invert of all
outlet tiles shall be at the same level. The construction of the
distribution box shall be such as to assure its being watertight to
prevent the entrance of rain water, surface drainage, or ground
water. The distribution box shall be constructed of some durable
material not subject to excessive corrosion or decay. If a metal
distribution box is used, a properly applied protective coating shall
be provided on both the interior and exterior surfaces. A metal
thickness of less than 14 gauge shall not be used.
(4) The Subsurface Tile Field shall be constructed according to the
following requirements:
(a) Minimum number of lines from distribution box: two.
(b) Maximum length of individual lines: 100 feet.
(c) Minimum width of trench: 18 inches.
(d) Maximum depth of cover of tile lines: 20 inches.
(e) Maximum grade of tile lines: six inches per 100 feet.
(f) Minimum space between trenches: eight feet.
(g) Minimum filter material under tile: six inches.
§ 22-707 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-707
1:643
(h) Minimum size filter material under tile: 1/2 inch.
(i) Minimum filter material over tile: two inches.
(j) Minimum distance from building or property line to tile line:
five feet.
(k) Tile lines shall not be located on uncompacted ground.
(l) Minimum size of tile in trenches: four inches.
(m) Filter material shall be free from dust, sand and clay.
(n) Pipe used between septic tank and distribution box on lines
under paved areas or on lines within five feet of property lines
shall be of watertight construction and minimum strength of
vitrified tile.
(o) In areas such as driveways subject to heavy loads, lines shall
be cast iron pipe with watertight joints.
(p) Tile in effective absorption area shall be laid within 1/4 inch
open joints. All open joints shall be protected on top by strips of
asphalt treated building paper or equal.
(q) Ends of tile lines should be joined together. If this is not
possible, the ends of lines shall be sealed with concrete.
(r) Gravel on top of tile shall be covered with untreated paper or
straw to keep soil from filtering into the gravel bed.
(s) Back filling shall not be started until inspection has been made
by authorized representative of the McLean County Board of
Health.
(t) Tile lines shall not be located closer than 75 feet from any
drinking water well.
F. Open sand filter. If soil seepage tests indicate the soil is unsuitable for
subsurface tile disposal systems, the use of an open sand filter may be
permitted if approved by the McLean County Board of Health after a
study of the individual case and if the design is approved in writing by
that Board. For open sand filter systems involving more than 15
persons, a permit from the State Sanitary Water Board is also
necessary.
G. Seepage pit. (Not recommended) Seepage pits or cesspools are the
least effective and least desirable of all types of tank effluent disposal
and shall not be used except where other methods are shown to be
impractical, and the McLean County Board of Health approves their
use.
§ 22-707 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 22-708
1:644
§ 22-708. [Ch. 22, Sec. 92] Unsanitary conditions.
Every sewage disposal system shall be maintained in proper sanitary
condition and repair by the owner. It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent,
occupant or person in control of any lot or building to discharge untreated
sewage or the effluent from any septic tank directly or indirectly to any
stream, ditch, ground surface or abandoned well or to allow the contents
of any privy vault, septic tank, or seepage pit to emit offensive odors or
become objectionable so as to be dangerous or prejudicial to health and all
such acts and/or omissions are hereby declared nuisances.
§ 22-709. through § 22-710. (Reserved)
§ 22-708 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-709
1:645

DIVISION 2
Inspections, Violations, Penalties and Enactments
§ 22-711. [Ch. 22, Sec. 93] Inspection.
§ 22-712. [Ch. 22, Sec. 94] Revocation or suspension of permit.
§ 22-713. [Ch. 22, Sec. 95] Violations.
Any violation of any provision of this article is a misdemeanor punishable by
a fine of not more than $200 for each offense, as provided by law. Each day
the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
A. Before issuance of any permit, an inspection shall be made by an
authorized representative of the McLean County Board of Health to
determine that all requirements of this article have been complied with.
B. Before any back filling is started, but after complete installation of the
system, an inspection shall be made by the McLean County Board of
Health to determine if full compliance of this regulation has been
fulfilled.
A. Any McLean County Board of Health representative shall have the
authority to enter and inspect for health the sanitation purposes, any
facility for which a permit has been issued.
B. If upon inspection it shall be found that the permit holder has violated
any provision hereof, the McLean County Board of Health shall have the
power to revoke the permit.
§ 22-711 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-713
1:647

ARTICLE VIII
(Reserved)
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-713
1:649

ARTICLE IX
Rat Control
§ 22-901. [Ch. 22, Sec. 133] Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following words shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this section:
BUSINESS BUILDINGS — Any structure, whether public or private, that
is adapted for occupancy for transaction of business for rendering of
professional service, for amusement, for the display, sale or storage of
goods, wares, or merchandise, or for the performance of work or labor,
including hotels, apartment buildings, tenement houses, rooming houses,
office buildings, public buildings, stores, theaters, markets, restaurants,
grain elevators, abattoirs, warehouses, workshops, factories and all
outhouses, sheds, barns, and other structures on premises used for business
purposes.
OCCUPANT — The individual, partnership, or corporation that has the use
of or occupies any business building, or a part or fraction thereof, whether
the actual owner or tenant. In the case of vacant business buildings or any
vacant portion of a business building, the owner, agent, or other person
having custody of the building shall have the responsibility of an occupant
of a building.
OWNER — The actual owner of the business building, whether individual,
partnership, or corporation or the agent of the building or other person
having custody of the building or to whom rent is paid. In the case of
business buildings leased with a clause in the lease specifying that the
lessee is responsible for maintenance and repairs, the lessee will be
considered in such cases as the "owner" for the purpose of this chapter.
RAT ERADICATION — The elimination or extermination of rats within
buildings so that the buildings are completely freed of rats or there is
no evidence of rat infestation remaining, by any or all of the accepted
measures, such as poisoning, fumigation, trapping, and clubbing.
RAT HARBORAGE — Any condition which provides shelter or protection for
rats, thus favoring their multiplication and continued existence in, under, or
outside of a structure of any kind.
RATPROOFING — Applied to a form of construction to prevent the ingress
of rats into business buildings from the exterior or from one business
building or establishment to another. It consists essentially of treating all
actual or potential openings in the exterior walls, ground or first floors,
basements, roof and foundations that may be reached by rats from the
ground by climbing or by burrowing with material impervious to rat
gnawing.
§ 22-901 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-902
1:651
§ 22-902. [Ch. 22, Sec. 134] Business buildings to be ratproofed
and freed of rats when directed.
It is hereby provided and required that all business buildings in the City
shall be ratproofed and freed of rats when directed by the Department of
Health or as required in this chapter.
§ 22-903. [Ch. 22, Sec. 135] Notice to occupant of rat infestation;
duty to institute rat eradication measures; failure to comply.
Whenever the Department of Health notifies the occupant of a business
building in writing that there is evidence of rat infestation of the building,
such occupant shall immediately institute rat eradication measures and
shall continuously maintain such measures in a satisfactory manner until
the premises are rat-free or the Department of Health advises that there is
no evidence of rat infestation. Unless such measures are undertaken within
three days after receipt of notice, the occupant of the business building
shall be deemed guilty of an offense under the provisions of this chapter.
§ 22-904. [Ch. 22, Sec. 136] Notice to owner to ratproof; failure to
comply.
Whenever the Department of Health notifies the owner of any business
building in writing that there is evidence of the need for ratproofing of
the building, such owner shall take immediate measures for ratproofing the
building. Unless such work and improvements have been completed by the
owner in the time specified in the written notice, in no event to be less than
15 days, or within the time to which a written extension may have been
granted by the Department of Health, then the owner shall be deemed guilty
of an offense under the provisions of this chapter.
§ 22-905. [Ch. 22, Sec. 137] Failure to comply - costs - lien.
On the failure of a person so notifies to comply with either of the notices
in the last two sections mentioned, the Department of Health shall, after
the time specified therein, notify the Building Inspector of the City. Upon
being so notifies, the Building Inspector shall take the necessary measures
for ratproofing of said building and of the extermination of rat, therein; and
the reasonable costs and expenses of so doing shall be collected from the
owner of said building, and in addition thereto, the reasonable costs and
expenses of said ratproofing and extermination shall be a lien upon the real
estate affected, as provided in Section 23-109 of Chapter 24 of the Illinois
Revised Statutes of 1959;36 in the event the costs and expenses aforesaid
are not paid within 30 days from the completion of the work by the Building
Inspector, the same shall be enforced in the manner provided in said Section
23-109 of Chapter 24 of the Illinois Revised Statutes of 1959.37
36.Editor's Note: See now 65 ILCS 5/11-20-8.
37.Editor's Note: See now 65 ILCS 5/11-20-8.
§ 22-902 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 22-906
1:652
§ 22-906. [Ch. 22, Sec. 138] Maintenance of ratproofed buildings.
The owners of all ratproofed business buildings are required to maintain
the premises in ratproof condition and to repair all breaks or leaks that
may occur in the ratproofing without a specific order of the Department
of Health and regardless of the need for other remodeling, repairing, or
construction.
§ 22-907. [Ch. 22, Sec. 139] Inspection of buildings; notice of
evidence of rats; abatement of conditions.
The Department of Health is hereby empowered to make unannounced or
announced inspections of the interior and exterior of business buildings
as, in its opinion, may be necessary to determine full compliance with
this chapter. The Department of Health shall make periodic inspections of
all ratproofed buildings to determine evidence of rat infestation and the
existence of new breaks or leaks in their ratproofing. When any evidence is
found indicating the presence of rats or openings through which rats may
again enter business buildings, the Department of Health shall serve the
owners or occupants or both, with notices or orders to abate the conditions
found.
§ 22-908. [Ch. 22, Sec. 140] Installation of impervious floors, etc.
Whenever conditions inside or under business buildings provide such
extensive harborage for rats that the Department of Health deems it
necessary to eliminate such harborage, it may require the owner or
occupant, or both, to install suitable rat-impervious floors in basements
or to replace wooden first or ground floors with rat-impervious floors or
require the owner or occupant, or both, to otherwise eliminate such rat
harborage within a reasonable time.
§ 22-909. [Ch. 22, Sec. 141] Removal of ratproofing; making new
openings.
It is hereby made unlawful for the occupant, owner, contractor, utility
company, plumber, repairman, or any other person to remove the
ratproofing from any business building for any purpose and fail to restore
the same in a satisfactory condition or to make any new openings that are
not closed or sealed against the entrance of rats.
§ 22-910. [Ch. 22, Sec. 142] Future construction to be ratproof.
It is hereby made unlawful for any person to hereafter construct, repair,
or remodel any business building, unless such construction, repair, or
remodeling shall render the building ratproof; provided, that only such
repairs or remodeling which affect the ratproof condition of any such
building shall be considered as subject to the provisions of this section.
§ 22-906 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-911
1:653
§ 22-911. [Ch. 22, Sec. 143] Requirements as to storage of food.
All human or animal food or feed within the City shall be stored in ratfree
and ratproof containers, compartments, or rooms unless stored in a ratproof
building.
§ 22-912. [Ch. 22, Sec. 144] Disposal of waste, garbage, and refuse.
Within the City all waste, garbage, or refuse upon which rats may feed and
all small dead animals shall be placed and stored until collected in covered
metal containers of a type prescribed by Article IV of Chapter 21 of this
Code.
§ 22-913. [Ch. 22, Sec. 145] Requirements as to lumber, boxes,
barrels, etc.
It is hereby made unlawful for any person to place, leave, dump, or permit
to accumulate on any private or public premises, improved or vacant, or on
any open land, street, or alley in the City any lumber, boxes, barrels, bottles,
cans, containers, or similar materials unless the same shall be placed on
open racks that are elevated not less than 18 inches above the ground and
evenly piled or stacked so that these materials will not afford harborage for
rats.
§ 22-914. [Ch. 22, Sec. 146] Penalty.
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
article shall upon conviction be punished as provided in § 1-106 of this
Code.
§ 22-911 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 22-914
1:654
ARTICLE X
Regulations For Massage Establishments
§ 22-1001. [Ch. 22, Sec. 153] Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following words shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them by this section:
EMPLOYEE — Any and all persons other than the masseurs or masseuses,
who render any service to the permittee, who receive compensation directly
from the permittee, and who have no physical contact with customers and
clients.
HEALTH OFFICER — The Director of the McLean County Health
Department or his authorized representative.
MASSAGE — Any method of pressure on or friction against or stroking,
kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, or stimulating of the
external soft parts of the body with the hands or with the aid of any
mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance with or without such
supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powder,
creams, lotions, ointments, or other similar preparations commonly used in
this practice.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS — Any establishment having a fixed place
of business where any person, firm, association, or corporation engages in,
or carries on, or permits to be engaged or carried on any of the activities
mentioned in the definition of "massage" above.
MASSEUR or MASSEUSE — Any person, who for any consideration
whatsoever, engages in the practice of massage as herein defined.
OUT CALL MASSAGE SERVICE — Any business, the function of which is to
engage in or carry on massages at a location designated by the customer or
client rather than at a massage establishment.
PERMITTEE — The operator of a massage establishment.
PERSON — Any individual, copartnership, firm, association, joint stock
company, corporation or combination of individuals of whatever form or
character.
SEXUAL OR GENITAL AREA — Includes the genitals, pubic area, anus,
or perineum of any person, or the vulva or breasts of a female.[Ord. No.
1975-96]
§ 22-1002. [Ch. 22, Sec. 154] Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on, or
permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, in or upon any premises
in the City of Bloomington, the operation of a massage establishment as
herein defined, without first having obtained a permit from the City
Manager, after approval of the Health Officer.
§ 22-1001 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-1003
1:655
§ 22-1003. [Ch. 22, Sec. 155] Filing of application and fee provision.
§ 22-1004. [Ch. 22, Sec. 156] Application for massage
establishment.
A. Every applicant for a permit to maintain, operate or conduct a massage
establishment shall file an application in duplicate under oath with the
City Clerk upon a form provided by said City Clerk and pay a nonrefundable
permit fee in an amount as set forth in the Schedule of Fees
for the quarter year or part thereof in which the permit is issued to the
Director of Finance, who shall issue a receipt which shall be attached to
the application filed with the City Clerk. The fee shall be paid to the
Director of Finance prior to the beginning of each quarter year [Ord.
No. 2018-89]
B. The City Clerk shall within five days refer copies of such applications to
the Building Safety Department, the Fire Department, the Health
Department, and the Police Department. These departments shall
within 30 days inspect the premises proposed to be operated as a
massage establishment and make written recommendations to the City
Manager concerning compliance with the Codes that they administer.
C. Within 10 days of receipt of the recommendations of the
aforementioned departments, the City Manager shall notify the
applicant that his or her application is granted, denied or held for
further investigation. The period of such additional investigation shall
not exceed an additional 30 days unless otherwise agreed to by the
applicant. Upon the conclusion of such additional investigation, the City
Manager shall advise the applicant in writing whether the application is
granted or denied.
D. Whenever an application is denied or held for further investigation, the
City Manager shall advise the applicant in writing of the reasons for
such action.
E. The failure or refusal of the applicant to promptly give any information
relevant to the investigation of the application or his or her refusal to
submit or to cooperate with any inspection required by this chapter
shall constitute an admission by the applicant that he or she is ineligible
for such permit and shall be grounds for denial thereof by the City
Manager.
A. The application for permit to operate a massage establishment shall set
forth the exact nature of the massage to be administered, and the
proposed place of business and facilities therefor.
B. In addition to the foregoing, any applicant for a permit, including any
partner or limited partner of a partnership applicant, and any officer,
director of a corporate applicant and any stockholder holding more
than 10% of the stock of a corporate applicant, shall furnish the
following:
§ 22-1003 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 22-1004
1:656
§ 22-1005. [Ch. 22, Sec. 157] Issuance of permit for massage
establishment.
(1) Name and address;
(2) Written proof that the individual is at least 18 years of age;
(3) All residential addresses for the past three years;
(4) The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair;
(5) The business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the
three years immediately preceding the date of application;
(6) The massage or similar business license history of the applicant;
whether such person, in previously operating in this or another City
or state under license, has had such license revoked or suspended,
the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation
subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation:
(7) All criminal or City ordinance violation convictions, forfeiture of
bond, and pleadings of nolo contendere on all charges, except
minor traffic violations;
(8) The fingerprints and photograph of the applicant;
(9) If the applicant is a corporation, or a partner of a partnership is a
corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly
as shown in its Articles of Incorporation. [Ord. No. 1975-96]
A. Upon receipt of the recommendations of the departments referred to in
§ 22-1004 and the certificate of the Health Officer that the
establishment is in compliance with all the requirements of §§ 22-1011
and 22-1012 the City Manager shall issue a permit to maintain, operate
or conduct a massage establishment, unless he finds:
(1) That the operation, as proposed by the applicant, if permitted,
would not have complied with all applicable laws, including but not
limited to, the Building, Health, Planning, Housing, Zoning and Fire
Codes of the City of Bloomington; or
(2) That the applicant or any other person who will be directly or
indirectly engaged in the management and operation of a massage
establishment has been convicted of:
(a) A felony;
(b) An offense involving sexual misconduct with children;
(c) Prostitution, soliciting for a prostitute, pandering, keeping a
place of prostitution, pimping or other offense opposed to
decency and morality.
§ 22-1004 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-1005
1:657
§ 22-1006. [Ch. 22, Sec. 158] Revocation or suspension of permit
for massage establishment.
§ 22-1007. [Ch. 22, Sec. 159] Masseur or masseuse permit. [Ord.
No. 2018-89]
Any person, including an applicant for massage establishment permit, who
engages in the practice of massage as herein defined, shall file an
application for a masseur or masseuse permit with the City Clerk upon a
B. The City Manager, at his discretion, may issue a permit to any person
convicted of any of the crimes in Subsection A(2)(a), (b) and (c) if he
finds that such conviction occurred at least four years prior to the date
of application, the applicant has no subsequent convictions and the
applicant has shown evidence of rehabilitation sufficient to warrant the
public trust.
C. Every massage establishment permit issued pursuant to this chapter
will terminate on December 31 of the year in which it was issued, unless
sooner suspended or revoked. [Ord. No. 1975-96]
A. Any permit issued for a massage establishment may be revoked or
suspended by the City Manager after hearing for good cause or in any
case where any of the provisions of this article are violated or any
employee of the permittee, including a masseur or masseuse, is
engaged in any conduct at permittee's place of business, which violates
any of the provisions of this article or any State law which provides for
imprisonment, and permittee should have actual or constructive
knowledge of such violations or the permittee should have actual or
constructive knowledge by due diligence, or where any applicant has
made a false statement on an application for a permit under this article
or in any case where the officer or health inspector of the McLean
County Health Department to inspect the premises or the operations
therein. Such permit may also be revoked or suspended by the City
Manager after hearing upon the recommendations of the Health Officer
that such business is being managed, conducted or maintained without
regard for the public health or health of patrons or customers or
without due regard to proper sanitation or hygiene.
B. Any violation of this article by any employee of the permittee, including
a masseur or masseuse, shall be cause for suspension of the permit for
not more than 30 days in the first instance. Any subsequent violation of
this article by any employee of the permittee, including a masseur or
masseuse, shall be cause for suspension or revocation of this permit.
C. The City Manager, before revoking or suspending any permit, shall give
the permittee at least 10 days' written notice of the charges against him
or her and the opportunity for a public hearing before the City Manager,
at which time the permittee may present evidence bearing upon the
question. In such cases, the charges shall be specific and in writing.
[Ord. No. 1975-96]
§ 22-1005 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 22-1007
1:658
form provided by said City Clerk and shall pay a nonrefundable filing fee in
an amount as set forth in the Schedule of Fees for an original application
and an amount set forth in the Schedule of Fees for a renewal application,
to the Director of Finance, who shall issue a receipt which shall be attached
to the application filed with the City Manager.
§ 22-1008. [Ch. 22, Sec. 160] Application form for masseur or
masseuse permit.
A. The application for a masseur or masseuse permit shall contain the
following:
(1) Name, residence address and date of birth;
(2) Social security number and driver's license number, if any;
(3) Applicant's weight, height, color of hair and eyes;
(4) Written evidence that the applicant is at least 18 years of age;
(5) Business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the three
years immediately preceding the date of application;
(6) Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of, pleaded nolo
contendere to, or suffered a forfeiture on a bond charge of
committing any crime except minor traffic violations. If the answer
is in the affirmative, a statement must be made giving the place and
the court in which such conviction, plea or forfeiture was had, the
specific charge under which the conviction, plea or forfeiture was
obtained, and the sentence imposed as a result thereof;
(7) The Chief of Police, or his delegate, shall have the right to take
fingerprints and a photograph of the applicant and the right to
confirm the information submitted;
(8) A medical certificate signed by a physician, licensed to practice in
the State of Illinois, within seven days from the date of the
application. The certificate will state that the applicant was
examined by the certifying physician and that the applicant is:
(a) Free of communicable disease;
(b) If not free of communicable disease, is incapable of
transmitting any such disease to others, disease, with or
without precautionary actions by the applicant.
B. If precautionary actions are required by the applicant to prevent the
transmission of communicable disease, such precautions will be a
condition of the permit. The additional information required by this
subsection shall be provided at the applicant's expense. This
information shall be submitted as part of the annual permit renewal
process. [Ord. No. 1994-101]
§ 22-1007 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-1009
1:659
§ 22-1009. [Ch. 22, Sec. 161] Issuance of masseur or masseuse
permit.
§ 22-1010. [Ch. 22, Sec. 162] Revocation of masseur or masseuse
permit.
§ 22-1011. [Ch. 22, Sec. 163] Facilities necessary.
A. The City Manager may issue a masseur or masseuse permit within 21
days following application, unless he finds that the applicant for
masseur or masseuse permit has been convicted of:
(1) A felony;
(2) An offense involving sexual misconduct with children;
(3) Keeping or residing in a house of ill fame, solicitation of a lewd or
unlawful act, prostitution or pandering.
B. The City Manager, in his discretion, may issue a permit to any person
convicted of such crimes if he finds that such conviction occurred at
least four years prior to the date of the application and the applicant
has had no subsequent convictions.
C. Every masseur or masseuse permit issued pursuant to this article shall
terminate on December 31 of the year in which it was issued, unless
sooner suspended. [Ord. No. 1975-96]
A. A masseur or masseuse permit issued by the City Manager shall be
revoked or suspended where it appears that the masseur or masseuse
has been convicted of any offense which would be cause for denial of a
permit upon an original application, has made a false statement on an
application for a permit, or has committed an act in violation of this
article.
B. The City Manager in revoking or suspending a masseur or masseuse
permit shall give the permit holder a written notice specifying the
grounds therefor. Such person may within 10 days of such revocation or
suspension, file a written request with the City Manager for a public
hearing before the City Manager, at which time the masseur or
masseuse may present evidence bearing upon the question. The
decision of the City Manager upon such hearing shall be a final,
appealable order. [Ord. No. 1975-96]
A. No massage establishment shall be issued a permit, nor be operated,
established or maintained in the City unless an inspection by the Health
Officer reveals that the establishment complies with each of the
following minimum requirements.
(1) Construction of room used for toilets, tubs, steam baths and
showers shall be made waterproofed with approved waterproof
§ 22-1009 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 22-1011
1:660
§ 22-1012. [Ch. 22, Sec. 164] Operating requirements.
materials and shall be installed in accordance with the Building
Code of the City of Bloomington;
(2) All massage tables, bathtubs, shower stalls, steam or bath areas
and floors shall have surfaces which may be readily disinfected;
(3) Adequate bathing, crossing, locker and massage facilities shall be
provided for the patrons to be served at any given time. In the
event male and female patrons are to be served simultaneously,
separate bathing, dressing, locker and massage room facilities
shall be provided;
(4) The premises shall have adequate equipment for disinfecting and
sterilizing nondisposable instruments and materials used in
administering massages. Such nondisposal instruments and
materials shall be disinfected after use on each patron;
(5) Closed cabinets shall be provided and used for the storage of clean
linen, towels and other materials used in connection with
administering massages. All soiled linens, towels and other
materials shall be kept in properly covered containers or cabinets,
which containers or cabinets shall be kept separate from the clean
storage areas;
(6) Toilet facilities shall be provided in convenient locations. When five
or more employees and patrons of different sexes are on the
premises at the same time, separate toilet facilities shall be
provided. A single water closet per sex shall be provided for each
20 or more employees or patrons of that sex on the premises at any
one time. Urinals may be substituted for water closets after one
water closet has been provided. Toilets shall be designated as to
the sex accommodated therein;
(7) Lavatories or washbasins provided with both hot and cold running
water shall be installed in either the toilet room or a vestibule.
Lavatories or washbasins shall be provided with soap and a
dispenser and with sanitary towels;
(8) The premises shall be equipped with a service sink for custodial
service.
B. The Health Officer shall certify that the proposed massage
establishment complies with all the requirements of this section of this
article and shall send such certification to the City Manager.
A. Every portion of the massage establishment, including appliances and
apparatus, shall be kept clean and operated in a sanitary condition.
B. Price rates for all services shall be prominently posted in the reception
area in a location available to all prospective customers.
§ 22-1011 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-1012
1:661
C. All employees, including masseurs and masseuses, shall be clean and
wear clean, non-transparent outer garments, covering the sexual and
genital areas, whose use is restricted to the massage establishment. A
separate dressing room for each sex must be available on the premises
with individual lockers for each employee. Door to such dressing rooms
shall open inward and shall be self-closing.
D. All massage establishments shall be provided with clean, laundered
sheets and towels in sufficient quantity and shall be laundered after
each use thereof and stored in a sanitary manner.
E. The sexual or genital area of patrons must be covered by towels, cloths
or undergarments when in the presence of an employee, masseur or
masseuse.
F. It shall be unlawful for any person in a massage establishment
knowingly to place his or her hand upon, to touch with any part of his or
her body, to fondle in any manner, or to massage a sexual or genital area
of any other person.
G. No masseur or masseuse, employee or operator shall perform, offer or
agree to perform any act which would require the touching of the
patron's genital area.
H. All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms and all
other physical facilities shall be in good repair and maintained in a
clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor
rooms, or steam or vapor cabinets, shower compartments and toilet
rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned each day the business is in
operation. Bathtubs and showers shall be thoroughly cleaned after each
use. When carpeting is used on the floors, it shall be kept dry.
I. Oils, creams, lotions or other preparations used in administering
massages shall be kept in clean, closed containers or cabinets.
J. Eating in the massage work areas shall not be permitted. Animals,
except for seeing-eye dogs, shall not be permitted in the massage work
area.
K. No masseur or masseuse shall administer a massage to a patron
exhibiting any skin fungus, skin infection, skin inflammation, or skin
eruption; unless a physician duly licensed by the State of Illinois
certifies in writing that such person may be safely massaged
prescribing the conditions thereof.
L. Each masseur and masseuse shall wash his or her hands in hot running
water, using a proper soap or disinfectant before administering a
massage to each patron. [Ord. No. 1975-96]
§ 22-1012 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 22-1013
1:662
§ 22-1013. [Ch. 22, Sec. 165] Advertising. [Ord. No. 1975-96]
No massage establishment granted a permit under provisions of this article
shall place, publish or distribute or cause to be placed, published or
distributed any advertising matter that depicts any portion of the human
body that would reasonably suggest to prospective patrons that any
services are available other than those services described in § 22-1001
of this article and not prohibited by § 22-1012 of this article, or that
employees, masseurs or masseuses are dressed in any manner other than
prescribed in § 22-1012 of this article, nor shall any massage establishment
indicate in the text of such advertising that any services are available other
than those services described in § 22-1001 and not prohibited by § 22-1012
of this article.
§ 22-1014. [Ch. 22, Sec. 166] Out call registration. [Ord. No.
1975-96]
Any masseuse or masseur who provides any of the services listed in the
definition of "massage" in § 22-1001 of this article at any hotel or motel must
first register his or her name and permit number with the owner, manager,
or person in charge of the hotel or motel.
§ 22-1015. [Ch. 22, Sec. 167] Out call service. [Ord. No. 1975-96]
No "out call massage service" may be operated other than by a licensed
massage establishment. All massages performed and advertising engaged
in by an "out call massage service" must be done in the manner prescribed
in §§ 22-1012 and 22-1013.
§ 22-1016. [Ch. 22, Sec. 168] Hours of operation. [Ord. No.
1975-96]
No massage establishment shall be open between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 6:00 a.m.
§ 22-1017. [Ch. 22, Sec. 169] Inspections. [Ord. No. 1975-96]
The Police Department and the McLean County Health Department shall
from time to time and at least twice a year, make an inspection of each
massage establishment granted a permit under the provisions of this article
for the purposes of determining that the provisions of this article are
complied with. Such inspections shall be made at reasonable times and in
a reasonable manner. It shall be unlawful for any permittee to fail to allow
such inspection officer access to the premises or to hinder such officer in
any manner.
§ 22-1013 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-1018
1:663
§ 22-1018. [Ch. 22, Sec. 170] Employment of person under the age
of 18 prohibited. [Ord. No. 1975-96]
It shall be unlawful for any owner, proprietor, manager or other person in
charge of any massage establishment to employ any person who is not at
least 18 years of age.
§ 22-1019. [Ch. 22, Sec. 171] Identification card. [Ord. No. 1975-96]
The City Manager shall provide each masseur and masseuse granted a
permit with an identification card which shall contain a photograph of
the masseur or masseuse and the full name and permit number assigned
to the said masseur or masseuse, which must be worn on the front of
the outer most garment at all times during the hours of operation of any
establishment granted a permit pursuant to this article.
§ 22-1020. [Ch. 22, Sec. 172] Transfer of permits. [Ord. No.
1975-96]
No permit for the operation of a massage establishment issued pursuant to
the provisions of this article shall be transferable except with the written
consent of the City Manager and approval of the Health Officer, provided,
however, that upon the death or incapacity of the permittee the massage
establishment may continue in business for a reasonable period of time to
allow for an orderly transfer of the permit.
§ 22-1021. [Ch. 22, Sec. 173] Display of permit. [Ord. No. 1975-96]
Every permittee shall display a valid permit in a conspicuous place within
the massage establishment so that the same may be readily seen by persons
entering the premises.
§ 22-1022. [Ch. 22, Sec. 174] Employment of masseurs and
masseuses. [Ord. No. 1975-96]
It shall be the responsibility of the permittee for the massage establishment
or the employer of any persons purporting to act as masseurs and
masseuses to insure that each person employed as a masseur or masseuse
shall first have obtained a valid permit pursuant to this article.
§ 22-1023. [Ch. 22, Sec. 175] Time limit for filing application for
permit. [Ord. No. 1975-96]
All persons who presently operate a massage establishment or who are
employed as a masseur or masseuse must file for a permit within three
months of the effective date of this article. Applications for renewal of
permits must be filed not later than December 15 of each year.
§ 22-1018 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 22-1024
1:664
§ 22-1024. [Ch. 22, Sec. 176] Non-applicability of this article.
This article shall not apply to hospitals, nursing homes, sanitaria or persons
holding an unrevoked certificate to practice the healing arts under the
laws of the State of Illinois, or persons working under the direction of
any such persons or in any such establishments, nor shall this article
apply to barbers or cosmetologists lawfully carrying out their particular
profession or business and holding a valid, unrevoked license or certificate
of registration issued by the State of Illinois.
§ 22-1025. [Ch. 22, Sec. 177] Rules and regulations. [Ord. No.
1975-102]
The City Manager, the Health Officer, or both officers, may, after a public
hearing, make and enforce reasonable rules and regulations not in conflict
with, but to carry out the intent of this article.
§ 22-1026. [Ch. 22, Sec. 178] Violation and penalty.
Every person except those persons who are specifically exempted by this
article, whether acting as an individual, owner, employee of the owner,
operator, or employee of the operator, or whether acting as a mere helper
for the owner, employee or operator, or acting as a participant or worker in
any way, who gives massages or conducts a massage establishment without
first obtaining a permit and paying a license fee to do so from the City of
Bloomington, or shall violate any of the provisions of this article, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by
a fine not to exceed $500 or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six
months or by both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 22-1027. [Ch. 22, Sec. 179] Maintaining public nuisance.
Any building used as a massage establishment in violation of this article
with the intentional, knowing, reckless or negligent permission of the owner
thereof, or the agent of the owner managing the building, together with
all fixtures and other property used in violation of this article are hereby
declared to be a nuisance.
§ 22-1028. [Ch. 22, Sec. 180] Severability.
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or
phrase in this article, or any part thereof, is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the
remaining portions of this article or any part thereof.
§ 22-1024 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-1028
1:665

ARTICLE XI
Regulations For Rooming Houses
§ 22-1101. [Ch. 22, Sec. 181] Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following words shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them by this section:
ROOMING HOUSE — Any building, or any part thereof, containing one or
more rooming units, which space is let by the owner or operator to more
than five persons.
ROOMING UNIT — Any habitable room or group of such rooms used or
intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating
purposes.[Ord. No. 1997-83]
§ 22-1102. [Ch. 22, Sec. 182] License required.
§ 22-1103. [Ch. 22, Sec. 183] Required inspection.
A. No person shall open, conduct, manage or maintain a rooming house or
advertise as such, without a license from the City. Application to
conduct and operate a rooming house shall be made to the City Clerk on
forms furnished by the City Clerk. All applications shall be accompanied
by a license fee in an amount as set forth in the Schedule of Fees. The
application shall contain:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the applicant, if an
individual, and if a firm, partnership or association, the name,
address and telephone of every member thereof, and in the case of
a corporation, the name and address thereof and of its officers;
(2) The location of the structure for which a license is sought;
(3) The name, address and telephone number of the person or persons
under whose management or supervision the rooming house will be
conducted. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
B. Licenses for rooming houses shall be valid for one year and shall be
renewed annually on January 1 of each year. [Ord. No. 1997-83]
A. After May 15, and prior to June 15, of each year, a rooming house
inspection will be conducted by a Code Official, and where deemed
necessary, the Code Official may require, either simultaneously or on a
separate occasion, an inspection by a Building Official and/or Fire
Official. Any and all Code violations found by the Code Official, Building
Official and/or Fire Official must be corrected no later than August 15,
of each year, or in the case of Illinois Wesleyan rooming houses, prior to
the time the students move in for fall semester. Failure to have all
violations corrected by this date, without an extension being granted,
will result in the rooming house being posted "OCCUPANCY
§ 22-1101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-1103
1:667
PROHIBITED." Occupancy will then be prohibited until all violations
are corrected.
B. Each rooming house will receive the initial rooming house inspection
and one reinspection as part of the yearly licensing fee. For each
reinspection after the first, a fee in an amount as set forth in the
Schedule of Fees will be imposed. Payment must be made prior to the
scheduling of each reinspection. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
C. No license shall be issued for a rooming house until the required annual
inspection has been conducted and the rooming house is found to be in
full compliance with all applicable City Codes.
§ 22-1103 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 22-1103
1:668
Chapter 22.2
HUMAN RELATIONS
§ 22.2-101. [Ch. 22.2, Sec. 1] Declaration of policy. [Ord. No.
2018-57]
It is the intent of the City of Bloomington in adopting this article, to
secure an end in the City to discrimination, including, but not limited to,
discrimination by reason of race, color, sex, gender, genetic information,
pregnancy, religion, age, national origin, marital status, familial status,
Military status, or physical or mental disability unrelated to ability. The
protections of this Ordinance are administered by the Bloomington Human
Relations Commission.
§ 22.2-102. [Ch. 22.2, Sec. 2] Establishment and guidelines of the
Human Relations Commission.
There is hereby established a Commission to be referred to and known as
the Bloomington Human Relations Commission:
A. Organization and members of the commission. The following
designated persons shall be the members of the Human Relations
Commission.
(1) Chairperson. The Chairperson shall be selected from among the
Commissioners by a majority vote of the Commission for a one-year
term. The term as Chairperson shall not affect the original
appointment term of the Commissioner chosen to serve as
Chairperson. The Chairperson shall receive no salary, but may be
compensated for expenses incurred in the performance of the
Commission duties. The Chairperson shall supervise the activities
and duties of the Human Relations Commission and shall preside
over all of its meetings in addition to the powers enumerated below.
The Chairperson shall participate in all matters and shall vote on all
issues before the Commission. [Ord. No. 2014-04]
(2) Vice-Chairperson. The Vice-Chairperson shall be selected from
among the Commissioners by a majority vote of the Commission for
a one-year term which shall coincide with the term of the
Chairperson. The term as Vice-Chairperson shall not affect the
original appointment term of the Commissioner chosen to serve as
Vice-Chairperson. The Vice-Chairperson shall receive no salary, but
may be compensated for expenses incurred in the performance of
the Commission duties. The Vice-Chairperson shall act as
Chairperson at meetings and functions of the Commission from
which the Chairperson is absent. [Ord. No. 2014-04]
(3) Commissioners. Seven persons, who shall be referred to and known
as Human Relations Commissioners, shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council for terms of
§ 22-1103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22.2-102
1:669
three years. This term may be extended after the three years for
no more than two additional three-year terms. Members of the
Commission shall serve no more than three consecutive threeyear
terms (a total of nine years). Commission members may be
reappointed at the discretion of the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the Council. Commissioners shall receive no salary, but
may be compensated for expenses incurred in the performance
of Commission duties. The Mayor shall make appointments to the
Human Relations Commission which reflect a broad diversity of
backgrounds within the community in the areas of race, ethnic
groups, sex and age. [Ord. No. 2014-04]
(4) Staff. The following designated persons shall assist the Commission
in the execution of its responsibilities:
(a) Community Relations Coordinator. The Community Relations
Coordinator shall be hired by the Director of Human Resources
and shall advise the Commission, serve as a resource person to
the Commission, coordinate and develop human relations
projects of the Commission and act as a liaison with the City
administration. The Community Relations Coordinator shall
make reasonable efforts to attend all meetings and functions of
the Commission and shall have a voice in all proceedings, but
shall not vote on issues before the Commission.
(b) Human Relations Associate. The Human Relations Associate
shall be hired by the Director of Human Resources and shall
investigate discrimination complaints filed with the
Commission, as well as individual instances and patterns of
conduct that appear to be in violation of this chapter, and shall
assist in the coordination and development of human relations
projects of the Commission. The Human Relations Associate
shall make reasonable efforts to attend all meetings of the
Commission and shall have a voice in complaint related issues,
but shall not vote on complaint related issues before the
Commission.
(c) Legal representation. The Commission shall be represented by
the City's Corporation Counsel Office, or in the case of a
conflict of interest, the Commission shall engage the services
of a private attorney. [Ord. No. 1996-8]
B. Removal. The Chairperson and Commissioners appointed herein may
be removed for cause by the City Council. [Ord. No. 1996-8]
C. Meetings. The Chairperson of the Human Relations Commission shall
call meetings of the Commission on a regular basis, not less than once a
month on a schedule to be established and published by the
Chairperson as required by law. The Chairperson or any four
Commissioners may call additional meetings as may be deemed
necessary by giving notice of the time and place of such meetings to all
§ 22.2-102 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 22.2-102
1:670
other Commissioners, to the Chairperson, to the news media as
required by law and to the Community Relations Coordinator not less
than 24 hours prior to such meetings. [Ord. No. 1996-8]
D. Duties and authority. It shall be the duty and authority of the Human
Relations Commission to:
(1) Conduct research, publish, and utilize studies in the field of intergroup
relations and to develop and implement procedures to
educate the community, equalize opportunities, eliminate
discrimination and promote good will among all persons;
(2) Receive and record any complaint whether initiated by the Human
Relations Commission or by the filing of a complaint with the
Commission, alleging discrimination against any person because of
race, color, age, sex, religion, national origin, marital status,
familial status or physical or mental disability unrelated to ability in
violation of this chapter;
(3) Seek to resolve conflicts between persons involved in complaints
which are within the jurisdiction of the Commission;
(4) Recommend to the appropriate agency or person legislative,
administrative, legal or other ameliorative action to be taken to
eliminate discrimination and foster good will;
(5) Invite and enlist the cooperation of any citizen, organization or
committee which can be of benefit in fulfilling the responsibilities
of the Human Relations Commission in carrying out specific
programs designed to lessen conflicts and in improving
understanding in the community;
(6) Adopt such bylaws, rules of procedure and regulations as may be
deemed necessary to conduct its meetings, conciliation
conferences, public hearings and general operations and to carry
out the purposes and provisions of this Ordinance;
(7) The Commission may also cooperate and assist any person who
requests such cooperation or assistance for the purpose of
developing or maintaining equal employment opportunity
programs;
(8) Prepare and submit annually to the City Council, at or shortly after
the end of each fiscal year, a report of its activities during such
fiscal year;
(9) Refer individuals and/or information to other agencies or persons
when appropriate. Serve as a resource/liaison for information,
training, education and outreach efforts. [Ord. No. 1996-8]
§ 22.2-102 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22.2-103
1:671
§ 22.2-103. [Ch. 22.2, Sec. 3] Definitions.
As used herein, unless a different meaning appears clearly from the content,
the following words or phrases shall have the meanings provided in this
section:
AGE — Shall be limited to individuals who are at least 40 years of age.
AGGRIEVED PERSON — Includes any person who:
ANSWER — A formal certified written response to the allegations in a
complaint which shall be filed by the Respondent in the manner and form
herein specified in accordance with the established time tables herein
specified.
COMMISSION — The City of Bloomington Human Relations Commission.
COMPLAINANT — The Commission, Staff, or an aggrieved person who files
a complaint with the Commission alleging a violation of this chapter.
COMPLAINT — A written and signed statement alleging one or more
discriminatory acts or practices.
CONCILIATION AGREEMENT — A written agreement setting forth the
resolution of the issues in conciliation.
CONCILIATION CONFERENCE — A meeting of the parties arranged by the
Commission in an attempt to resolve a complaint by a signed agreement of
the parties.
CONCILIATOR — One or more members of the Commission or any other
person authorized by the Commission to conduct a conciliation conference.
CONTRACTOR — Any person who contracts with or proposes to contract
with the City to provide goods and/or services in an amount greater than
$5,000 for the current fiscal year or who has contracted with the City for a
total of $5,000 during the last preceding fiscal year.
DISABILITY —
A. Claims to have been injured by a discriminatory practice; or
Believes that such person will be injured by a discriminatory practice
that is about to occur.
B.
Means:
A physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or
more of the major life activities of an individual;
(1)
(2) Record of such an impairment; or
(3) Being regarded as having such an impairment.
A.
Excluded from this definition is an impairment relating to the illegal
use, possession or distribution of "controlled substances" as defined in
Schedules I through V of the Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 812).
B.
§ 22.2-103 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 22.2-103
1:672
DISCRIMINATE — To make a difference in treatment, or favor any person
because of race, color, sex, religion, age, national origin, marital status,
familial status, sexual orientation, or physical or mental disability unrelated
to ability.[Ord. No. 2002-91]
EMPLOYEE —
EMPLOYER — Includes any person within the City of Bloomington,
including, but not limited to, owners, managers, supervisors and others who
serve a supervisory function, who hires or employs any employee whose
services are to be partially or wholly performed in the City of Bloomington,
but excluding any religious or fraternal corporation, association, society or
organization with respect to the hiring or employment of individuals from
their membership.
EMPLOYMENT AGENCY — Any person regularly undertaking, with or
without compensation, to procure employees for an employer or to procure
for employees opportunities to work for an employer or to recruit, refer or
place employees.
FAMILIAL STATUS —
GENETIC INFORMATION — Information about an individual's genetic
tests, the genetic tests of family members of such individual, and the
manifestation of a disease or disorder in family members of such individual.
Genetic information shall not include information about the sex or age of
any individual.[Ord. No. 2018-57]
HEARING OFFICER — One or more members of the Commission or any
attorney duly licensed by the State of Illinois who may be designated by the
Commission to conduct a Public Hearing.
HOUSING ACCOMMODATIONS — Includes all buildings, structures, or any
portions thereof, within the City of Bloomington which are used or occupied,
or are maintained, arranged or designed to be used or occupied as a home,
residence or sleeping place for one or more persons.
MARITAL STATUS — The status of being single, married, divorced,
separated or widowed.
Any individual whether paid or unpaid who performs services under the
direction and control of and for any employer; or
A.
B. An applicant for employment.
One or more individuals, who have not attained the age of 18 years,
being domiciled with a parent or person having legal custody of such
individual or individuals; or
A.
The designee of such parent or other person having such custody, with
the written permission of such parent or other person; or
B.
Any person who is pregnant or is in the process of securing legal
custody of one or more individuals who have not attained the age of 18
years.
C.
§ 22.2-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22.2-103
1:673
MILITARY STATUS — A person's status on active duty in or status as
a veteran of the armed forces of the United States, status as a current
member or veteran of any reserve component of the armed forces of the
United States Army Reserve, United States Marine Corps Reserve, United
States Navy Reserve, United States Air Force Reserve, and United States
Coast Guard Reserve, or status as a current member or veteran of the
Illinois Army National Guard or Illinois Air National Guard.[Ord. No.
2018-57]
NATIONAL ORIGIN — The place in which an individual or one of his or her
ancestors was born.
OWNER — Any person who holds legal or equitable title to, or owns any
beneficial interest in, any real property or who holds legal or equitable title
to share of or holds any beneficial interest in, any real estate cooperative
which owns any real property, or any person who is acting as the agent,
manager or employee of the owner.
PARTY or PARTIES — Either the Complainant or the Respondent. These
terms shall also refer to the Commission when used in the context of a
written agreement which is to be or has been signed by the Commission or
its authorized representative as the resolution of the allegations contained
in a complaint.
PERSON — Includes one or more individuals, partnerships, associations,
organizations, corporations, legal representatives, joint stock companies,
mutual companies, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers, employment
agencies, labor unions or union labor organizations and any other
incorporated or unincorporated organized group. The term includes, but
is not limited to, any real estate owner, lessor, assignor, builder, manager,
broker, salesman or agent, any lending institution, the City of Bloomington,
any other unit of local government and any department, unit, officer or
employee of any of the above.
PREGNANCY — The condition of being pregnant, childbirth, and/or medical
or common conditions related to pregnancy or childbirth.[Ord. No.
2018-57]
PROBABLE CAUSE — On the basis of all available information there exists
a state of facts which leads an objective person to reasonably believe that
a violation of this chapter may have occurred. These facts need not be
proved "beyond a reasonable doubt," as in criminal cases, or by "clear and
convincing evidence," or by a "preponderance of the evidence" as in civil
matters. The Commission is not a court. It functions on an administrative,
investigative level. It seeks only reasons to believe that facts exist which
establish a violation of local civil rights laws.
PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION — All places, businesses or individuals offering
goods, services or accommodations to the general public. This paragraph
shall not apply to any public school system.
PUBLIC HEARING — An administrative hearing of the allegations in a
complaint by the Commission or by an impartial Hearing Officer pursuant
to the procedures set forth in this chapter.
§ 22.2-103 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 22.2-103
1:674
RELIGION — Includes all aspects of religious observance and practice, as
well as belief, except that with respect to employers. "Religion" with respect
to employers includes all aspects of religious observance and practice,
as well as belief, unless an employer demonstrates that he is unable to
reasonably accommodate an employee's or prospective employee's religious
observance or practice without undue hardship on the conduct of the
employer's business.
RESPONDENT — Any person accused in a complaint of having committed a
discriminatory practice or act.
RESPONSE — An informal written statement by a Respondent or a
Respondent's legal representative stating that person's initial position with
respect to the allegations contained in a complaint.
SEXUAL HARASSMENT (IN EMPLOYMENT) — Any unwelcome sexual
advance, request for sexual favors, or conduct of a sexual nature when:
SEXUAL HARASSMENT (IN FINANCING) — Any unwelcome sexual
advance, request for sexual favors, or conduct of a sexual nature when:
SEXUAL HARASSMENT (IN HOUSING) — Any unwelcome sexual advance,
request for sexual favors or conduct of a sexual nature when:
Submission to such conduct is an explicit or implicit term or condition
of an individual's employment; or
A.
Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used as
the basis for any employment decision affecting the individual; or
B.
Such conduct has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering with
an individual's work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile,
or offensive working environment.
C.
Submission to such conduct is an explicit or implicit term or condition
of any portion of the loan process; or
A.
Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used as
the basis for any loan decision affecting the individual; or
B.
Such conduct has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering with
an individual's access to any part of the loan process, or creating an
intimidating, hostile, or offensive environment with respect thereto.
C.
Submission to such conduct is an explicit or implicit term or condition
of an individual's real estate transaction; or
A.
Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used
as the basis for any decision affecting the individual's real estate
transaction; or
B.
Creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive environment with respect
thereto.
C.
§ 22.2-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22.2-103
1:675
SEXUAL HARASSMENT (IN PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION) — Any
unwelcome sexual advance, request for sexual favors, or conduct of a sexual
nature when:
SEXUAL ORIENTATION — Homosexuality, bisexuality, or heterosexuality, or
gender-related identity whether the orientation is real or perceived, and
whether or not traditionally associated with the person's designated sex at
birth.[Ord. No. 2018-57]
STAFF — Includes the Community Relations Coordinator, the Human
Relations Associate, as well as individuals hired in or assigned to the Human
Relations Office.[Ord. No. 1996-8]
§ 22.2-104. [Ch. 22.2, Sec. 4] Employment. [Ord. No. 2018-57]
"Discrimination" as applied under this section shall mean any differences
in treatment based on race, color, sex, genetic information, pregnancy,
religion, age, national origin, marital status, familial status, sexual
orientation, military status, or physical or mental disability unrelated to
ability.
Submission to such conduct is an explicit or implicit term or condition
of an individual's access to, participation in, or full use of a public
accommodation; or
A.
Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used
as the basis for any decision affecting the individual's access to,
participation in, or full use of a public accommodation; or
B.
Such conduct has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering with
an individual's access to, participation in, or full use of any public
accommodation or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive
environment with respect thereto.
C.
A. Discriminatory acts. It shall be illegal for any person to commit any of
the following acts of discrimination in employment:
(1) To permit or take action which discriminately affects a person's
selection, status or eligibility for employment, promotion or
transfer or for apprenticeship or membership or conditions and
privileges or benefits directly or indirectly related to one's
employment.
(2) To cause or permit to be published or circulated, any notice,
advertisement, job order, requisition or request for applicants for
employment or apprenticeship or for the referral thereof which
makes or has the effect of making race, color, religion, sex, age,
national origin, marital status, familial status or physical or mental
disability unrelated to ability as a condition of applying for
employment or of referral therefor or indicates the existence of
such a condition except for a bona fide occupational qualification.
§ 22.2-103 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 22.2-104
1:676
§ 22.2-105. [Ch. 22.2, Sec. 5] Housing. [Ord. No. 2018-57]
"Discrimination" as applied under this section shall mean any differences
in treatment based on race, color, sex, genetic information, pregnancy,
religion, age, national origin, marital status, familial status, sexual
orientation, military status, or physical or mental disability unrelated to
ability.
(3) To refuse to make reasonable accommodations for persons with
disabilities in rules, policies, practices or services when such
accommodations may be necessary to afford such person equal
opportunity in employment. It shall be an affirmative defense to
this subsection for the employer to show that such accommodations
would constitute an undue hardship upon the employer.
(4) For an employer, employment agency or labor organization to
inquire on a written application whether a job applicant has ever
been arrested or to use such knowledge of an arrest as a reason for
denial or termination of employment. This section shall not be
construed to prohibit any employer, employment agency or labor
organization from requesting or using information or records
concerning the conviction of any individual. [Ord. No. 1996-8]
B. Exemptions.
(1) It shall not be unlawful practice for any person to develop a bona
fide affirmative action plan designed to overcome the effects of past
discrimination and to take action not otherwise prohibited by this
chapter or State or Federal law to carry out such affirmative action
plan.
(2) Nothing is this chapter shall apply to decisions of a religious
society, association, organization or institution affecting the
definition, promulgation or advancement of the mission, practices,
or beliefs of the society, association, organization or institution.
[Ord. No. 2002-91]
A. Discriminatory acts. It shall be illegal for any person to commit any of
the following acts of discrimination in housing:
(1) To directly or indirectly discriminate against any person in any
manner in the sale, rental, lease or occupancy of any residential
real estate in the City of Bloomington, specifically relating to, but
not limited to, the price, terms, conditions or privileges of any kind
relating thereto or in the furnishing of any services or facilities in
connection therewith including advertisements therefor.
(2) To refuse to allow, permit or assist any person in the examination of
any listing of real estate or real estate otherwise for sale within the
City of Bloomington, except for nondiscriminatory reasons
applicable to all persons.
§ 22.2-104 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22.2-105
1:677
(3) To solicit either orally or in writing or to distribute or cause to be
distributed, written material or statements designed to induce any
owner of any housing accommodation in the City of Bloomington, to
sell or refuse to sell or lease his or her property because of any
present or prospective change in the race, color, sex, religion, age,
national origin, marital status, familial status or physical or mental
disability of persons in the neighborhood.
(4) To refuse to make reasonable accommodations for persons with
disabilities in rules, policies, practices or services when such
accommodations may be necessary to afford such person equal
opportunity in housing. It shall be an affirmative defense to this
subsection for the respondent to show that such accommodations
would constitute an undue hardship upon the respondent. [Ord.
No. 1996-8]
B. Exemptions.
(1) Owner occupied. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to
apply to the rental or leasing of housing accommodations in that
portion of a building in which the owner or members of his/her
family occupy one of the living units and in which the owneroccupant
anticipates the necessity of sharing a kitchen or
bathroom with a prospective tenant, not related to the owneroccupant.
(2) Housing for older persons. No provision in this section regarding
familial status shall apply with respect to older persons.
(a) As used in this section, "housing for older persons" means
housing:
[1] Provided under any State or Federal program that the
Secretary of Housing and Urban Development has
determined to be specifically designed and operated to
assist elderly persons (as defined in the State or Federal
program); or
[2] Intended for and solely occupied by persons 62 years of
age or older; or
[3] Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one
person 55 years of age or older per unit. In determining
whether housing qualifies as housing for older persons
under this subsection, the Commission shall develop
regulations which require at least the following;
[a] The existence of significant facilities and services
specifically designed to meet the physical or social
needs of older persons, or if the provision of such
facilities and services is not practical, that such
§ 22.2-105 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 22.2-105
1:678
§ 22.2-106. [Ch. 22.2, Sec. 6] Public accommodations. [Ord. No.
2018-57]
"Discrimination" as applied under this section shall mean any differences
in treatment based on race, color, sex, genetic information, pregnancy,
religion, age, national origin, marital status, familial status, sexual
orientation, military status or physical or mental disability unrelated to
ability.
housing is necessary to provide important housing
opportunities for older persons; and
[b] That at least 80% of the units are occupied by at least
one person 55 years of age or older per unit; and
[c] The publication of, and adherence to, policies and
procedure which demonstrate an intent by the owner
or manager to provide housing for persons 55 years of
age or older.
(b) Housing shall not fail to meet the requirements for housing for
older persons by reason of:
[1] Persons residing in such housing as of the effective date of
this Ordinance who do not meet the age requirements of
Subsection A(2)(a)[2] or [3]; provided, that the new
occupants of such housing meet the requirements of
Subsection A(2)(a)[2] or [3] of this subsection; or
[2] Unoccupied units; provided, that such units are reserved
for occupancy by persons who meet the age requirements
of Subsection A(2)(a)[2] or [3] of this subsection.
(3) Religion. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit a religious
organization, association or society, or any nonprofit institution or
organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in
conjunction with a religious organization, association or society
from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of a dwelling which it
owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of
the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons,
unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race,
color or national origin.
(4) Sex. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit restricting the
rental of rooms in a housing accommodation to persons of one sex
where compelling privacy reasons exist. [Ord. No. 1996-8]
(5) Nothing is this chapter shall apply to decisions of a religious
society, association, organization or institution affecting the
definition, promulgation or advancement of the mission, practices,
or beliefs of the society, association, organization or institution.
[Ord. No. 2002-91]
§ 22.2-105 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22.2-106
1:679
§ 22.2-107. [Ch. 22.2, Sec. 7] Financing. [Ord. No. 2018-57]
"Discrimination" as applied under this section shall mean any differences
in treatment based on race, color, sex, genetic information, pregnancy,
religion, age, national origin, marital status, familial status, sexual
orientation, military status or physical or mental disability unrelated to
ability.
A. Discriminatory acts. It shall be illegal for any person to commit any of
the following acts of discrimination in public accommodations:
(1) To discriminate against any person in the full enjoyment of goods,
services, facilities, advantages or privileges of any public
accommodation.
(2) To refuse to make reasonable accommodations for persons with
disabilities in rules, policies, practices or services when such
accommodations may be necessary to afford such person equal
opportunity in public accommodations. It shall be an affirmative
defense to this subsection for the respondent to show that such
accommodations would constitute an undue hardship upon the
respondent. [Ord. No. 1996-8]
B. Exemptions.
(1) Sex. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit restricting the
rental of rooms in a housing accommodation to persons of one sex
where compelling privacy reasons exist. [Ord. No. 1996-8]
(2) Nothing is this chapter shall apply to decisions of a religious
society, association, organization or institution affecting the
definition, promulgation or advancement of the mission, practices,
or beliefs of the society, association, organization or institution.
[Ord. No. 2002-91]
A. Discriminatory acts. It shall be illegal for any person to commit any of
the following acts of discrimination in financing:
(1) To discriminate or to participate directly or indirectly in
discrimination in connection with the terms of loans, guaranteeing
loans, accepting mortgages or otherwise making available funds
for loans, provided that lending money is one of the principal
aspects of the person's business or is incidental to the person's
principal business.
(2) To refuse to make reasonable accommodations for persons with
disabilities in rules, policies, practices or services when such
accommodations may be necessary to afford such person equal
opportunity in financing. It shall be an affirmative defense to this
subsection for the respondent to show that such accommodations
would constitute an undue hardship upon the respondent. [Ord.
No. 1996-8]
§ 22.2-106 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 22.2-107
1:680
§ 22.2-108. [Ch. 22.2, Sec. 8] Additional civil rights violations.
§ 22.2-109. [Ch. 22.2, Sec. 9] Jurisdictional authority.
The Human Relations Commission shall have jurisdiction to take the actions
authorized herein if the alleged act of unlawful discrimination or practice
prohibited herein occurred within the corporate limits of the City of
Bloomington, Illinois. For the purposes of this section, the discriminatory
practice shall be deemed to have occurred within the corporate limits of the
City of Bloomington if:
§ 22.2-110. [Ch. 22.2, Sec. 10] Complaint resolution process.
B. Exemption. Nothing is this chapter shall apply to decisions of a
religious society, association, organization or institution affecting the
definition, promulgation or advancement of the mission, practices, or
beliefs of the society, association, organization or institution. [Ord. No.
2002-91]
A. Retaliation. It shall be illegal for any person to discriminate or take
retaliatory action against any other person because such person has
opposed any practice forbidden by this chapter or because such person
has made a charge, filed a complaint, testified or assisted in any manner
in any investigation, proceeding or hearing under this chapter. [Ord.
No. 1996-8]
B. Aiding and abetting. It shall be illegal for any person to aid, incite,
compel, coerce or participate directly or indirectly in the doing of any
act or practice declared in this chapter to be prohibited. [Ord. No.
1996-8]
C. Interference. It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully interfere
with the performance of a duty or the exercise of a power by the
Commission or one of its members or Staff. [Ord. No. 1996-8]
A. All or part of the employment services in a position held or applied for
by a Complainant are to be performed within the City of Bloomington;
or
B. The housing accommodation sought, occupied, or formerly occupied by
Complainant is located within the City of Bloomington; or
C. The public accommodation is located within the City of Bloomington; or
D. The person allegedly discriminating in financing is located or has a
principal office within the City of Bloomington or is offered property
within the City as collateral for any loan. [Ord. No. 1996-8]
A. Complaint.
(1) Who may file:
§ 22.2-107 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22.2-110
1:681
(a) Any person claiming to be aggrieved by a discriminatory
practice or act committed within the limits of the City of
Bloomington may file a complaint with the Bloomington
Human Relations Commission.
(b) Staff may investigate individual instances and patterns of
conduct which the Commission or Staff feel are in violation of
the provisions of this chapter, and may file complaints in
connection therewith.
(c) The Commission may file a complaint against any person who
is alleged to have committed a discriminatory act within the
jurisdiction of the Commission. Each complaint filed by the
Commission shall be signed by four or more Commissioners.
(2) Dual filing of complaint prohibited. The Commission and Staff shall
not process any complaint if a similar complaint is filed before the
Illinois Department of Human Rights or the Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission or Housing and Urban Development
Department. The Commission shall dismiss any complaint filed with
it where it is discovered that a similar complaint has been filed with
any of the above said agencies.
(3) Content. A complaint shall contain the following:
(a) The name, address and telephone number, if any, of the
Complainant or if a Commission or Staff complaint, of the
Commission or Human Relations Office.
(b) The full name, address and telephone number of the
Respondent, if known; if not known, the complaint shall so
state.
(c) The alleged discriminatory practice(s) and/or act(s) together
with a plain and concise statement of the particulars thereof.
(d) The date or dates of the alleged discriminatory practice(s) and/
or act(s) and if alleged to be of a continuing nature, the dates
between which said continuing practices or acts of
discrimination are alleged to have occurred.
(4) Place of filing. A complaint shall be filed at the Human Relations
Office at the Bloomington City Hall.
(5) Time of filing. A complaint must be filed no later than 180 days
after the date of the last alleged occurrence of a discriminatory
practice or act or 180 days after the date of discovery of an alleged
discriminatory practice or act, which ever is later. The Respondent
shall be informed by Staff promptly by certified mail of the filing of
a complaint and of the Commission's responsibility to resolve such
complaints. A copy of the complaint shall be enclosed with said
letter.
§ 22.2-110 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 22.2-110
1:682
(6) Withdrawal. Complaints may be voluntarily withdrawn at the
request of the Complainant at any time prior to the completion of
the Public Hearing. The circumstances accompanying such
withdrawal may be fully investigated by the Commission or Staff.
[Ord. No. 1996-8]
B. Notification of formal complaint. The Respondent shall be informed by
Staff promptly by certified mail or by personal service of the filing of
such complaints and of the Commission's responsibility to resolve such
complaints. A copy of the complaint shall be enclosed with said letter.
[Ord. No. 1996-8]
C. Response.
(1) Time of filing. A response shall be filed by the Respondent at the
Human Relations Office within 14 days from the date of service of
the complaint or at such later time as the Commission or Staff may
allow.
(2) Content of response. The response shall contain the full name,
address and telephone number of the Respondent, and if the
Respondent is represented by an attorney, the name, address and
telephone number of said attorney. The response shall contain
specific information stating the Respondent's position with respect
to the allegations contained in the complaint.
(3) Failure to file response. If no response is filed within the permitted
time, it shall be presumed that the complaint is not denied. Failure
to file a response shall not operate to delay the proceeding. [Ord.
No. 1996-8]
D. Party representation. Both the Complainant and the Respondent may be
represented by counsel at any stage of conciliation, investigation or
hearing on the complaint. Representatives of parties shall be entitled to
the notices specified herein only after they have entered their
appearances in a case in writing by mailing or delivering same to the
Human Relations Office wherein they identify the party they represent,
and state their name and the address and telephone number where they
may be contacted and to which all such notices may be mailed or
delivered. Evidence that notices were mailed or delivered to such
addresses shall be prima facie proof that all such notices were properly
served. [Ord. No. 1996-8]
E. Investigation process.
(1) Investigation. After the filing of a complaint, an investigation of the
allegations in the complaint shall be conducted by Staff. The
findings of the investigation will be reported to the Commission and
the Commission shall determine on the basis of all available
information if there is probable cause to believe that the allegations
made in the complaint are true or if further investigation is
required for its determination.
§ 22.2-110 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22.2-110
1:683
(2) Additional respondents. A person who is not named as a
Respondent in a complaint, but who is identified as a Respondent in
the course of an investigation, may be joined as an additional or
substitute Respondent upon written notice to such person from the
Human Relations Office. Such notice shall explain the basis for the
belief that the person to whom the notice is addressed is properly
joined as a Respondent. This Respondent will be notified per
Subsection B of this section, and shall be held to the response
requirements of Subsection C of this section.
(3) Subpoena power. The Commission shall issue subpoenas for the
appearance of witnesses, the production of evidence, or both, in the
course of the investigation. Subpoenas will be issued where
necessary for a thorough investigation. A subpoena shall be served
in the same manner as subpoenas issued under Subsection I(5) of
this section.
(4) Failure to cooperate. The Commission may dismiss a complaint or
may enter an order of default against a party for failure to
cooperate with the investigation.
(5) No prima facie case. The Commission may reject without prejudice
and without investigation any complaint that fails to set forth
sufficient evidence to state a prima facie case of a violation of this
chapter. [Ord. No. 1996-8]
F. Findings.
(1) Probable cause. If the Commission determines from the
investigation of a complaint that there is probable cause to believe
a violation has occurred, the Commission shall direct Staff to give
notice to all parties that a probable cause determination has been
made by the Commission. This notice shall be mailed to all parties
within 14 days of the Commission's decision or at such other time
as may be approved by the Commission.
(a) Basis for establishing probable cause.
[1] "Probable cause" means on the basis of all available
information there exists a state of facts which leads an
objective person to reasonably believe that a violation of
this chapter may have occurred. These facts need not be
proved "beyond a reasonable doubt" as in criminal cases,
or by "clear and convincing evidence," or by a
"preponderance of the evidence" as in civil matters. The
Commission is not a court. It functions on an
administrative, investigative level. It seeks only reason to
believe that facts exist which establish a violation of this
chapter.
[2] Probable cause is established when one or more of the
following 11 factors are uncovered:
§ 22.2-110 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 22.2-110
1:684
[a] Prima facie evidence uncovered is on its face
discriminatory, e.g., notices printed and distributed by
the Respondent.
[b] The Respondent admits orally or in writing to the
investigator, Complainant or witnesses that the action
taken was because of the race, color, sex, etc. of the
Complainant, class, associate of the Complainant —
and the admissions are documented, witnessed, or
under the circumstances of the case, the Commission
has probable cause to believe the admissions were
made.
[c] The Respondent violates equal opportunity
regulations and ordinances and those guidelines
which have the same effect as the law.
[d] Disparate treatment, e.g., a comparison between the
Complainant of the protected class and similarly
situated others of different race, color, sex, religion,
etc., depending on what is alleged in the complaint.
[e] Disparate effect — effect of neutral standards equally
applied having a discriminatory impact.
[f] A pattern exists of a class being isolated from the
other members of the total group or being restricted
to certain areas, departments, use of certain facilities,
creating a bona fide segregated situation.
[g] A discriminatory pattern exists. It has been
determined that the pattern was created by and is
maintained by specific Respondent policies, practices
and procedures. Those practices tend to exclude,
channel into a limited or specified area or otherwise
deny equal opportunity to a given class.
[h] The Respondent violated his/her own policies, rules,
regulations, recognized business practices in regard
to the Complainant, denying the Complainant an
opportunity he or she would otherwise have had, and
there are comparisons that can be made of similarly
situated others of another class.
[i] When the evidence that would enable a finding to be
made has been mysteriously lost or destroyed,
tampered with, altered or partly withheld, or the
evidence is conflicting and shifting.
[j] The action of the Respondent is, on its face, so
outrageous that even in the absence of any other
damaging comparisons as indicated above it is
§ 22.2-110 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22.2-110
1:685
presumed to have resulted from discriminatory bias
against persons in the protected class.
[k] The Respondent's decision (to discipline, fire, refuse
service, etc.) was based on his/her prejudice or his/her
reliance on information from biased sources and the
information relied upon can be shown to be untrue.
There may or may not be any other comparisons that
can be made in accordance with the above criteria.
(2) No probable cause. If the Commission determines from the
investigation of a complaint that there is not probable cause to
believe the Respondent has engaged in any discriminatory practice
or act as alleged in the complaint, it shall state its findings in
writing, dismiss the complaint and notify the parties by mail. [Ord.
No. 1996-8]
G. Reconsideration. A Complainant may apply to the Commission for a
reconsideration of a dismissal of his/her complaint. Such application
must be in writing, state specifically the grounds upon which it is based,
and be filed with the Human Relations Office within 14 days from the
date of the mailing of the notice of dismissal. A copy of said application
shall be sent to the Respondent by certified mail. The Respondent shall
have 14 days from the date of mailing of said application to the
Respondent to file a written objection with the Commission, which shall
be filed with the Human Relations Office. The Commission may order
the complaint reinstated at its next special or regular meeting, but in no
event earlier than 14 days after such application has been mailed to the
Respondent or at any time after an objection from the Respondent is
filed. [Ord. No. 1996-8]
H. Conciliation.
(1) Conciliation conference. If the Commission determines that
probable cause exists for the allegations made in the complaint, it
shall designate one or more of its members or Staff to undertake a
conciliation conference with the parties in an attempt to resolve the
complaint by mutual agreement. Within 30 days after the probable
cause finding or at such other time as may be approved by the
Commission, a notice stating the time and place of the conciliation
conference shall be sent to all parties and their legal
representatives, if any. If the Complainant fails to attend the
conciliation conference, the complaint may be dismissed, unless
such absence is excused by the Conciliator for just cause. Each
party at a conciliation conference may be represented by one
person of his/her choice. If the Respondent fails to attend the
conciliation conference, the Conciliator shall notify the Commission
of same and the case shall proceed to a Public Hearing.
(2) Successful conciliation. If the conciliation conference is successful
in resolving the complaint, the Conciliator shall have the terms of
§ 22.2-110 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 22.2-110
1:686
the settlement prepared and agreed to in writing by the parties.
The Conciliator shall submit the settlement agreement to the
Commission for its review and final decision thereon. All such
agreements shall become effective only after they are approved
by the Human Relations Commission. Except as prohibited by law,
the Commission may be a party to such agreement, which may be
signed by the Chairperson of the Commission, or by a majority of
the Commission (which may include the Chairperson).
(3) Unsuccessful conciliation. If the conciliation conference is
unsuccessful in resolving the complaint, the Conciliator shall notify
the Commission of same and the case shall proceed to a Public
Hearing. [Ord. No. 1996-8]
I. Public hearing.
(1) Notice of hearing. In case of failure of conciliation efforts, or in
advance of such efforts, as determined by the Commission, and
after finding probable cause, Staff shall cause to be issued and
served in the name of the Commission, a written notice, together
with a copy of the complaint, as the same may have been amended,
requiring the Respondent to answer to the charges of such
complaint at a Public Hearing. The notice shall specify the time,
date and place of such hearing. Notice shall be served by
registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, or by
personal service.
(2) Complaint. A complaint may be amended as a matter of right by the
Complainant, or in the case of a Staff filed complaint, by the Staff,
or in the case of a Commission filed complaint, by the Commission
at any time prior to the filing of an answer by the Respondent. A
complaint may thereafter be amended only with the consent of all
parties or with the consent of the Hearing Officer on application
duly made in writing therefor. An amended complaint must be in
the form as the original complaint; however, an amendment to a
complaint filed by the Commission may be signed only by the
Chairperson and need not be notarized.
(3) Answer.
(a) Time of filing. The Respondent shall file a written verified
answer within seven days, or by such time as agreed to by all
parties, from the date of the mailing of the notice of the Public
Hearing and this requirement shall be stated in said notice.
The answer shall be filed at the Human Relations Office. Upon
written application, Staff may extend the time within which the
answer may be filed up to seven days prior to the Public
Hearing.
(b) Form of answer. The answer shall contain an admission or
denial of each allegation contained in the complaint or a
§ 22.2-110 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22.2-110
1:687
statement that the Respondent does not have adequate
knowledge or information sufficient to form a belief with
respect to particular allegations. The answer shall contain a
statement of any matters which constitute a defense to the
allegations contained in the complaint.
(c) Amendment to answer. An answer may be amended as a matter
of right seven or more days prior to the date of the Public
Hearing and thereafter may be amended only in the discretion
of the Hearing Officer on application duly made in writing
therefor. All answers shall contain the full name, address and
telephone number of the Respondent and if the Respondent is
represented by an attorney, the name, address and telephone
number of said attorney. In any case where a complaint has
been amended, the Respondent shall have an equal
opportunity to amend his/her answer within the time specified
in this chapter and remaining for the filing of an answer or in
such additional time as may be allowed by the Hearing Officer
on application duly made therefor to the Hearing Officer.
(4) Procedure without answer. Regardless of whether a Respondent
files an answer within the time provided herein, a hearing may be
held at the time and place specified in the Notice of Hearing, and
Findings of Fact and orders may be entered upon testimony taken
at the hearing.
(5) Subpoenas.
(a) The Hearing Officer or any of the members of the Commission
who preside at a Public Hearing may issue subpoenas upon the
application of any party to the proceeding whenever necessary
to compel the attendance of witnesses, or to require the
production for examination of any books, records,
correspondence, documents, papers or any other evidence
relating to any matter under investigation or hearing before
the Commission or at a Public Hearing.
(b) When a subpoena is issued upon the motion of a party of the
proceeding other than the Commission, the customary legal
cost of service, witness and mileage fees shall be paid by the
party at whose request the subpoena is issued. Where a
subpoena is issued upon the motion of the Commission, the
cost of such service, witness and mileage fees shall be paid by
the Commission.
(c) Any witness summoned may petition the Hearing Officer or the
members of the Commission who are to preside over a Public
Hearing to vacate or modify a subpoena. Prompt notice of the
petition to vacate or modify a subpoena shall be given to the
party, if any, who requested the issuance of the subpoenas.
After such investigation as the Hearing Officer or the
§ 22.2-110 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 22.2-110
1:688
Commission members consider appropriate, the petition may
be granted in whole or in part upon a finding that the
testimony, or the evidence whose production is required, does
not relate to any matter in question, or that a subpoena for the
production of evidence is unreasonable and oppressive.
(d) Upon failure of any person to comply with a subpoena issued as
herein provided, the Commission may authorize its legal
representative on its behalf to petition any court of competent
jurisdiction to compel the attendance before the Commission
or Hearing Officer of the person subpoenaed and to compel the
production of subpoenaed evidence. If any person fails to obey
any such court order, the Commission through its authorized
legal representative may petition the court to hold such person
in contempt of court. Such person may be assessed a fine by
the Commission not in excess of $1,000 for each offense,
provided the person to whom the subpoena is issued is so
notified on said subpoena that such fine may be assessed. Each
such person shall be immediately notified of the amount of
each such fine and each fine shall be paid within 30 days after
it is assessed. In the event any such fines are not so paid, they
shall be considered to be debts to the City of Bloomington and
shall be collectible in the same manner provided by law for the
collection of all other debts.
(e) All subpoenas issued hereunder shall be served upon the party
to whom they are directed by members of the Bloomington
Police Department or by any other means which show that the
subpoena has been received by the person to whom it was
directed.
(6) Rules of evidence. The rules of evidence prevailing in the courts of
law in this State shall not be applicable to nor bind any party, the
representative of any party, nor any administrative person or body
in any proceeding hereunder but such parties, persons and bodies
shall consider any and all reliable, probative, and substantial
evidence, statistical or otherwise, produced by anyone at any
proceeding hereunder which may tend to prove or disprove any act
or acts of discrimination alleged in the complaint under
consideration. All testimony in any proceeding hereunder shall be
given under oath. The Complainant has the burden of proving his or
her case by a preponderance of the evidence.
(7) Written record of the hearing. The written record of the Public
Hearing shall consist of the notice of hearing, the complaint, the
answer, the recorded transcript of the testimony taken at the
hearing, the exhibits in evidence, motions, stipulations, oral
arguments and the finding and orders of the Hearing Officer and of
the Commission.
§ 22.2-110 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22.2-110
1:689
(8) Close of hearings. The Hearing Officer shall specifically inquire of
all parties whether they have further proofs to offer or witnesses to
be heard. Upon receiving negative replies, the Hearing Officer
shall declare the hearing closed. If briefs are to be filed, the
hearing shall be declared closed as of the final date set by the
Hearing Officer for the receipt of briefs.
(9) Findings and recommendations.
(a) The Hearing Officer shall report his/her recommended findings
to the Commission in writing within 30 days of the close of the
hearing. The Commission shall at its next meeting, or within a
reasonable time after receipt of said Hearing Officer's report,
adopt, modify, or reject in whole or in part and in writing the
findings, recommendations, damages and/or the proposed fine
of the Hearing Officer which, upon being signed by the
Chairperson or by all members of the Commission attending
such hearing shall constitute a final order of the Commission. A
copy of the final order of the Commission shall be served by
certified mail, or personal service on each party directly
affected thereby.
(b) If the Commission conducts said Public Hearing, its findings,
determinations, recommendations, damages to be paid to the
Complainant and/or the fine shall be stated in writing which
upon being signed by the Chairperson or by all members of the
Commission who presided at the hearing shall constitute a
final order of the Commission.
(10) Review of decision. Review of all decisions and final orders made at
any public hearing provided for herein shall be by writ of certiorari
and all appeals must be filed within 35 days from the date that a
copy of the decision or final order sought to be reviewed was
served upon the party affected thereby. [Ord. No. 1996-8]
J. Remedies.
(1) Relief may include, but is not limited to, an order:
(a) To cease the illegal conduct complained of and to take steps to
alleviate the effect of the illegal conduct complained of;
(b) To pay actual damages, as reasonably determined by the
Commission, for injury or loss suffered;
(c) To pay compensatory damages, as reasonably determined by
the Commission;
(d) To hire, reinstate or upgrade the Complainant, with or without
back pay or to provide such fringe benefits as the Complainant
may have been denied;
(e) To sell or lease housing in question to the Complainant;
§ 22.2-110 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 22.2-110
1:690
§ 22.2-111. [Ch. 22.2, Sec. 11] Settlement.
(f) To admit the Complainant to a public accommodation;
(g) To extend to the Complainant the full and equal enjoyment of
the goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages, or
accommodations of the Respondent;
(h) To pay the Complainant all or a portion of the costs, including
reasonable attorney's fees, expert witness fees, witness fees,
and duplicating costs, incurred in pursuing the complaint
before the Commission or at any stage of judicial review;
(i) To take such action as may be necessary to make the
Complainant whole, including, but not limited to awards of
interest on the actual damages and back pay from the date of
the violation;
(j) To file with the Commission a report as to the manner of
compliance;
(k) To post in a conspicuous place notices which the Commission
may publish or cause to be published setting forth
requirements for compliance with this Ordinance, or other
relevant information which the Commission determines
necessary to explain this Ordinance; and
(l) To pay a fine of up to $2,500 for each offense.
(2) The total amount of actual and compensatory damages in the
Commission's order shall not exceed $50,000.
(3) The Commission may file with the Department of Professional
Regulation of the State of Illinois a notice in the event that any
licensed real estate broker or salesperson violates this Ordinance.
[Ord. No. 1996-8]
A. Circumstances. A settlement of any charge prior to a finding of
probable cause may be effectuated at any time upon agreement of the
parties. A settlement of any charge after a finding of probable cause
shall be effectuated as specified in § 22.2-110H(1) and (2) of this
chapter. [Ord. No. 1999-89]
B. Form. Settlements of charges prior to a finding of probable cause shall
be reduced to writing by the staff, signed by the parties, and submitted
by the staff to the Commission for inclusion in the Commission's
records. Settlements of charges after a finding of probable cause shall
be effectuated as specified in § 22.2-110H(1) and (2) of this chapter.
[Ord. No. 1999-89]
C. Violation.
§ 22.2-110 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22.2-111
1:691
§ 22.2-112. [Ch. 22.2, Sec. 12] Equal employment opportunity and
contract compliance.
(1) When either party alleges that a settlement order has been
violated, the staff shall conduct an investigation into the matter.
(2) Upon finding substantial evidence to demonstrate that a settlement
has been violated, the staff shall file notice of a settlement order
violation with the Commission and serve all parties. The
Commission shall have the authority to order appropriate sanctions
permitted by this Code against the party found to have violated a
settlement agreement. [Ord. No. 1996-8]
A. The City of Bloomington shall not contract in any amount exceeding
$5,000 in any year with any contractor or vendor, or maintain any
financial relationship with any financial institution, which does not first
submit to the City a written commitment to provide equal employment
opportunity in recruiting, training, and utilizing workers and to require
all subcontractors to provide equal employment opportunity in
recruiting, training and utilizing workers. [Ord. No. 1996-8]
B. The Commission shall have the authority to subpoena for records or
testimony any financial institution within the City of Bloomington or any
contractor or vendor contracting with the City of Bloomington for the
purpose of investigating compliance with the provisions of this
§ 22.2-112. Subpoenas shall be served in the same manner as
subpoenas issued under § 22.2-110I(5) of this chapter. [Ord. No.
1996-8]
C. Any financial institution within the City of Bloomington or any
contractor or vendor contracting with the City of Bloomington will be
required on request to submit compliance reports in writing to the
Human Relations Commission showing the implementation of and the
extent of the effectiveness of their equal employment opportunity
program in recruiting, training and hiring minority and women
workers. [Ord. No. 1996-8]
D. In the event that any contractor, vendor or financial institution
contracting with the City of Bloomington fails to comply with the Equal
Employment Opportunity and/or Contract Compliance provisions of this
chapter, the City upon recommendation of the Human Relations
Commission may deny, cancel, terminate, or suspend the contract in
whole or in part and/or may recover the sum of $50 for each day a party
fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter as liquidated damages
and not as a penalty. [Ord. No. 1996-8]
E. Upon the request of the Commission, the services of all City
departments and agencies shall be made available through the City
Manager by their respective department heads to the Commission and
upon request, relevant information in the possession of any department
or agency shall be furnished to the Commission. [Ord. No. 1996-8]
§ 22.2-111 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 22.2-113
1:692
§ 22.2-113. [Ch. 22.2, Sec. 13] Judicial relief. [Ord. No. 1996-8]
Whenever deemed necessary in order to protect the rights of a Complainant
or to preserve the power of the Commission to resolve a complaint, the
Legal Department of the City of Bloomington, or the legal representative
of the Commission, may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for an
injunction or other judicial relief to accomplish such purpose.
§ 22.2-114. [Ch. 22.2, Sec. 14] Limitations. [Ord. No. 1996-8]
Any action under § 22.2-112 shall be commenced within one year after
the cause of action accrued and any other action hereunder shall be
commenced within 180 days after the cause of action accrued or after
discovery thereof.
§ 22.2-115. [Ch. 22.2, Sec. 15] Penalty. [Ord. No. 1996-8]
If fines or other damages due hereunder are not paid within 30 days after
they are assessed, they shall be considered to be debts to the City of
Bloomington or to the party to whom they are owed and shall be collectible
in the same manner provided by law for the collection of all other debts.
§ 22.2-116. [Ch. 22.2, Sec. 16] Severability. [Ord. No. 1996-8]
If any section, paragraph, sentence or clause of this chapter is for any
reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect
the validity of any other part of this chapter.
Chapter 22.5
JUNK DEALERS
§ 22.5-101. [Ch. 22.5, Sec. 1] Junk dealers - must have license -
place of business.
No person shall use, exercise, or carry on the business of a keeper of a junk
store or junkyard for the purchase and sale of junk, rags, old rope, paper,
or bagging, old iron, brass, copper, tin, slush, lead, or other articles of like
nature without being first specially licensed for such purpose; nor shall any
person or persons so licensed as aforesaid carry on any such business at
any other house or place than at the place designated in such license.
§ 22.5-102. [Ch. 22.5, Sec. 2] How granted - fee. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
All licenses to keep what are commonly called junk stores or junkyards
as above defined shall be granted by the City Manager upon written
application made to him for that purpose and upon payment by the person
licensed to the Director of Finance of a license fee in an amount as set forth
in the Schedule of Fees per annum. No such license shall be granted for a
term or more than one year. Said license shall expire on December 31st of
the year in which it was issued. License fees for licenses applied for during
§ 22.2-113 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22.5-102
1:693
the year shall be prorated so as to require a fee for each quarter year or
part thereof remaining in the year.
§ 22.5-103. [Ch. 22.5, Sec. 3] Bond.
Every person making application for such a license shall, before the same is
granted, enter into a bond to the City in the sum of $500, with two or more
sureties to be approved by the Director of Finance, conditioned for the due
observance of this Code and of all Ordinances of the City that may hereafter
be passed, respecting dealers in junk.
§ 22.5-104. [Ch. 22.5, Sec. 4] Purchase by - prohibited - when.
No keeper of a junk shop or junkyard shall purchase from any one except
from plumbers and peddlers holding license as such from the City or from
the owners of the building from which the material is taken, any lead pipe,
faucets, boilers, or other plumbing material.
§ 22.5-105. [Ch. 22.5, Sec. 5] Purchasing, selling, etc., weapons
prohibited.
No junk dealer shall deal in or buy or sell or display in his store any
pistol, revolver, derringer, Bowie knife, dirk, or other deadly weapon of like
character, capable of being secreted upon the person.
§ 22.5-106. [Ch. 22.5, Sec. 6] Transportation of wastepaper, etc. -
manner of - penalty.
No keeper of a junk store or junkyard or any employee or servant thereof or
any other person shall collect or transport in the City any wastepaper, rags,
or other material likely to fall off or be blown about by the wind except in
a wagon so covered that such paper, rags, or other material cannot fall off
or be blown therefrom or in sealed bags or boxes that will accomplish the
same purpose. All such wagons, bags, and boxes shall be so constructed and
maintained that such paper, rags, and other material cannot drop through
the sides or bottom. Any person violating any of the provisions of this
section shall be fined not less than $5 nor more than $25 for each offense.
§ 22.5-107. [Ch. 22.5, Sec. 7] Report to Police Department.
It shall be the duty of every person licensed to keep a junk store or junkyard
to make out and deliver to the Chief of Police upon his request on any
day a report of all articles bought during the preceding day, together with
the hour when the same were purchased, the amount paid for the same, a
description of the said articles, a description of the person or persons from
whom the same were purchased, and the place of residence of said person
or persons.
§ 22.5-102 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 22.5-108
1:694
§ 22.5-108. [Ch. 22.5, Sec. 8] Permit - penalty.
No person, either by himself or his agent, servant, or employee, shall go
from place to place buying or collecting rags, old rope, paper, bagging, old
metal or whatever else is commonly known as junk, without first securing
from the Chief of Police a permit to do so; and any person so doing, either by
himself, his agent, servant, or employee, without such permit; shall be fined
for each offense not less than $5 nor more than $50. Any such permit to
any employer must specify the name or names of those who are to do such
buying or collecting before it shall be a protection either to the employer or
his employee.
§ 22.5-109. [Ch. 22.5, Sec. 9] Minors - purchase from prohibited -
hours of business.
No keeper of any junk store or junkyard or the agent, Clerk, or servant
of such keeper shall purchase any article, goods, or things whatsoever,
except rags and wastepaper, of any minor under the age of 16 years. No
keeper of any junk shop or junkyard shall purchase in the way of his or
her business any goods, articles, or thing whatsoever from any person or
persons whomsoever between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any
day.
§ 22.5-110. [Ch. 22.5, Sec. 10] Purchases from intoxicated persons,
thieves, etc.
No person keeping, operating, or maintaining a junk store or junkyard shall
purchase any junk from any person appearing to be intoxicated nor from
any person known to be a thief or to have been convicted of larceny or
burglary; and when any person is found to be the owner of stolen property
which has been purchased by any person keeping, operating, or maintaining
a junk store or junkyard, such property shall be returned to the owner
thereof without the payment of the amount paid therefor by the person
keeping, operating, or maintaining a junk store or junkyard.
§ 22.5-111. [Ch. 22.5, Sec. 11] Removal of place of business.
In case any person so licensed as aforesaid, either as a dealer in junk or as
keeper of a junk store, shall move his or her store or place of business from
the place designated in said license, he or she shall immediately thereupon
give notice to the City Manager of such removal, and the number of his or
her place of business shall thereupon be changed by the City Manager to
correspond to such place of removal.
§ 22.5-112. [Ch. 22.5, Sec. 12] License - not transferable.
No license granted under the provisions of this chapter shall be
transferable, nor shall it be held or be construed to authorize the conduct
of the business of keepers or junk stores or junkyards in any other manner
than is prescribed in this article.
§ 22.5-108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22.5-113
1:695
§ 22.5-113. [Ch. 22.5, Sec. 13] Penalty.
Whoever shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter, where no other
penalty is provided shall upon conviction be subject to a penalty of not less
than $10, nor more than $200 for each offense.
Chapter 22.8
INSURANCE — CENTRAL ILLINOIS RISK POOLING
AUTHORITY
§ 22.5-113 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 22.5-113
1:696
ARTICLE I
Definitions and Purpose
§ 22.8-101. [Ch. 22.8, Sec. 101] Definitions.
As used herein, the following terms shall have the meaning hereinafter set
out:
AGGREGATE STOP-LOSS INSURANCE — Insurance purchased by the
Authority from an insurance company approved by the Department of
Insurance to write such coverage in Illinois providing certain coverage up
to a contracted amount for otherwise uninsured losses to be borne by the
Joint Risk Management Fund, which in any one year aggregate to a preset
maximum amount of coverage.
ANNUAL PAYMENT — The amount each member must annually pay to fund
the anticipated costs of the full operation of the Authority.
AUTHORITY — The Central Illinois Risk Pooling Authority or ("CIRPA")
established pursuant to the Constitution and the statutes of the State of
Illinois and by home rule ordinance of the City of Bloomington.
BOARD OF DIRECTORS — The Board of Directors of the Authority
described in Article V of this Ordinance.
BY-LAWS — The By-laws of the Authority as described in Article V of this
Ordinance.[Ord. No. 1995-101]
CATASTROPHE EXCESS INSURANCE — Insurance purchased by the
Authority from an insurance company approved by the Department of
Insurance to write such coverage in Illinois providing certain coverage for
losses over a preset amount up to a preset maximum amount of coverage.
CHARTER MEMBER — The following unit of local government is the initial
member of the Authority: City of Bloomington.
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES — The governing body of a municipality or
other unit of local government which is a member of the Authority.
EMPLOYEE — A present or former officer, member of a board, commission
or committee, agent, volunteer, servant or employee, whether or not
compensated, but does not include an independent contractor.
JOINT SELF-INSURANCE — A self-insurance program in which
governmental units agree to contribute annual and, where required,
supplementary payments to support a risk management program and a joint
risk management fund.
MEMBERS — The units of government or intergovernmental agencies
which initially or later enter into an intergovernmental contract authorized
hereby.
RISK MANAGEMENT — A program attempting to reduce or limit casualty
losses to the property of members and injuries to persons or property
caused by the operations of the members. Where claims arise, the
employees and officers of the Authority will process such claims, investigate
§ 22.8-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22.8-101
1:697
their validity, settle or defend against such claims within the financial limits
established by the Board of Directors, tabulate such claims, costs and losses
and carry out other assigned duties.
RISK MANAGEMENT FUND — A fund of public monies established by the
CIRPA to administer and self-insure certain risks within an agreed scope
and/or to purchase catastrophe, excess and aggregate stop-loss insurance
and to pay other expenses within the scope of its authority as stated herein.
SELF-INSURANCE — The decision of a governmental unit not to purchase
insurance coverage for risks below certain high limits; to seek all
immunities provided by Illinois law for a noninsured unit of local
government; to rely upon its financial capabilities to pay any losses which
occur and, in the case of third party claims, are held valid and not barred
by available immunities; and to purchase some insurance to protect against
catastrophic or aggregate losses.
SUPPLEMENTARY PAYMENT — Additional payments which may be
required of a member if the amount of the annual payments shall be
insufficient to fund the operations of the Authority.
§ 22.8-102. [Ch. 22.8, Sec. 102] Purpose.
A. CIRPA is an agency separate and apart from the charter member and
other units of government pursuant to Article VII, Section 10 of the
1970 Constitution of the State of Illinois, Section 6 of the
Intergovernmental Cooperation Act (5 ILCS 220/1, et seq.) and Article
IX of the Local Governmental and Governmental Employees Tort
Immunity Act ("Tort Immunity Act") (745 ILCS 10/9-101 et seq.)
established for the purpose of preventing or lessening casualty losses to
governmental properties and injuries to persons or property which
might result in claims being made against members. It may be referred
to as "CIRPA" or the "Authority."
B. It is the intent of the members of the Authority to create an entity which
will administer a Risk Management Fund or a Joint Risk Management
Fund and utilize such funds contributed by the members to defend and
protect, as provided herein, any member of the Authority, employees
against stated liability or loss.
C. All funds contained within the Risk Management Fund are monies
directly derived from its members which are units of local government
within the State of Illinois. It is the intent of the members that, to the
fullest extent possible, the scope of risk management undertaken by
them through a self-insurance program using governmental funds shall
not waive, on behalf of any unit of local government or its employees
any defenses or immunities therein provided in the Tort Immunity Act.
Specifically, the members of this Authority intend to effect no waiver of
immunities through payment of public funds retained within the Risk
Management Fund and not used to purchase excess or stop loss
insurance policies. Such contributions constitute reserves to protect
against uninsured risks in accordance with 5 ILCS 220/6, and are not
§ 22.8-101 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 22.8-102
1:698
intended to constitute the issuance of a policy for insurance coverage,
(by an insurance company authorized by the Department of Insurance
to write such coverage in Illinois), as provided in 745 ILCS 10/9-103.
[Ord. No. 1995-101]
§ 22.8-102 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22.8-102
1:699

ARTICLE II
Powers and Duties
§ 22.8-201. [] Powers of Authority.
The powers of the Authority to perform and accomplish the purposes set
forth above shall, within the budgetary limits and procedures set forth
herein, be the following:
A. To sue and be sued;
B. To make contracts;
C. To provide personnel to operate the Authority through direct
employment, purchase of service from members, agents and
independent contractors;
D. To hold and dispose of real and personal property and to purchase or
lease equipment, machinery, or personal property necessary for the
carrying out of the purpose of the Authority;
E. To borrow money, contract debts and pledge assets in the name of the
Authority;
F. To carry out educational and other programs relating to risk reductions;
G. To cause the creation, collect funds for, and administer a Joint Risk
Management Fund;
H. To purchase excess insurance and stop loss insurance to supplement
the Joint Risk Management Fund;
I. To establish reasonable and necessary loss;
J. To provide risk management services including the defense of and
settlement of claims;
K. To carry out such other activities as are necessarily implied or required
to carry out the purposes of the Authority specified in Article I or the
specific powers enumerated in Article II. [Ord. No. 1995-101]
§ 22.8-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22.8-201
1:701

ARTICLE III
Commencement of the Authority and Initial Membership
§ 22.8-301. [] Commencement; charter members. [Ord. No.
1995-101]
The Authority will commence its operations on October 1, 1995. The initial
charter members of the Authority shall be those units of local government
whose names are set out in Appendix A.
§ 22.8-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22.8-301
1:703

ARTICLE IV
Participation
§ 22.8-401. [] Terms of participation, withdrawal; new members.
A. The members shall be bound by the terms of this document in its
original form and as validly amended from such time as each of the
members have adopted an ordinance or resolution substantially in the
form attached hereto as Appendix B.
B. Any member of the Authority may withdraw from the Authority at the
end of a fiscal year of the Authority upon the giving of at least one 60
days' prior written notice. Such notice shall be addressed to the
Authority at 109 East Olive Street, Bloomington, Illinois 61701 and
shall be accompanied by a resolution of the corporate authority of the
member electing to withdraw from the Authority indicating that
member's election to withdraw.
C. In the event a member withdraws as provided herein under Article XVI
of this document or is terminated under Article XVI, all liability of the
member which is no longer a participant in the Authority, including
claims incurred but not reported and related expenses, shall be the
exclusive responsibility of that member and shall not be the
responsibility of the Authority or any member which may continue to
participate in the Authority.
D. The Board may establish and periodically review standards for the
admission of new members. [Ord. No. 1995-101]
§ 22.8-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22.8-401
1:705

ARTICLE V
Board of Directors
§ 22.8-501. [Ch. 22.8, Sec. 501] Membership.
§ 22.8-502. [Ch. 22.8, Sec. 502] Adoption of by-laws.
The Board of Directors shall adopt Bylaws for the Authority which shall
contain the following provisions:
A. The Board of Directors shall be the governing body of the Authority and
shall manage its operations. The Board of Directors of the Authority
shall consist of the following persons:
(1) Two members of the Bloomington City Council;
(2) The City Manager of the City of Bloomington who may designate
the Assistant City Manager as his representative;
(3) Two persons other than Council members designated by the
Bloomington City Council;
(4) An elected or appointed official from each other member.
B. Directors shall serve as long as they maintain the criteria for their
appointment. Any Director is subject to removal by the member that
appointed the Director at any time, with or without cause. In such an
event, the corporate authority of the member shall appoint a qualified
individual to serve in place of the removed Director.
C. Each Director shall have one vote and shall be entitled to vote on all
matters coming before the Board of Directors, except where the
Director has a conflict of interest. The Board of Directors shall act by a
majority vote of its members present and voting at a properly convened
meeting with a quorum of Directors present, as defined in the Bylaws.
[Ord. No. 1995-101]
A. The powers and duties of the Board of Directors;
B. The rules regarding Board of Director meetings;
C. The method for fixing contributions to the Authority;
D. The rules for maintaining reserves for the Authority;
E. The rules for levying and collecting assessments for deficiencies;
F. The method for disposing surplus funds;
G. The administration of the Authority in the event of termination or
insolvency; and
H. Any other necessary or appropriate procedural guidelines to assist the
Board of Directors in managing the Authority. [Ord. No. 1995-101]
§ 22.8-501 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22.8-503
1:707
§ 22.8-503. [Ch. 22.8, Sec. 503] Adoption of memorandum of
liability coverage.
A. The Directors shall adopt a Memorandum of Liability Coverage for the
Authority which shall set forth the following:
(1) The insurance coverage to be offered by the authority. These
coverages may include any or all of the following:
(a) Casualty insurance, including general and professional liability
coverage;
(b) Property insurance, including marine insurance, inland
navigation and transportation insurance coverage;
(c) Automobile insurance, including motor vehicle liability
insurance coverage and security from motor vehicles owned or
operated, and protection against other liability and loss
associated with ownership of motor vehicles;
(d) Surety and fidelity insurance coverage; and
(e) Umbrella and excess insurance coverage.
(2) The deductible levels, if any;
(3) The maximum levels of coverage the Authority will self-insure;
(4) The amount of insurance to be purchased by the Authority on a per
member basis to provide coverage over and above claims which are
not to be satisfied directly from the Authority's resources;
(5) The amount of aggregate excess insurance coverage to be
purchased by the Authority on a per member basis;
(6) The procedures for the administration of claims.
B. The Memorandum of Liability Coverage is appended hereto as
Appendix C and its terms are hereby incorporated herein by reference.
However, the Memorandum of Liability Coverage may be amended by
the members or the Board of Directors, as set forth in the Memorandum
of Liability Coverage. [Ord. No. 1995-101]
§ 22.8-503 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 22.8-503
1:708
ARTICLE VI
Board of Directors Meetings
§ 22.8-601. [] Meetings; minutes.
A. Regular meetings of the Board of Directors shall be held at least two
times a year. The dates of regular meetings of the Board shall be
established at the beginning of each fiscal year. Any item of business
may be considered at a regular meeting. At least one meeting must be
held during the first half of the fiscal year and at least one meeting must
be held during the second half of the fiscal year. Special meetings of the
Board of Directors may be called by its Chairman, or by any two
Directors. The Chairman or in his absence, the Vice Chairman, shall
give at least five days' written notice of regular or special meetings to
the authorized and alternate representatives of each member and an
agenda specifying the subject of any special meeting shall accompany
such notice. In an emergency, the time requirement for notice may be
waived. Business conducted at special meetings shall be limited to
those items specified in the agenda. [Ord. No. 1995-101]
B. The time, date and location of regular and special meetings of the Board
of Directors shall be determined by the Chairman of the Board of
Directors, or in his absence, by the Vice Chairman. [Ord. No.
1995-101]
C. Minutes of all regular and special meetings of the Board of Directors
shall be sent to all members of the Board of Directors. [Ord. No.
1995-101]
§ 22.8-601 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22.8-601
1:709

ARTICLE VII
Authority Officers
§ 22.8-701. [Ch. 22.8, Sec. 701] Officers of authority. [Ord. No.
1995-101]
Officers of the Authority shall consist of a Risk Manager, a Treasurer, and
such other officers as are established from time to time by the Board
of Directors. All Authority officers shall be appointed by the Board of
Directors.
§ 22.8-702. [Ch. 22.8, Sec. 702] Risk Manager.
The Risk Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the Authority
and shall in general supervise and control the day to day operations of the
Authority and shall carry out the policy of the Authority as established in
the By-laws and by the Board of Directors. Among his or her duties, the Risk
Manager:
§ 22.8-703. [Ch. 22.8, Sec. 703] Temporary appointment of Risk
Manager or Treasurer. [Ord. No. 1995-101]
Where a Risk Manager or Treasurer is not appointed or where there is a
vacancy in either position, the Chairman of the Board of Directors, upon
the authorization of the Executive Committee or the Board of Directors may
perform the duties of the Risk Manager or Treasurer and when so acting
A. Shall sign with such other person authorized by the Board of Directors
any instruments which the Board of Directors has authorized to be
executed and, in general to perform all duties incident to the office of
Risk Manager and such other duties as may be prescribed by the Board
of Directors from time to time.
B. Shall prepare a proposed annual budget and proposed annual Risk
Management Fund payment and, where required, supplementary
payments to the Risk Management Fund and shall submit such
proposals to the Board of Directors.
C. Shall, where necessary, make recommendations regarding policy
decisions, the creation of other Authority officers and the employment
of agents and independent contractors. At each regular meeting of the
Board of Directors and at such other times as he or she shall be
required to do so, he or she shall present a full report of his or her
activities and the fiscal condition of the Authority.
D. Shall report monthly to all members on all claims filed and payouts
made.
E. Shall within the constraints of the approved or amended budget, to
employ all secretarial, clerical and other similar help and expend funds
for administrative expenses. [Ord. No. 1995-101]
§ 22.8-701 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22.8-703
1:711
shall have all of the powers of and be subject to all of the restrictions upon
the Risk Manager or Treasurer.
§ 22.8-704. [Ch. 22.8, Sec. 704] Treasurer.
The Treasurer shall:
§ 22.8-705. [Ch. 22.8, Sec. 705] Bond. [Ord. No. 1995-101]
The Authority shall purchase a bond in the minimum amount contained
within the Risk Management Fund from time to time to assure the fidelity
of the Risk Manager and the Treasurer. Without amending the By-laws,
the Board of Directors, by motion, may increase the amount of the bonds
for the aforesaid officers and procure fidelity and other bonds for officers,
directors, employees or independent contractors of the Authority.
§ 22.8-706. [Ch. 22.8, Sec. 706] Outside services. [Ord. No.
1995-101]
The Board may select a financial institution to carry out some or all of
the functions which would otherwise be assigned to a Treasurer and may
select a risk management company or agent to carry out some or all of the
functions which would otherwise be assigned to a Risk Manager. The Board
may also employ persons or companies as independent contractors to carry
out some or all of the functions of officers of the Authority.
§ 22.8-707. [Ch. 22.8, Sec. 707] General counsel.
A. Have charge and custody of and be responsible for all funds and
securities of the Authority; receive and give all receipts for moneys due
and payable to the Authority from any source whatsoever, deposit all
such moneys in the name of the Authority in such banks, savings and
loan associations or other depositories as shall be selected by the Board
of Directors; and, invest the funds of the Authority as are not
immediately required in such securities as the Board of Directors shall
specifically or generally select from time to time; maintain the financial
books and records of the Authority;
B. In general, perform all duties incident to the office of Treasurer and
such other duties as from time to time may be assigned to him or her by
the Risk Manager or the Board of Directors. [Ord. No. 1995-101]
A. The General Counsel shall act as attorney for the Authority and shall:
(1) Advise and be responsible to the Board of Directors on all legal
matters affecting the Authority or its members in connection with
their membership or claims covered by the Authority;
(2) Represent members with respect to any and all claims covered by
the Authority, and to defend, litigate, compromise or settle them as
provided herein;
§ 22.8-703 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 22.8-707
1:712
(3) Perform other duties as directed by the Board of Directors.
B. The General Council may by contract authorized by the Board of
Directors, represent members with respect to matters not covered by
this Ordinance. [Ord. No. 1995-101]
§ 22.8-707 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22.8-707
1:713

ARTICLE VIII
Finances and Risk Management
§ 22.8-801. [Ch. 22.8, Sec. 801] Fiscal year. [Ord. No. 1995-101]
The fiscal year of the Authority shall commence on January 1 and end on
December 31 of each year.
§ 22.8-802. [Ch. 22.8, Sec. 802] Budget.
§ 22.8-803. [Ch. 22.8, Sec. 803] Determining members' payments
due.
A. The annual operating budget of the Authority shall separately show the
following: general and administrative costs; deposits, projected income
and other income; the actuarially estimated claims and allocated claims
adjustment costs; and any other information determined to be
necessary by the Board of Directors. [Ord. No. 1995-101]
B. Except for 1995, the Board of Directors or the Executive Committee
shall approve a preliminary budget for the administration of the
Authority by October 1 of each year. Copies of all preliminary and final
budgets shall be promptly sent to each member of the Board of
Directors. The Board of Directors shall, by December 1 of the year prior
to the start of each fiscal year adopt a final budget and determine the
amount of the annual payment to be made by each member and the
date upon which the payment is due. Failure of the Board of Directors
or the Executive Committee to approve a preliminary or final budget
within the times set forth within this section shall not relieve the
members of the obligation to make annual or supplementary payment
to the Authority so long as such budgets are finally adopted, and the
members are given at least 45 days after the passage of the final budget
in which to make payments to the Authority. [Ord. No. 1995-101]
A. In determining the amount of the annual payment due from each
member, the Board of Directors shall consider some or all of the
following factors:
(1) Population of the governmental body;
(2) Property values of the governmental body;
(3) Number of vehicles owned by the governmental body and the use
made of the vehicles;
(4) The size and scope of the governmental programs of the member;
(5) The payroll of the member;
(6) The budget of the member;
(7) The claims and loss experience of the member;
§ 22.8-801 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22.8-803
1:715
§ 22.8-804. [Ch. 22.8, Sec. 804] Amendment of budget. [Ord. No.
1995-101]
Budgets may be amended at any time by majority vote of the Board or of the
Executive Committee and calls for supplementary payment may be made by
the Board of Directors. The Board shall also make calls for supplementary
payment from members which have withdrawn or been expelled for years
during which they were members. The forwarding of such annual and
supplementary payment within a time specified in notices to the members
giving them not less than 45 days to make such payments, shall be of the
essence of this contract, supplementary payment shall only be required by
the Board of Directors in a situation in which there is a reasonable concern
that the sum remaining from the annual payment will not be sufficient
to meet the responsibilities of the Authority established herein, members
shall be responsible for supplementary payment during the entire life of the
Authority and any later period when claim expenses need be paid which are
attributable to the of membership when the event out of which the expense
or claim occurred, supplementary payment may be called for in a number of
individual requests.
§ 22.8-805. [Ch. 22.8, Sec. 805] Monthly or quarterly payments.
[Ord. No. 1995-101]
In subsequent years, the Board of Directors may permit the annual or
supplementary payment to be paid monthly or quarterly basis. The amount
of any supplementary payment required shall be based upon the same
formula as was used in establishing the annual payment for that year.
(8) Other information relevant to determine the risk pertaining to each
member.
B. The Board of Directors shall annually establish or ratify an objective
formula which it utilized in making the allocation of the amount of the
annual payment due from each member. This standard may, however,
vary from year to year but it must be applied equally to all members
similarly situated during such period of time as it is utilized.
C. Surplus funds attributable to a member may not be returned to a
member unless the member withdraws or the Authority is terminated
and liquidated. However, surplus funds at the end of each fiscal year
attributable to a member may be applied to the annual contribution
owing by the member for the following fiscal year or years.
D. Notwithstanding the previous paragraph, if the surplus funds at the end
of a fiscal year attributable to a member equal at least 15% of the total
expenditures of the general and special revenue funds of the member
for the corresponding fiscal year, the Board of Directors of the Authority
may vote to return a reasonable portion of the surplus funds to the
member. However, no return of surplus funds shall be permitted unless
the member consents to the return of the surplus funds. [Ord. No.
1995-101]
§ 22.8-803 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 22.8-806
1:716
§ 22.8-806. [Ch. 22.8, Sec. 806] Surplus distribution. [Ord. No.
1995-101]
If, for any year during the Authority's existence, all claims known or
unknown have either been paid or provision has been made for such
payment, the Board of Directors as then constituted may distribute surplus
funds to the members who constituted the membership of the Authority in
that prior year, after first deducting therefrom reasonable administrative
and other non allocated costs incurred by the Authority in the processing
of the claims in years other than the one in which the claim was made and
after establishing such reserves as may be established from time to time.
After claim year 1996, no member which withdraws from the Authority shall
receive a return of surplus funds or rebate(s) approved by the Board of
Directors from any year for which said withdrawn member was a member
of the Authority unless, for all years the withdrawn member was a member
of the Authority, the withdrawn member has a positive cash balance when
its total net losses (to be defined as completed payment, including defense
costs, damages, any reasonable administrative and any other non allocated
costs incurred by the Authority or all claims known to have been incurred
by the withdrawing member in all years for which the withdrawing member
participated in the Authority plus any reasonable reserve which the
Authority Executive Committee shall require to be established for any
incurred but not reported claims during said years) for that withdrawn
member's claims for all years combined are compared to that withdrawn
member's total loss fund contributions for those years. A withdrawing or
withdrawn member shall receive a distribution of surplus funds or rebate(s)
approved by the Board of Directors when its total net losses for all years of
its membership are less than its total loss fund contributions for said years.
In no case shall a withdrawing or withdrawn member receive a distribution
of surplus funds or rebate(s) approved by the Board of Directors in excess
of its final combined cash balance for all years while a member of the
Authority. The Board of Directors may, in its absolute discretion, withhold
distribution of any surplus funds or rebates to any withdrawn member until
the Board of Directors is assured there is sufficient evidence to establish
with reasonable certainty the withdrawn member's total net losses.
§ 22.8-807. [Ch. 22.8, Sec. 807] Audit. [Ord. No. 1995-101]
The Board of Directors shall provide to the members an annual audit
of the financial affairs of the Authority to be made by a certified public
accountant at the end of each fiscal year in accordance with generally
accepted auditing principles.
§ 22.8-808. [Ch. 22.8, Sec. 808] First year of authority. [Ord. No.
1995-101]
During the first year of the existence of the Authority, a budget shall be
approved for the remainder of the fiscal year. That budget shall confirm
and authorize the payment of any funds made earlier during that first
fiscal year as well as such funds as are estimated to be required during
§ 22.8-806 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22.8-808
1:717
the remainder of that fiscal year. The amount of the annual payments due
from the members during the first fiscal year shall be the payments which
were established and paid by members commencing on October 1, 1995. If
new members are admitted into the Authority at any time other than the
anniversary date of the Authority, the Board of Directors shall establish the
annual payment due from that new member and the exact amount of that
annual payment due for that portion of the year for which the member is
admitted to the Authority.
§ 22.8-808 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 22.8-808
1:718
ARTICLE IX
Scope of Loss Protection
§ 22.8-901. [] Coverage.
A. In the absence of a motion by the Board of Directors expanding or
contracting the scope of loss protection furnished by the Authority, the
Authority shall provide the scope of loss protection to the extent that
protection would be accorded within the terms of the excess and
aggregate policies held from time to time by the Authority for the
benefit of its members. It is the intent of this document that, except to
the extent to which the scope of coverage provided by the Authority is
specifically expanded by action of the Board of Directors, the members
herein do not intend to utilize the loss fund of the Authority to cover
matters in which aggregate and excess coverage is not
contemporaneously provided. The initial scope of protection to be
furnished by the Authority shall be substantially as is established in
Appendix C attached hereto and made a part here; provided, however,
that without limiting the generality thereof, except as covered within
the insurance policies purchased by the Authority, the Authority shall
not provide self-insurance coverage in the following areas:
(1) Punitive or exemplary damages.
(2) Liability of individuals otherwise covered, for acts committed
outside of the scope of their duties and powers.
(3) Causes of action seeking only non-monetary claims such as
injunction, mandamus and declaratory relief.
(4) The payment of the attorneys' fees of opposing counsel or other
court costs where a judgment providing no other monetary relief to
the plaintiff is entered.
(5) Causes of action where the plaintiff seeks no damages but only the
return of tax funds or any other fund alleged to have been paid or
received by the member in error or without authority in law.
(6) Causes of actions grounded solely in contract except for validly
extended contractual obligations of members to indemnify third
parties.
(7) Causes of action seeking only back pay or retroactive salary
increases based upon alleged discrimination.
(8) Causes of action alleging improper acts by police officers, whether
sworn or unsworn, police departments or other officers of members
serving as law enforcement officers where said individuals or
departments are not certified by the State of Illinois or other
agency approved by the Board of Directors to certify local police
officers and local police departments, or have been found, previous
to the cause of action arising, to not meet minimum State of Illinois
§ 22.8-901 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22.8-901
1:719
requirements established for said police officers or departments.
The minimum state requirements referred to in this exclusion shall
be those requirements promulgated pursuant to the Illinois Police
Training Act, 50 ILCS 705/1 et seq. or any related Illinois statute
intended to regulate the training and/or certification of local police
offices and local police departments, effective on the date the
alleged cause of action accrues.
B. In listing the items set forth above, the members merely wish to take
formal note of certain areas in which coverage may from time to time
not be available from insurance companies from which the Authority
purchases insurance. These limitations in coverage are not, however,
intended as a complete statement of those areas which may not be
found within the scope of coverage provided by the Authority. Nor are
these listed areas of exclusion intended to be outside the scope of
protection afforded by the Authority to the extent to which the
aggregate, excess or other policies purchased by the Authority may
from time to time provide such coverage. The Risk Manager, after
having reviewed a claim forwarded to the Authority for coverage shall
be permitted to decline to provide coverage for such claim if, in his or
her opinion, the claim is not within the scope of coverage accorded by
the Authority. The Risk Manager may also agree to accept the claim and
provide a defense but may reserve the right of the Authority to
withdraw from the defense or to refuse to provide indemnification
against the claim in the event that it is later determined that the claim
is not properly within the scope of protection accorded by the Authority.
C. By entering into and agreeing to the provisions of this document, each
member of the Authority agrees to be bound by a decision by a majority
vote of the then current members of the Authority that a particular
matter presented to the Authority for defense and indemnification is or
is not within the scope of coverage provided by the Authority. Any
member of the Authority may request that the Board of Directors take
official action to affirm or reverse a decision by the Risk Manager or
other officer, employee or independent contractor of the Authority that
a particular matter is or is not within the scope of coverage provided by
the Authority. The member requesting such a consideration by the
Board of Directors shall have a full opportunity to explain the position
being urged by the member. The decision of the Authority shall be final
in the absence of a gross abuse of its discretion. [Ord. No. 1995-101]
§ 22.8-901 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 22.8-901
1:720
ARTICLE X
Excess Insurance
§ 22.8-1001. [Ch. 22.8, Sec. 1001] Excess insurance. [Ord. No.
1995-101]
The Authority may purchase excess insurance from a company approved
by the Department of Insurance to write such coverage in Illinois in such
amounts as shall be approved by the Board of Directors.
§ 22.8-1002. [Ch. 22.8, Sec. 1002] Stop-loss insurance. [Ord. No.
1995-101]
In addition to the stated excess insurance coverage, the Authority will
obtain aggregate stop-loss insurance such that in the event that the
Authority should in any single year expend a maximum aggregate sum set
from time to time by the Board of Directors for the payment of claims,
the stop-loss protection would pay additional claims above that amount to
certain maximum annual amount. The Board of Directors shall determine
the commencement level of the aggregate stop loss protection and its limit
based upon the current assets and risk history of the Authority.
§ 22.8-1003. [Ch. 22.8, Sec. 1003] Payment of claims exceeding
reserves. [Ord. No. 1995-101]
In the event that a series of losses should deplete the amounts which could
be raised from annual and all callable supplementary payment, the excess
insurance and the stop loss coverage for any one year, then the payment of
such uncovered valid loss shall be the obligation of the individual member
or members against whom the claim was made and perfected by judgment
or settlement. The Authority shall make payments from the Risk
Management Fund and the excess insurance and stop loss insurance
proceeds in the order in which the judgments against the Authority have
been entered or settlements of claims have been reached.
§ 22.8-1001 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22.8-1003
1:721

ARTICLE XI
Obligations of Members
§ 22.8-1101. [] Obligations.
A. The obligations of members of the Authority shall be as follows:
(1) To budget for, where necessary, to levy for and to promptly pay all
annual and supplementary or other payments to the Authority at
such times and in such amounts as shall be established by the
Board of Directors within the scope of this document. Any
delinquent payments shall be paid with a penalty which shall be
equal to the highest interest rate allowed by statute to be paid by
an Illinois unit of local government.
(2) To select a person to serve on the Board of Directors and to select
an alternate representative.
(3) To allow the Authority reasonable access to all facilities of the
member and all records including but not limited to financial
records which relate to the purpose or powers of the Authority.
(4) To allow attorneys engaged by the Authority to represent the
member in investigation, settlement discussions and all level of
litigation arising out of any claim made against the member within
the scope of loss protection furnished by the Authority.
(5) To furnish full cooperation with the Authority's attorneys, claims
adjusters, the Risk Manager and any agent, employee, officer or
independent contractor of the Authority relating to the purpose and
powers of the Authority.
(6) To follow in its operations all loss reduction and prevention
procedures established by the Authority within its purpose and
powers.
(7) To report to the Risk Manager within the time limit specified the
following items;
(a) Within 10 days of receipt, a statutory notice of claim, a
summons and a complaint or other pleading before a court or
agency for which coverage is sought;
(b) To report, within 30 days of receipt, a written demand for
monetary relief for which coverage is sought;
(c) To report to the Risk Manager at the earliest practicable
moment any information of an occurrence received by the
member and from which the member could reasonably
conclude that coverage will be sought.
B. In the event that the items set forth above are not submitted to the Risk
Manager within the time periods set forth above, the Board of Directors
§ 22.8-1101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22.8-1101
1:723
of the Authority by a vote of a majority of a quorum of the Board, at a
regular or special meeting, may in whole or in part decline to provide
a defense to the member or to extend the funds of the Authority for
the payment of losses or damages incurred. In reaching its decision,
the Board shall consider whether and to what extent the Authority was
prejudiced in its ability to investigate and defend the claim due to the
failure of the member to promptly furnish notice of the claim to the Risk
Manager. In the absence of fraud or a gross abuse of discretion, the
decision of the Board of Directors shall be final. [Ord. No. 1995-101]
§ 22.8-1101 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 22.8-1101
1:724
ARTICLE XII
Liability of Board of Directors or Officers
§ 22.8-1201. [] Liability. [Ord. No. 1995-101]
The members of the Board of Directors or officers of the Authority should
use ordinary care and reasonable diligence in the exercise of their power
and in the performance of their duties hereunder; they shall not be liable
for any mistake of judgment or other action made, taken or omitted by them
in good faith, nor for any action taken or omitted by any agent, employee or
independent contractor selected with reasonable care; nor for loss incurred
through investment of Authority funds, or failure to invest. No Director
shall be liable for any action taken or omitted by any other Director. No
Director shall be required to give a bond or other security to guarantee the
faithful performance of their duties hereunder. The Authority may purchase
insurance providing liability coverage for such Directors or officers.
§ 22.8-1201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22.8-1201
1:725

ARTICLE XIII
Additional Insurance
§ 22.8-1301. [] Additional insurance coverage. [Ord. No. 1995-101]
Membership in the Authority shall not preclude insurance coverage above
those amounts purchased by the Authority. The Authority shall make its
facilities available to advise members of the types of additional or different
coverage available to municipalities.
§ 22.8-1301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22.8-1301
1:727

ARTICLE XIV
Optional Defense by Member
§ 22.8-1401. [] Defense.
A. Whenever the Authority proposes to settle any pending claim or suit
where the amount of that proposed settlement shall exceed $10,000,
the member shall be given advance notice of that settlement. Such
notice may be given by the establishment of a reserve amount in excess
of $10,000 provided that the amount of the settlement does not exceed
the amount reserved. The officers and employees of the Authority shall,
however, endeavor to give specific oral or written notice to a member of
the exact amount of any proposed settlement in excess of $10,000 at
least 14 days prior to the date at which the Authority proposes to bind
itself to pay such settlement amount. It is recognized by the members
that under some circumstances, the Authority may not be able to give
14 days' prior oral or written notice of the proposed settlement. The
officers, employees or independent contractors of the Authority shall
attempt to give the members as much notice of the settlement as is
possible under the circumstances of each case.
B. If, the event that a member should disagree with the amount at which
the Authority proposes to settle a case or claim, the authorized
representative of the member on the Board of Directors of the
Authority, the alternate representative, or the Manager or other Chief
Executive Officer of the member may notify the Risk Manager of the
Authority that the member exercises its right to prevent the Authority
from reaching a settlement at the agreed upon amount. The Risk
Manager may require that such information be transmitted in writing.
In the event that the Authority does not settle a case based upon the
objection of a member, the Authority shall continue to provide a defense
to the defendants unless the member should desire to undertake the
defense itself. In the event that the case or claim is eventually resolved
through a settlement or judgment in an amount less than the amount at
which the case could have been previously settled by the Authority then
the member which has undertaken the cost of its own defense shall be
entitled to its additional actual costs, including attorneys' fees, up to
the level at which its costs and the prior allocated costs of the Authority,
including attorneys' fees, equal the amount at which the case could
have been settled by the Authority. To the extent that the case or claim
is resolved through settlement or judgment at an amount greater than
that at which the case or claim could have been previously settled by
the Authority, the member shall be obligated to pay to the Authority,
supplementary payment in the amount that the sum of the settlement or
judgment, plus all other allocated costs of the Authority, exceed the sum
of money at which the case could have been earlier settled by the
Authority. If at any time the amount of the allocated costs of the
Authority devoted to the case shall equal or exceed the amount at which
the case could have been settled, the Authority may require periodic
§ 22.8-1401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22.8-1401
1:729
supplementary payment from the member if the member wishes to have
the Authority continue to provide the defense.
C. Allocated costs shall mean those costs which are allocated to individual
cases under the bookkeeping and accounting system utilized by the
Authority. The Authority may establish the amount at which it could
have settled the case through a written settlement offer by the plaintiff,
or through other competent evidence of the availability of the
settlement at a particular sum.
D. To the extent that payment shall be made from an aggregate, excess or
other insurance carrier, the provision of this article shall prevail when
not contrary to those insurance contracts, supplementary payment
required under this article shall not be subject to the limitation in
supplementary payment contained in § 22.8-804. [Ord. No. 1995-101]
§ 22.8-1401 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 22.8-1401
1:730
ARTICLE XV
Contractual Obligation
§ 22.8-1501. [] Contract.
A. This document shall constitute a contract among those units of local
government which become members of the Authority. The obligations
and responsibilities of the members set forth herein including the
obligation to take no action inconsistent with this Agreement as
originally written or validly amended shall remain a continuing
obligation and responsibility of the member. The terms of this Contract
may be enforced in a court of law by the Authority.
B. The consideration for the duties herewith imposed upon the members
to take certain actions and to refrain from certain other actions shall be
based upon the mutual promises and agreements of the members set
forth herein. This Agreement may be executed in duplicate originals
and its passage shall be evidenced by a certified copy of an ordinance or
resolution passed by a majority of the members of the corporate
authorities or similar governing body then in office. Provided, however,
that except to the extent of the limited financial contributions to the
Authority agreed to herein or such additional obligations as may come
about through amendments to this Agreement no member agrees or
contracts herein to be held responsible for any claims in tort or contract
made against any other member. The contracting parties intend in the
creation of the Authority to establish an organization for joint risk
management only within the scope herein set out and have not herein
created as between member and member any relationship of surety,
indemnification or responsibility for the debts of or claims against any
member. [Ord. No. 1995-101]
§ 22.8-1501 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22.8-1501
1:731

ARTICLE XVI
Expulsion of Members
§ 22.8-1601. [Ch. 22.8, Sec. 1601] Grounds for expulsion.
By the vote of 2/3 of the entire membership of the Board of Directors, any
member may be expelled. Such expulsion may be carried out for one or
more of the following reasons:
§ 22.8-1602. [Ch. 22.8, Sec. 1602] Procedure.
A. Failure to make any payments due to the Authority;
B. Failure to undertake or continue loss reduction and prevention
procedures adopted by the Authority;
C. Failure to allow the Authority reasonable access to all facilities of the
member and to all records which relate to the purpose or powers of the
Authority;
D. Failure to furnish full cooperation with the Authority's attorneys, claims
adjusters, the Risk Manager and any agent, employee, officer or
independent contractor of the Authority relating to the purpose and
powers of the Authority;
E. Failure to carry out any obligation of a member which impairs the
ability of the Authority, to carry out its purpose or powers. [Ord. No.
1995-101]
A. No member may be expelled except after notice from the Authority of
the alleged failure along with a reasonable opportunity of not less than
30 days to cure the alleged failure if remediable. The member may
request a hearing before the Board before any decision is made as to
whether the expulsion shall take place. The Board shall set the date for
a hearing which shall not be less than 15 days after the expiration of the
time to cure has passed. A decision by the Board to expel a member
after notice and hearing and a failure to cure the alleged defect shall be
final unless the Board shall be found by a court to have committed a
gross abuse of discretion. The Board of Directors may establish the date
at which the expulsion of the member shall be effective at any time not
less than 60 days after the vote expelling the member has been made by
the Board of Directors. If the motion to expel the member made by the
Board of Directors or a subsequent motion does not state the time at
which the expulsion shall take place, such expulsion shall take place 60
days after the date of the vote by the Board of Directors expelling the
member. [Ord. No. 1995-101]
B. After expulsion, the former member shall continue to be fully obligated
for its portion of any claim against the assets of the Authority which was
created during the term of its membership along with any other
unfulfilled obligation as if it was still a member of the Authority. The
§ 22.8-1601 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22.8-1602
1:733
expelled member shall, after expulsion, no longer be entitled to
participate or vote on the Board of Directors. [Ord. No. 1995-101]
§ 22.8-1602 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 22.8-1602
1:734
ARTICLE XVII
Termination or Insolvency of the Authority
§ 22.8-1701. [Ch. 22.8, Sec. 1701] Conditions for termination. [Ord.
No. 1995-101]
If, at the conclusion of any fixed term of the Authority, the Board of Directors
does not vote to continue the existence of the Authority, or, if at any time the
number of the members of the Authority which will continue as members
into the next fiscal year shall not be sufficient to at the support a $40,000
Joint Risk Management Fund, the Authority shall cease its existence close
of the then current fiscal year. Under those circumstances, the Board of
Directors shall continue to meet on such a schedule as shall be necessary to
carry out the winding up of the affairs of the Authority. It is contemplated
that the Board of Directors may be required to continue holding meetings
for some substantial period of time in order to accomplish this task.
§ 22.8-1702. [Ch. 22.8, Sec. 1702] Withdrawal. [Ord. No. 1995-101]
Where any member withdraws from the Authority, at a time when the
Authority shall continue in operation, the withdrawing member shall
continue to hold membership on the Board of Directors but only for the
purpose of voting on matters affecting their limited continuing interest in
the Authority for such years as they were members of the Authority. All
members upon a general termination of the Authority shall remain fully
obligated for their portion of any claim against the assets of the Risk
Management Fund which was created during the term of their membership
along with any other unfulfilled obligations, including but not limited to
calls for supplementary payment for years of their membership which may
be required and called for in subsequent years.
§ 22.8-1703. [Ch. 22.8, Sec. 1703] Insolvency. [Ord. No. 1995-101]
In the event of the Authority's insolvency, the Board of Directors shall
appoint a qualified, independent third party to act as custodian or receiver
and to liquidate and distribute the Authority's assets in accordance with
applicable law. Further, contributions attributable to a member shall be
returned to the member following the payment of all claims owing by the
member and following the payment of the participating public entity's pro
rata share of administrative and other costs.
§ 22.8-1701 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22.8-1703
1:735

ARTICLE XVIII
Representations and Warranties
§ 22.8-1801. [] Representations and warranties.
Each participating public entity represents and warrants the following:
A. That it shall obtain the authority of its legislative or governing body to
comply with the terms of this document;
B. That it shall comply with the terms and conditions of this document and
the Memorandum of Liability Coverage and any other agreements
relating to the operation of the Authority;
C. That it shall make all required contributions to the Authority in a timely
fashion in accordance with the terms of this document and the
Memorandum of Liability Coverage; and
D. That it shall fully cooperate and assist the Authority in defense of any
claims brought against the participating public entity that are covered
by this document and the Memorandum of Liability Coverage. [Ord.
No. 1995-101]
§ 22.8-1801 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22.8-1801
1:737

ARTICLE XIX
Notices
§ 22.8-1901. [] Delivery of notices. [Ord. No. 1995-101]
Notices to members shall be sufficient if delivered to the principal office of
the respective member. Notices to the Board of Directors shall be sufficient
if delivered to the office of the City of Bloomington City Manager, 109 East
Olive Street, Bloomington, Illinois 61701. Notices may be delivered by firstclass
mail.
§ 22.8-1901 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22.8-1901
1:739

ARTICLE XX
Governing Law
§ 22.8-2001. [] Governing law. [Ord. No. 1995-101]
This document is intended to comply with all applicable law. This document
shall be governed, to the extent permissible, by Illinois law.
§ 22.8-2001 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22.8-2001
1:741

ARTICLE XXI
Prohibition Against Assignment
§ 22.8-2101. [] Assignment of rights, claims or interest. [Ord. No.
1995-101]
No participating public entity may assign any right, claim or interest it
may have under this document, and no creditor, assignee or third party
beneficiary of any member shall have any right, claim or title to any part,
share, interest, fund, premium or asset of the Authority.
§ 22.8-2101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22.8-2101
1:743

ARTICLE XXII
Complete Agreement
§ 22.8-2201. [] Complete agreement. [Ord. No. 1995-101]
This document constitutes the full and complete Agreement of the members
and supersedes all prior oral or written understandings and agreements
between the members.
§ 22.8-2201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22.8-2201
1:745

ARTICLE XXIII
Authorization
§ 22.8-2301. [] Authority to enter into agreement. [Ord. No.
1995-101]
The authorized representative signing this document on behalf of each
member hereby represents and warrants that he or she has full and
complete authority to enter into this Agreement on behalf of the member.
§ 22.8-2301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22.8-2301
1:747
Chapter 23
LAKE BLOOMINGTON
§ 22.8-2301 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 22.8-2301
1:748
ARTICLE I
In General
§ 23-101. [Ch. 23, Sec. 1] Definitions.
The following words when used in this chapter shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this section:
CITY — The City of Bloomington, Illinois.
CRAFT — Every description of water craft, used or capable of being used as
a means of transportation on water, except a seaplane on the water, inner
tube, air mattress or similar device.[Ord. No. 1990-29]
CUSTODIAN — Refers to any lessee from the City of any marginal land for
residence purposes located in Zone E.
DISTANCE — Any statement of distance means the shortest horizontal
distance from the point designated between the points designated or
measured at right angles to the line designated.
DOCK — Any structure extending alongshore or out from the shore into a
body of water, to which boats may be moored.[Ord. No. 2018-87]
DRAINAGE AREA — The entire area of land and water that drains into the
reservoir or into Money Creek, Hickory Creek or any tributary or other
stream above the public water supply dam.
HIGH WATER LINE — The contour known as 720, referred to United States
Government evaluations, as obtained from the bench mark established in
the City.
INTAKE — The place where the water supply for the City is taken from the
reservoir.
MARGINAL LAND — The land owned or controlled by the City adjacent to
the shoreline and not flooded by the waters of the reservoir.
PERSON — The feminine as well as the masculine when applicable and
the plural as well as the singular when applicable. It also includes firm,
corporation, association, club, organization or other entity.
RESERVOIR — The artificial lake and water impounded therein by means
of the public water supply dam constructed across the valley of Money
Creek in the Northeast Quarter of Section 1, Township 25 North, Range 2
East of the 3rd Principal Meridian in McLean County, Illinois, and by any
other structure heretofore or hereafter constructed within the limits of the
hereinafter defined drainage area, which are used or for use as a public
water supply for the City.
SHORELINE — The extended point where the plane of the surface of the
water of the reservoir touches the land.
WATERCOURSE — Any stream, natural or artificial channel, spring or
depression of any kind, in which water flows continuously or intermittently
§ 23-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-101
1:749
over any part of the drainage area, directly or indirectly, into any part of the
reservoir.
§ 23-102. [Ch. 23, Sec. 2] Applicability of ordinance. [Ord. No.
1990-29]
All of the provisions of this chapter shall apply to the reservoir and marginal
land as defined by the preceding section, except where otherwise indicated.
§ 23-103. [Ch. 23, Sec. 3] Buildings and structures. [Ord. No.
1990-29]
No building or other structure, whether for habitation or otherwise,
including any dock, wharf, boathouse or anchored or stationary raft shall
be constructed, altered or maintained within the limits of the reservoir
or marginal land, unless all applicable permits, based upon a written
application setting forth the location, specifications and intended use
thereof, are granted by the appropriate divisions of the Building
Department, including building, electric, plumbing and heating.
§ 23-104. [Ch. 23, Sec. 3.1] Boat docks.
Boat docks may be constructed and permitted upon Lake Bloomington
under the following conditions only:
A. No dock shall be placed, constructed, operated, expanded or
maintained in or on the Lake without a permit issued by the City after
application for the same has been approved by the Water Department
Director or designee. Dock permits shall be valid on a calendar year
basis and run from January to December. Prior to January 1, 2020, the
Assistant City Manager shall have the authority to issue dock permits.
Thereafter, the Community Development Department shall be
responsible for issuing dock permits. The denial of any dock permit may
be appealed to the City Manager.
B. A dock permit may be issued only to Lake Leaseholders that maintain a
residence on the leased property. In addition, dock permits may be
issued to nonprofit Lake Leaseholders and those that have a separate
lease agreement with the City for the operation of a marina at the Lake.
However, no permit may be issued for any boat dock that: (1) is
anchored/located within a public access area and lays within 15 feet of
any a neighboring lot line; and/or (2) extends more than 40 feet into the
reservoir from the shoreline. In addition, if a dock resides on, in or next
to a cove or public access area, the dock, and any accompanying
structure, shall not extend more than 25% of the width of the cove or
public access area.
C. Application for a dock permit shall be filed with the Water Department
upon forms provided by the City requiring such information as shall be
deemed reasonably necessary or desirable to aid in the administration
of the provisions of this chapter and which application shall be
§ 23-101 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 23-104
1:750
accompanied by the payment of the appropriate fee of $250. A dock
permit and a building permit shall be required for any new dock.
In addition, a building permit shall be required for any expansion,
reconstruction, and/or repair, except as provided in Subsection Q.
Building permits shall be issued through the Community Development
Department at fees as may be established and approved for similar
permits. Those issued a dock permit must submit an application to
renew their permit on an annual basis and pay a fee of $50. Renewal
applications must be submitted by December 1 preceding the year in
which the permit is sought. Dock permit fees and are due at the time of
application. No dock permit fee shall be required for the nonprofit Lake
Leaseholders and/or those that have a separate lease agreement with
the City for the operation of a marina at the Lake.
D. Ownership, construction, operation, use and maintenance of a
permitted dock are subject to all federal, state and local laws, as well as
all rules and regulations by the City now in effect; or those promulgated
in the future by the City. Failure to abide by these laws, rules or
regulations may be cause for revocation of the permit.
E. All boat docks shall be considered the personal property of the permit
holder and permittees shall disclaim the City of any liability related to
the use of their dock. Therefore, the permittee does and shall save, hold
harmless and defend the City, its officers and/or directors from any and
all causes of action, suits at law or equity, claims or demands, or from
any liability of any nature for, or on account of, any damages to persons
or property, including a permitted dock, growing out of the ownership
construction, operation or maintenance by the permittee of the
permitted dock. A Waiver and Release of Liability Agreement, and a
certificate of insurance identifying the City as an additional insured
must also accompany each annual permit application demonstrating a
liability policy of at least $100,000.
F. Whenever regulations or restrictions imposed by these standards are
either more or less restrictive than regulations or restrictions imposed
by any governmental authority or other entity that might have authority
to regulate residential docks, the regulations, rules or restrictions that
are more restrictive or impose higher standards shall govern.
G. The City, and its agents, shall have the right to enter permittee's dock
and related property to make on-site inspections at any time of the dock
and all seawalls, retaining walls, bulkheads, groins, piles, piling, tie
poles, or other structures associated with the dock. Should the City find
any of the same and/or a portion thereof, to be hazardous to the public
for, but not limited to, water impact, safe pedestrian, boating or other
purposes, the City shall order the removal or repair by the owner of
such structure in accordance with Subsection U.
H. A City furnished permit number plate shall be displayed at the lake end
and at the shore end of each dock, and on the plate at the lake end a
decal or sticker evidencing payment of the permit fee for the then
§ 23-104 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-104
1:751
current year shall be affixed. The permit holder is responsible for
mounting the permit number plates in a manner visible to the general
public and accessible by City staff.
I. No dock shall be constructed except in locations approved by the Water
Department Director or designee. In addition, no dock shall be
constructed immediately in front of another Lake leaseholder's leased
marginal land, provided that, a Lake front lease holder may grant
written permission and co-sign a permit application to allow another
Lake lease holder to maintain a dock on the marginal land adjacent the
Lake leaseholder's leased marginal land.
J. The boat dock construction standards shall apply to each newly
constructed dock. Any existing grandfathered dock that is not in
compliance with the Boat Dock Construction Standards must come into
compliance with said Standards if the dock is ever enlarged, expanded,
replaced or repaired beyond the following exemptions: (1) replacing or
repairing handrails, guardrails, and benches; (2) replacing existing
hardware and fasteners on deck decking, framing and boat lifts; (3)
sealing of cracks in a seawall or bulkhead cap or face; (4) repair or
sealing of the pilasters of an existing seawall or bulkhead; and/or (5)
minor decking repairs that do not constitute full replacement of
decking. All permitted docks must be securely attached to the shoreline
and constructed of such quality material and securely anchored as to
withstand lake level changes and exposure to sun, strong wind, moving
water and wave action.
K. Docks must at all times be kept in good state of repair.
L. Temporary docks shall be removed from the lake on or before October
31 of each year and not replaced before April 1 of each year.
M. The location, construction, operation or maintenance of a dock
anywhere in or on the Lake is a revocable license privilege and is not
transferrable.
N. Dock owners maintain responsibility for all activity in relation to the use
of their dock and must comply with all Lake Bloomington rules,
guidelines, standards, and applicable City Code provisions.
O. No more than 245 dock permits shall be issued at any given time.
P. No dock shall be used in a manner which interferes with the peaceful
enjoyment of the Lake.
Q. No dock shall exceed the parameters and/or design set forth in the
permit and any alteration, expansion, or repair of a permitted dock shall
require a building permit except for the following exemptions: (1)
replacing or repairing handrails, guardrails, and benches; (2) replacing
existing hardware and fasteners on decking, framing and boat lifts; (3)
sealing of cracks in a seawall or bulkhead cap or face; and/or (4) repair
or sealing of the pilasters of an existing seawall or bulkhead; and/or (5)
§ 23-104 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 23-104
1:752
minor decking repairs that do not constitute full replacement of
decking.
R. In the case of the sale of a home on leased land, a conditional permit
may be applied for by the prospective purchaser. Such permit shall be
conditioned upon the approval of the lease transfer by the City Council
and that the dock complies with the requirements of this section as well
as the Boat Dock Construction Standards. Failure of completion of the
sale shall not be reason for application fees, as outlined in Subsection
C, to be returned to the applicant.
S. Dock owners are responsible for maintaining and using their docks in a
manner that does not negatively impact the water quality at the Lake
and shall take appropriate measures to avoid any environmental
contamination.
T. No dock shall be used for human habitation. The installation of sleeping
accommodations, cooking facilities, heating facilities, toilet and shower
facilities, refrigeration, television, and other items conducive to human
habitation on private recreation facilities are prohibited.
U. If a dock fails an inspection or is located, constructed, operated or
maintained in violation of the provisions of this section, or otherwise
violates any provision of this section or applicable portions of Chapter
23, the City shall issue a notice of violation, by certified mail, that
requires correction of the violation within 30 calendar days. If the
violation is not corrected within 30 calendar days of issuance of the
notice, the City may remove the dock at the owner's expense.
V. If the City issues three or more violation notices to a dock owner, the
Water Department Director may revoke the permit for the dock. In such
a case, notice shall be given to the dock owner by posting notice on the
dock and mailing notice to the owner's address via registered mail or, if
the owner cannot be determined after a diligent search, notice shall be
published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. The dock
must be removed within 30 days. If the dock is not removed within this
time period, the City may remove the dock at the owner's expense. Any
revocation of a permit may be appealed to the City Manager.
W. Any dock that does not have a permit and its plate and current year
sticker properly affixed is considered to be trespassing on City property
and shall be considered a violation of the City Code. Any such dock may
be removed by the City at the owner's expense after posting notice on
the dock and mailing notice to the owner's address via registered mail
or, if the owner cannot be determined after a diligent search, publishing
notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the City that it will be
removed at least 30 days before the removal. [Ord. No. 2018-87]
§ 23-104 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-105
1:753
§ 23-105. [Ch. 23, Sec. 4] Sewage disposal generally. [Ord. No.
1990-29]
No toilet, water closet, urinal, privy, cesspool, septic tank, sewer or other
means for the depositing, storing, retaining or disposing of sewage or
sink or bathroom wastes shall be built or maintained within the reservoir
and only on marginal land after a written permit has been granted by
the applicable health regulatory body based upon a written application
disclosing the location and specifications therefor and means for the
treatment or disposal of such sewage or sink or bathroom wastes in such
manner as may be approved by the Department of Health so as not to
pollute or threaten pollution of the reservoir or tend to create a nuisance,
and the construction and maintenance thereof shall be subject to
supervision by the health authority.
§ 23-106. [Ch. 23, Sec. 5] Protection of sewers.
Only sewage and normal sink and bathroom drainage shall be discharged
into any sewers of the City. No other solids or liquids, either organic or
inorganic shall be permitted to enter directly or indirectly into any sewer of
the City.
§ 23-107. [Ch. 23, Sec. 6] Connections to utility services.
No person not an authorized employee of the City shall make any
connection with, uncover, alter or disturb any water pipe or main, conduit,
electric wire or line, sewer or other utility constructed or maintained by
the City or open any manhole, intercepting chamber, or any appurtenance
thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the City based upon a
written application setting forth the location and nature of the work to be
done, together with a description thereof or copy of plans or specifications
therefor of the contemplated connection or alteration and depositing with
the City such a sum of money as the City shall estimate will fully cover all
damage of any kind which may be caused by the connection or alteration
or filing an appropriate bond, guaranteeing restoration, in form and amount
and with surety, as approved by the City, if requested by the City to do
so. After such alteration or connection has been completed, the sewer,
water pipe or main, conduit, electric wire or line, manhole or intercepting
chamber shall be immediately restored to as good a state or condition
as prior to the doing of such work, to the satisfaction of the City or by
the City, as the City may elect. If the completion of the restoration be
without expense to the City and to its satisfaction the sum deposited shall
be refunded, but if any of the work be done by it, the City shall certify the
actual expense incurred and shall refund to the holder of the permit the
difference, if any, between the amount deposited and the amount certified.
In the event the amount so certified shall be in excess of the deposit the
holder of the permit shall immediately pay such excess to the City.
§ 23-105 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 23-108
1:754
§ 23-108. [Ch. 23, Sec. 7] Pollution of waters and watercourses
generally. [Ord. No. 1990-29]
No person shall within the drainage area place, throw, discharge or cause
to be discharged any sewage, garbage, decayed or fermented fruits or
vegetables, offal, dead body, manure, polluted, filthy, decaying, fermenting,
putrescible or oily matter or liquid or industrial waste into or so as to reach
any natural or artificial watercourse or open or covered sewer, ditch, tile
or drain flowing directly or indirectly, continuously or intermittently into
or so as to pollute or tend to pollute the reservoir or other waters from
which the City obtains a water supply. No person shall in the drainage
area construct or cause to be constructed or use any toilet, water closet,
urinal, sink, cesspool, privy, garage, slaughterhouse or other structure,
establishment or place which is so situated that polluted or oily liquid
therefrom may continuously or intermittently so flow as to ultimately reach
and pollute or tend to pollute the waters of such reservoir or other waters
from which the City obtains or may obtain a water supply unless there is
constructed, maintained, and operated such sewage treatment and disposal
units and facilities for the treatment or disposal thereof, approved by the
City, whereby such polluted or oily liquid is treated or caused to be treated,
so as not to pollute or tend to pollute or threaten pollution of the waters
of such reservoir or water supply of the City. No connection for water
service shall be installed or water service furnished by the City at any
place in the drainage area (being that entire area of land which drains
into the artificial water supply lake of the City known as Lake Bloomington
or into Money Creek, Hickory Creek, or any tributary or other stream
above the impounding dam of such public water supply lake) unless there
are constructed and satisfactorily maintained and operated such approved
sewage treatment and disposal units and facilities for the treatment or
disposal of the sewage from such premises.
§ 23-109. [Ch. 23, Sec. 8] Disposal of waste, garbage, etc.; use of
manure and fertilizer. [Ord. No. 1990-29]
No house slop, sink waste, garbage, decayed, or fermented fruit or
vegetables or other fruit or vegetable refuse, offal, swill, carcass, filthy,
decaying, fermenting, or putrescible matter of any kind or unsanitary waste
product or polluted or oily liquid or solid shall be thrown into the reservoir
or placed, piled, or discharged in any manner in the reservoir or in the
marginal land, but shall be kept in watertight closed containers, approved
by the City and at regular intervals be removed from the marginal land in
time or manner as required by the City; provided, however, that manure
and commercial fertilizer may be used for horticultural purposes on the
marginal land, but no manure or commercial fertilizer shall be placed,
spread or used on or in the grounds of the marginal land in such quantities
or in such a manner as to cause or threaten any pollution of the reservoir or
bring about any public or private nuisances whatsoever.
§ 23-108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-110
1:755
§ 23-110. [Ch. 23, Sec. 9] Interments prohibited. [Ord. No. 1990-29]
No interment of a human body shall be made within the reservoir or the
marginal land.
§ 23-111. [Ch. 23, Sec. 10] Regulation of livestock and poultry.
[Ord. No. 1990-29]
No person shall cause or permit any domestic livestock or poultry to run
at large on the marginal land. Any such livestock or poultry found at large
in the reservoir or on the marginal land may be taken up by the City and
sold to pay the expense of taking, keeping, advertising, and selling such
livestock or poultry and all damages caused to the City or its property
by such livestock or poultry. No livestock or poultry shall be kept on the
marginal land except in such places and to such limited extent as may be
expressly authorized by the City by lease and in a manner not tending to
pollute any part of the reservoir or tending to be offensive or annoying to
any custodian of any marginal land. No animal or poultry shall be allowed
to stand, wallow, wade, or swim or be washed or watered in the reservoir.
No person shall bring, drive, or lead any domestic livestock on the marginal
land except in lawful use of the public highway and except horses and draft
animals while engaged in work or ridden on such portions of the marginal
land as may be designated for riding or driving. No person shall cause or
permit any horse or other animal to stand in any street, road, or parkway
unless securely hitched or in charge of some competent person.
§ 23-112. [Ch. 23, Sec. 11] Washing clothes, etc.
No clothing, bedding, carpet, vehicle, receptacle, utensil, or article that
tends to pollute water shall be washed in the reservoir.
§ 23-113. [Ch. 23, Sec. 12] Swimming, bathing, and wading.
A. Swimming, bathing, and wading is prohibited in the reservoir except:
(1) Under the supervision of one or more experienced life guards at
such portions of the reservoir as may be designated by the City for
such use and which are provided with adequate and sanitary toilet
facilities.
(2) By the respective custodians of the marginal land, their families,
and guests, within 100 feet of the respective tracts of marginal land
leased by the City to such custodians. If the use of the reservoir by
the respective custodians, their families, and guests should in any
way tend to create an unsanitary condition in any portion of the
reservoir or tend to create a public or private nuisance in any part
of the reservoir or on the marginal land, or should be deemed by
the City as unusually hazardous, such respective custodians, their
families, and guests may be prohibited from further swimming,
bathing, or wading in the reservoir at or off the shore of such tracts
§ 23-110 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 23-113
1:756
§ 23-114. [Ch. 23, Sec. 13] Water skiing and surf board riding.
of marginal land by a written notice to such custodians from the
City. [Ord. No. 1990-29]
B. No person having any communicable disease or skin infection shall
swim, bathe or wade in the reservoir. [Ord. No. 1990-29]
C. All persons using the reservoir for swimming, bathing or wading
purposes shall use the same so as not to create any unsanitary condition
in or about the reservoir, and so as not to pollute the waters thereof, or
make such water unwholesome or unfit for water supply purposes, or
injurious to the aquatic life thereof. [Ord. No. 1990-29]
D. Swimming from any boat is prohibited. [Ord. No. 1990-29]
E. Scuba diving shall be prohibited except as authorized in writing by the
City. [Ord. No. 1990-29]
F. The City shall at all times have power and authority to prohibit
swimming, bathing and wading in the waters of the reservoir for the
purpose of preventing any pollution of or other injury to the reservoir or
to suppress or prevent disease or other danger to public health or
human life. [Ord. No. 1990-29]
A. Water skiing or surf board riding shall be permitted on the reservoir
except as modified by the following provisions:
(1) Water skiing and surf board riding shall be permitted only between
12:00 noon and 7:00 p.m.
(2) Water skiing and surf board riding shall be prohibited within a
100-foot radius of the "intake" or as designated by marker buoys; in
all posted "No Wake" areas; under all bridges; and within 200 feet
of the shoreline, except where boats and skiers are leaving or
returning to their leased lands or other approved docking areas.
Such departures and returns shall be made at approximately right
angles to the shore. [Ord. No. 1990-29]
B. All water skiers or surf board riders must wear U.S. Coast Guard
approved personal floatation devices. [Ord. No. 1990-29]
C. At least two persons capable of operating the boat in an emergency
must be occupying the boat pulling a water skier or surf board rider,
one of whom shall act as an observer. [Ord. No. 1990-29]
D. Only one water skier or surf board rider shall be pulled by a boat at any
one time. [Ord. No. 1990-29]
E. All boats pulling a water skier or surf board rider shall operate and
make all turns in a counterclockwise direction. [Ord. No. 1990-29]
§ 23-113 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-114
1:757
§ 23-115. [Ch. 23, Sec. 14] Boating.
F. Only the person actually water skiing, riding a surf board or preparing
to ski or ride the surf board shall be in the water. [Ord. No. 1990-29]
G. All water skiers shall commence skiing from the water, not from shore
or docks. [Ord. No. 1990-29]
A. Boating of any kind or character is prohibited within a 100-foot radius
of the intake or as designated by marker buoys. [Ord. No. 1990-29]
B. Boating on the reservoir is subject to the following restrictions:
(1) Licenses. No boat or craft of any kind may be propelled, kept or
used in the reservoir until the owner thereof shall have registered
such boat or craft and secured a written license and registration
number from the City based upon a written application setting
forth the length and draft of such boat or craft, its means of
locomotion, and if propelled by motor or engine, the horse power
rating thereof, the maximum number of passengers such boat or
craft may safely carry, its contemplated use, whether it is
contemplated to be used for racing purposes, and such other and
further information as the City may from time to time require. Such
license, when granted, shall be in writing and may be further
evidenced by an official registration number plate or marker to be
furnished by the licensee. Such plate or marker shall be uniformly
placed in such conspicuous position on the boat or craft as may be
designated by the City; and such license shall be exhibited on
request to any agent of the City. The registration number in figures
at least three inches high must appear on each side of the bow.
Such license, unless issued for a special event, shall expire on
December 31st and may be annually renewed by filing a like
application before such boat or craft may be lawfully propelled,
kept, or used in the reservoir. In order to provide a fund to be used
to defray the expenses of inspection and supervision of boats or
craft on the reservoir, to enforce the provisions of this chapter and
for the improvement of navigation and the safety and pleasure of
boating, such application renewal must be accompanied by the
payment of annual license fees to the City as follows, and by a
Certificate of Insurance issued upon the boat in question,
protecting members of the general public for personal injuries,
property damage and death in the amount of $100,000/$100,000
personal injury and $5,000 property damage.
(a) Class A - $15 for each boat or craft which is not equipped with
or propelled by a motor, engine or sail. [Ord. No. 1998-4]
(b) Class B - $25 for each sailboat or craft not equipped with or
propelled by any motor or engine. [Ord. No. 1998-4]
§ 23-114 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 23-115
1:758
(c) Class C - $30 for each boat with motor rated up to 14 h.p. [Ord.
No. 2006-18]
(d) Class D - $45 for each boat with motor rated above 14 h.p.
[Ord. No. 2006-18]
(e) Proration of fee. For the fractional part of any calendar year,
the license fee shall be the same as hereinbefore specified.
(f) Sale of craft. Upon the sale of any boat or craft, the license
issued therefor shall cease to apply; but such license and the
license number may be transferred to any other qualified boat
or craft then owned by the vendor upon his written application
and payment to the City of a transfer fee of $2 plus the excess,
if any, of the license fee requirements for such other boats or
craft over that of the boat or craft so sold. The boat or craft so
sold shall be removed from the reservoir or registered by the
purchaser as in case of an original registration.
(g) Temporary license. A temporary license may be obtained for $6
for each boat or craft of Class A, B or C for not to exceed 10
consecutive days from the date of the issuance of the
temporary license. A one day permit for any such boat or craft
of Class A, B or C shall be made available at a fee of $10 per
boat or craft. [Ord. No. 1999-44]
(2) Engine size.
(a) No boat or craft shall be operated on the lake with a motor or
engine of greater rated horsepower than that which was
designated for the boat or craft by the U.S. Coast Guard,
Boating Industry Association, or the National Marine
Manufacturers Association. In no case shall a boat be operated
on the reservoir with a motor or engine exceeding 40 h.p.
(b) This Subsection B(2) shall not be construed to prohibit the
operation of boats previously licensed at Lake Bloomington
which have been modified to meet previous requirements of
this chapter only during such time as said boats are owned by
the same person in whose name said boats were licensed on
April 18, 1974. It shall be the responsibility of the Park Ranger,
as License Issuing Officer, to ascertain that the requirements
of the first sentence of this Subsection B(2) is complied with.
(3) Exhaust gases. No person shall operate or cause to be operated any
boat or craft equipped with a motor or internal combustion engine
regardless of whether such motor or engine be temporarily or
permanently attached to such boat or craft on any of the waters of
the reservoir, unless such motor or engine is equipped with an
efficient muffler in good working order and constant operation so
as to prevent excessive noise and annoying smoke. No outboard
motor or internal combustion engine shall be deemed equipped
§ 23-115 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-115
1:759
with an efficient muffler, unless the exhaust gases are discharged
under water or are so muffled as to be not noisier or more annoying
than an internal combustion engine of like power equipped with
an underwater exhaust. No inboard motor or internal combustion
engine shall be deemed equipped with an efficient muffler unless
the exhaust gases are condensed and silenced by the continuous
circulation of water through the exhaust pipe, or are so muffled
as to be not noisier or more annoying than when so condensed
and silenced by water circulation through the exhaust pipe of an
internal combustion engine of like power.
(4) Cutouts prohibited. No person shall use on any boat or craft on the
waters of the reservoir a muffler cutout or any device whatsoever
that operates to discharge exhaust gases of any motor or engine
without such gases passing through an efficient muffler except as
hereafter provided in Subsection B(7) of this section.
(5) Prohibited hours. No internal combustion engine or motor shall be
operated on any boat or craft on the reservoir between 1/2 hour
after sunset and sunrise, except boats operating at speeds of less
than five m.p.h. The reservoir shall be designated a no-wake zone
during said hours.
(6) Speed regulations. The maximum speed limit on the reservoir shall
be 25 m.p.h.
(a) No craft shall exceed five m.p.h. in any area of the reservoir
posted as a "No Wake" area.
(b) No craft shall exceed five m.p.h. when traveling within 200 feet
of the shoreline.
(7) Racing. No boat or craft propelled by an engine or motor may be
used in racing or practicing therefor except in such areas of the
reservoir at such hours and at such days as the City may from time
to time especially designate therefor and during such periods the
provisions of Subsections B(3) and (4) of this section shall not
apply. Racing by boats propelled by internal combustion engines
and motors in any other part of the reservoir is hereby prohibited.
(8) Construction of section; obedience to signs; etc. Nothing herein
shall be construed as permitting any boat or craft to be operated at
a speed greater than is safe and prudent under the circumstances,
and the operator thereof shall observe all signs and other
regulations placed by the City on or near the reservoir.
(9) Life preservers.
(a) No boat or craft shall be operated on the reservoir unless at
least one U.S. Coast Guard approved personal floatation device
(PFD) of the following types or their equivalent is on board for
each person: Type I, Type II or Type III.
§ 23-115 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 23-115
1:760
(b) Any water craft 16 feet in length, except a canoe or kayak,
must have at least one Type IV U.S. Coast Guard approved PFD
or its equivalent on board, in addition to the PFD's required
above. When assisting a person on water skis, aquaplane or
similar device, there must be one U.S. Coast Guard approved
PFD on board the water craft for each person being assisted or
towed, or worn by the person being assisted or towed. A U.S.
Coast Guard approved Type V PFD may be carried in lieu of the
Type I, II or III PFD, if the Type V PFD is approved for the
activity in which it is being used.
(c) All such PFD's mentioned in this section must be readily
accessible, in serviceable condition, of an appropriate size for
whom it is intended, and legibly marked with the U.S. Coast
Guard approval number.
(10) Lighting equipment.
(a) Every boat or craft shall carry and display when underway
between the hours of sunset and sunrise such lights as shall be
required by the U.S. Coast Guard for craft of equivalent length
and type.
(b) No boat or craft of any kind or character shall be anchored
between sunset and sunrise more than 200 feet from the shore
of the reservoir unless it displays an adequate light clearly
visible from any quarter by an approaching boat.
(11) Signaling devices and fire extinguishers. No boat or craft that is
propelled by a motor or engine shall be operated on the reservoir
unless the following safety equipment is provided:
(a) Signaling devices. A mouth, hand or power operated whistle,
horn or other appliance capable of producing a blast of two
seconds or more duration and audible for at least 1/2 mile.
(b) Fire extinguishers. At least one U.S. Coast Guard approved fire
extinguisher so placed as to be readily accessible and in such
condition as to be ready for immediate and effective use.
(c) Sirens are prohibited except on police or fire boats.
(12) Renting and passengers. The business of renting boats for hire or
carrying passengers for hire on the reservoir is prohibited except
as may be authorized by special concession granted by the City, but
the provisions of this chapter shall apply to all boats or craft
permitted by special concession, and all such concession boats or
craft shall be inspected annually during their period of operations
on the reservoir. Any such boats or craft failing to have approved
life preservers in place as when licensed or otherwise failing to
pass inspection shall be made to comply with this Ordinance before
further operation. No individual operator or employee or any
§ 23-115 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-115
1:761
person operating any boat carrying passengers for hire shall be
permitted to operate such boat unless he is familiar with the
ordinance, rules and regulations for the operation of boats on the
reservoir and with the commonly approved safety regulations and
measures to be used in case of accident or emergency, including
instruction of passengers in the use of safety equipment and their
conduct in case of emergency. Each such operator or employee
shall at all times be subject to examination and approval by the City
as to such qualifications, and any determination by the City as to
such qualifications shall be conclusive.
(13) Steering and sailing rules. The following steering and sailing rules
shall govern the use and operation of boats on the reservoir:
(a) Passing. When two boats are approaching each other "head on"
or nearly so (so as to involve risk of collision), each boat must
bear to the right and pass the other boat on its left side;
(b) Crossing. When boats approach each other obliquely or at
right angles, the boat approaching on the right side has, the
right-of-way;
(c) Overtaking. One boat may overtake another on either side but
must grant right-of-way to the over taken boat.'
(d) Sailboats and rowboats. When a motorboat is approaching a
boat propelled solely by sails or oars, the motorboat must yield
the right-of-way to the sailboat or rowboat except, when, a
large craft is navigating in a confined channel, the large craft
has the right-of-way over a boat propelled solely by oars or
sails. [Ord. No. 1990-29]
C. Houseboats. No boat or craft commonly known as a houseboat or craft
on which the occupants have sleeping accommodations or remain more
than a few hours shall be permitted on the reservoir. [Ord. No.
1990-29]
D. Toilet facilities. No boat or craft used or operated on the reservoir shall
be equipped with toilet facilities without a special permit in writing
from the City. Maintenance and operation of special equipment for the
storage of all wastes and disposal thereof on shore shall be approved by
the City. [Ord. No. 1990-29]
E. Operation while intoxicated, etc. No person in an intoxicated condition
or under the influence of narcotic drugs shall operate or be a passenger
in any boat or craft. [Ord. No. 1990-29]
F. Disregard for safety of persons or property. No person shall operate a
motor boat with a willful or wanton disregard for the safety of persons
or property. [Ord. No. 1990-29]
§ 23-115 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 23-115
1:762
G. Pollution of waters. Persons using or operating any boat or craft on the
waters of the reservoir shall do so in such manner as not to create an
unsanitary condition in or about such waters and shall not pollute such
waters by the discharge, in any material amount, of oil or other
polluting liquid or solid tending to make such waters unwholesome or
unfit for water supply purposes or injurious to the aquatic life thereof.
[Ord. No. 1990-29]
H. Nuisances. No boat or craft shall be used or operated, nor any horn or
sound device sounded so as to create a nuisance or disturb the peace or
quiet of any neighborhood. [Ord. No. 1990-29]
I. Reservation of rights to City. The City shall at all times have power and
authority to prohibit, restrict or otherwise limit or regulate the keeping,
maintenance or operating of any or all boats and craft on the waters of
the reservoir should it become necessary to do so in the interest of the
public health or safety or for the protection or improvement of the
reservoir or other cause. [Ord. No. 1990-29]
J. Impounding vessels adrift, etc., by City. Any boat or craft found
abandoned or adrift in the reservoir or any unlicensed boat or craft
thereon shall be taken up by the City and the City shall have a lien
thereon for all license fees therefor and the expense of taking, towing,
keeping, advertising and selling of the same and for all damages caused
by such craft to property of the City and may enforce such lien by
advertisement and sale of such craft in like manner as chattel
mortgages may be foreclosed under the laws of this State. Nothing
herein shall be construed as exonerating the owner or operator of any
boat or craft from personal liability to the City or any other person for
any damage or injury caused by such boat or craft. [Ord. No. 1990-29]
K. Air propeller driven boats are prohibited. [Ord. No. 1990-29]
L. Sail boards and U.S. Coast Guard approved inflatable boats are
permitted on the reservoir but they must be licensed. [Ord. No.
1990-29]
M. Age of operator.
(1) No person under 10 years of age may operate a motorboat.
(2) Persons at least 10 years of age and less than 12 years of age may
operate a motorboat only if - they are accompanied on the
motorboat and under the direct control of a parent or guardian.
(3) Persons at least 12 years of age and less than 18 years of age may
operate a motorboat only if:
(a) They are accompanied on the motorboat and under the direct
control of a parent of guardian; or
(b) A person at least 18 years of age designated by a parent or
guardian; or
§ 23-115 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-115
1:763
§ 23-116. [Ch. 23, Sec. 15] Fishing.
(c) Such motorboat operator is in possession of a Boating Safety
Certificate issued by the Department of Conservation, Division
of Law Enforcement, authorizing the holder to operate
motorboats. [Ord. No. 1990-29]
N. Jet ski craft are prohibited from operation on the reservoir. [Ord. No.
1990-29]
A. Prohibited near intake. Fishing of any kind and by any method is
prohibited within a 100-foot radius of the intake or as designated by
marker buoys. The City is hereby authorized and vested with full power
and authority to make, promulgate and enforce such rules and
regulations as may be deemed necessary and proper for regulating
fishing as prohibited or permitted by this chapter. [Ord. No. 1990-29]
B. State license required; obedience to state law. No person required to be
licensed by the laws of the State, now or hereafter, shall take, catch or
attempt to take or catch, any species of fish, frogs or turtles without a
State Fishing License in full force and effect, issued to such person and
in his possession. All persons shall strictly adhere to the Fish Code of
the State and the amendments thereto.
C. Hook and line to be used; use of trot line; seine; jug fishing, etc.
prohibited. No person shall take, catch or attempt to take or catch any
fish in the reservoir by any method whatsoever except that of a hook
attached to a single line. The use of any trot line is hereby prohibited.
The use of any seine, of any character, or any trap for the taking or
catching of aquatic life is hereby prohibited. The use of snares, spears,
gigs, firearms or artificial light for the taking or catching of aquatic life
is hereby prohibited. [Ord. No. 1990-29]
D. Restriction as to marginal land leased by City. No person shall take,
catch or attempt to catch any fish off the shore or within 100 feet of the
shore of any marginal land leased by the City to any custodian for
residence purposes except under the following conditions:
(1) Fishing is permitted within 100 feet of the shore of marginal land
leased by the City to any custodian for residence purposes only
between sunrise and sunset;
(2) No person shall tie a boat to a boat dock maintained by a person
leasing marginal land from the City without permission from such
leaseholder;
(3) No person shall enter onto any boat dock or marginal land leased
by a person leasing marginal land from the City without permission
from such leaseholder;
§ 23-115 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 23-116
1:764
§ 23-117. [Ch. 23, Sec. 16] Picnicking and camping.
Picnicking and camping are prohibited on the reservoir and the marginal
land, except:
(4) No person shall fish within such 100 feet area if any person is
swimming within 100 feet of marginal land leased from the City as
set forth in § 23-112A(2) of this chapter. [Ord. No. 1996-110]
E. Suspension of privilege. The privilege of fishing in the reservoir or any
part thereof may be suspended by the City at any time whenever such
suspension shall be deemed proper to conserve aquatic life or to
prevent any tendency to pollute the waters of the reservoir or to
promote the improvement or convenient maintenance of any part of the
reservoir. The posting of any authorized sign in any part of the reservoir
shall suspend the privilege of fishing at such location. [Ord. No.
1990-29]
F. Exemption of City and state. Nothing herein enumerated in Subsections
A to E inclusive, of this section shall apply to or be construed to prevent
or penalize anything done or caused to be done by the City or by agents
of the reservoir or the aquatic life therein.
G. Pollution of water, etc. All persons using the waters of the reservoir for
fishing purposes shall so use the same as not to create any unsanitary
conditions in or about the water or on any part of the marginal land or
so as to pollute or make any part of the waters unwholesome or unfit for
use. [Ord. No. 1990-29]
H. It shall be illegal for any person to harvest from Lake Bloomington any
sport fish in violation of the following fish size and/or creel limitations:
[Ord. No. 1999-44]
Fish Species Size and Creel Limitations
Largemouth Bass 15 inches minimum length
Smallmouth Bass 15 inches minimum length
Walleye or
Sauger
14 inches minimum length
Hybrid Striped
White Bass
17 inches minimum length - 3 fish per day
Northern Pike 24 inches minimum length - 3 fish per day
Crappie 25 fish per day
Bluegill 8 inches minimum length - 10 fish per day
A. Upon such portions of the public parks or other areas on the marginal
land for such purposes. [Ord. No. 1990-29]
§ 23-116 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-117
1:765
§ 23-118. [Ch. 23, Sec. 17] Protection of birds and animals. [Ord.
No. 1990-29]
No person shall trap, catch, kill or wound, or attempt to trap, kill or wound
any bird or animal, take any bird egg or molest or rob any nest of any bird or
animal or cruelly treat any bird or animal in the reservoir or on the marginal
land.
§ 23-119. [Ch. 23, Sec. 18] Dogs and cats. [Ord. No. 1990-29]
No vicious or dangerous dog shall be permitted on the reservoir or marginal
lands. Any dog or cat found running at large may be taken up by the City,
and if not promptly called for, may be destroyed or otherwise disposed of
all without liability on the part of any officer performing such duty or of the
City.
§ 23-120. [Ch. 23, Sec. 19] Hunting and use of firearms and traps.
B. By custodians of marginal land, their families and guests upon such
portions of the marginal land as may have been leased to such
custodians by the City.
(1) If the use of such portions of the marginal land by the respective
custodians thereof, their families and guests should in any way tend
to create an unsanitary condition at any place in the reservoir or
tend to create a public or private nuisance on the marginal land,
such custodians, their families and guests may be prohibited from
further picnicking and camping on the marginal land on their
respective tracts of marginal land by a written notice to such
custodians from the City.
(2) Any person picnicking, camping or making other use of the public
parks or other areas on the marginal land shall keep the premises
neat and clean, pick up and remove in a sanitary manner all paper,
garbage, rubbish and debris and before leaving the premises put
out any fire made by him. [Ord. No. 1990-29]
C. All areas designated as public parks shall be closed between the hours
of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., except for fishermen or with written
approval from the Director of Public Works. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
A. No person shall hunt, shoot, pursue, lure, kill, destroy, capture, trap or
ensnare any birds or animals of any kind except for the immediate
protection of their health or safety or as they may be so licensed by the
City. The City may license or authorize any person to use firearms, traps
or other means to destroy any predatory or otherwise undesirable
animal, bird or aquatic life. Hunting licenses issued by the State of
Illinois do not and shall not be considered to authorize any person to
violate the provisions of this Ordinance. [Ord. No. 1990-29]
§ 23-117 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 23-120
1:766
§ 23-121. [Ch. 23, Sec. 20] Skating and ice boating. [Ord. No.
1990-29]
No person shall skate or use any iceboat or ice craft upon any of the ice
of the reservoir, except upon such portion as may be designated by the
City for such purpose and except by any custodian, his family and guests
on that part of the reservoir adjoining the marginal land leased to such
custodian. Any such skating and ice boating shall not be conducted in a
reckless manner or at a speed greater than is reasonable and proper, having
regard for the number of persons upon such designated portion. However,
nothing herein contained shall be construed to prohibit any exhibition or
contest of speed or fancy skating or iceboat racing upon such portions of
the ice of the reservoir as may be set aside for that purpose by the City. The
steering and sailing rules set forth in § 23-115B(13) of this Code, insofar as
they are applicable, shall govern the use and operation of iceboats on the
reservoir.
§ 23-122. [Ch. 23, Sec. 21] Ice cutting.
No ice cutting shall be permitted in or upon the waters or ice of the
reservoir.
§ 23-123. [Ch. 23, Sec. 22] Fires. [Ord. No. 1990-29]
No fire shall be lighted or used, except at such places as may be designated
by the City for such purpose and except by any custodian, his family, and
guests on the parcel of marginal land leased to such custodian by the City.
§ 23-124. [Ch. 23, Sec. 23] Lighting or setting off fireworks or
balloons. [Ord. No. 1990-29]
No fireworks shall be lighted from the reservoir or marginal land unless
supervised or by special permit from the City.
§ 23-125. [Ch. 23, Sec. 24] Injury to property. [Ord. No. 1990-29]
No person shall willfully, maliciously or negligently cut, break, climb on,
carry away, conceal, transfer, tamper with, mark upon, or in any way injure,
damage or deface any tree, shrub, plant, turf, grass, statue, bust, lamp
post, hydrant, regulating device, transformer, meter, wire, wiring, pole,
curbstone, coping, flagstone, fence, wall, bridge, balustrade, railing, bench,
building or other structure of any kind or property or take down, alter, mar,
move, injure or destroy any sign, trail marker, placard, notice, post, pile or
buoy posted or placed by the City or drive any motor car, vehicle, boat or
craft in such a manner as to cause the same to collide with, run against,
B. No person shall fire or discharge any firearm of any description while
hunting, for practice, as a hobby or for any other reason unrelated to
their immediate health or safety on the reservoir or marginal land
unless said person may be specifically licensed to do so by the City.
[Ord. No. 1990-29]
§ 23-120 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-125
1:767
strike, or cause to strike, injure or deface or damage any such property,
but custodians of the marginal land surrounding the reservoir may make
changes and improvements as permitted in their leases from the City. No
person shall open any fire hydrant of the City except a duly authorized
fireman or agent of the City.
§ 23-126. [Ch. 23, Sec. 25] Business establishments. [Ord. No.
1990-29]
Unless duly authorized in writing by the City, no person shall on the
reservoir or marginal land maintain or operate any garage, restaurant,
confectionery, refreshment parlor, dance hall, hotel, inn, place of
amusement for hire, store or stand for the sale of merchandise. Any license
issued therefor by the City shall be kept conspicuously posted in such place
of business or establishment.
§ 23-127. [Ch. 23, Sec. 26] Peddling, begging, etc. [Ord. No.
1990-29]
No person shall beg, solicit alms or do anything pertaining to soliciting,
peddling or hawking on the reservoir or marginal land.
§ 23-128. [Ch. 23, Sec. 27] Advertising. [Ord. No. 1990-29]
The erection or maintenance of any sign, bill, poster, placard or card or
the distributing of any advertising matter by handbills, or otherwise, on the
reservoir or marginal land, except signs posted or approved by the City is
prohibited.
§ 23-129. [Ch. 23, Sec. 28] Flying devices. [Ord. No. 1990-29]
No person shall make an ascent in any balloon, airplane, hydroplane or any
other device or any descent in any airplane, balloon, hydroplane, or any
other flying device or parachute on the reservoir or marginal land without a
written permit from the City.
§ 23-130. [Ch. 23, Sec. 29] Going upon prohibited grounds. [Ord.
No. 1990-29]
No person shall go upon any portion of the reservoir or marginal land
where, by a sign or notice, posted or authorized to be posted by the City,
persons are prohibited from going.
§ 23-131. [Ch. 23, Sec. 30] Encroachments. [Ord. No. 1990-29]
No building or structure or anything erected or constructed on the face
thereof or in any way connected therewith shall extend into, upon, or
over any boulevard, road or parkway within the marginal land unless a
written permit for the same shall have been granted by the City, based
upon a written application setting for the location and specifications of the
encroachment.
§ 23-125 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 23-132
1:768
§ 23-132. [Ch. 23, Sec. 31] Moving of building.
§ 23-133. [Ch. 23, Sec. 32] Obstruction generally. [Ord. No.
1990-29]
No building material, fuel, manure, or other product may be deposited on
any boulevard, road or parkway within the marginal land. Such products
may be temporarily deposited in such location, provided a written permit
is secured from the City, based upon a written application setting forth the
location and approximate time such obstruction will exist and the amount of
the boulevard, road or parkway the same will obstruct.
§ 23-134. [Ch. 23, Sec. 33] Removal of obstruction. [Ord. No.
1990-29]
Any walk, opening, excavation, projection, or obstruction which shall be
constructed, erected, placed or maintained in or upon any boulevard, road
or parkway contrary to any of the provisions of this Code or other
Ordinances of the City governing and controlling the reservoir or marginal
land may be filled up, removed or abated by the City at the expense and risk
of the person constructing, erecting, placing or maintaining the same.
§ 23-135. [Ch. 23, Sec. 34] Danger signals on obstructions.
Every person using or obstructing any portion of any boulevard, road or
parkway for any purpose shall cause warning lights to be placed and
A. No person shall move any building on, along or across or obstruct or
excavate in any boulevard, road or parkway within the marginal land
unless a permit in writing therefor shall have been procured from the
City based upon a written application setting forth the dimensions of
the building to be moved and its contemplated route or the location or
nature and specifications of the proposed excavations or obstructions,
and upon depositing with the City such a sum of money as the City shall
estimate will cover all damages to the roadway, trees, shrubs, grass,
lamp posts, and other property and improvements upon such
boulevard, road or parkway or upon filing an appropriate bond to
guarantee such complete restoration as requested by the City.
B. After such work shall have been completed the boulevard, road,
parkway grass, trees, shrubs, lamp posts, and other property and
improvements shall be immediately restored to their former condition
by the holder of the permit to the satisfaction of the City or by the City,
as the City may elect. If restoration be made without expense to the
City, and to its satisfaction, the sum deposited shall be refunded; but if
any of the work to be done by it, the City shall certify the actual expense
incurred and shall refund to the holder of the permit the difference, if
any, between the amount deposited and the amount so certified by the
City. In the event the amount so certified should be in excess of the
amount deposited, the holder of the permit shall immediately pay such
excess amount to the City. [Ord. No. 1990-29]
§ 23-132 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-135
1:769
properly maintained in conspicuous places from sunset until sunrise during
the time such obstruction shall remain and shall also construct such other
and proper safeguards as may be necessary to properly protect the public
from injury, or if necessary, maintain a watchman at such obstruction.
§ 23-136. [Ch. 23, Sec. 35] Walks and private drives. [Ord. No.
1990-29]
No walk or private drive shall be constructed or laid within the marginal
land without a written permit from the City to construct or lay the same
based upon a written application setting forth the location and the
specifications for its construction.
§ 23-137. [Ch. 23, Sec. 36] Traffic regulations - signs and signals.
All persons shall obey all official signs and traffic signs and traffic signals
and Police Officers of the City. The display of unauthorized traffic signs and
signals is prohibited.
§ 23-138. [Ch. 23, Sec. 37] Same - vehicles not to be driven off
roadways, etc.
No vehicle including bikes, whether motorized or not, shall be driven upon
any part of the marginal land, except:
§ 23-139. [Ch. 23, Sec. 38] Same - parking.
No vehicle shall be permitted to stand in any of the following places on the
marginal land, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or
to comply with the directions of any Police Officer:
A. Upon roadways and parking places constructed or designed by the City
for such use; and
B. By any custodian upon lands leased to him. [Ord. No. 1990-29]
A. Where parking or standing is indicated to be prohibited by an
authorized sign;
B. In any intersection or crosswalk;
C. Upon the roadway of, or approaches to, any bridge or the main
impounding dam or dividing dam forming the reservoir;
D. At any place where the standing or parking of a vehicle will block the
use of any walk or driveway;
E. At any place where the standing or parking of a vehicle will tend to
obstruct the flow of a single line of traffic in each direction or cause
either of such lines of traffic to veer from its course in the center of the
roadway;
§ 23-135 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 23-139
1:770
§ 23-140. [Ch. 23, Sec. 39] Same - speed. [Ord. No. 1990-29]
No person shall drive a motor vehicle upon any boulevard, road, driveway
or parkway at a speed greater than is posted or reasonable and proper,
if not posted, having regard for the traffic and the use of the way and
so as not to endanger the life, limb or injure the property of any person.
The City may from time to time designate the maximum rate of speed
on all boulevards, roads, and parkways based on the location, nature and
amount of traffic on the same and shall erect suitable signs indicating
such maximum rates of speed. If the rate of speed of any motor vehicle
operating on any boulevard, road, or parkway shall exceed the rate of
speed designated for such location, such rate of speed shall be prima facie
evidence that the person operating such motor vehicle was running at a rate
of speed greater than is reasonable and proper, having regard for the traffic
and use of the highway.
§ 23-141. [Ch. 23, Sec. 40] Same - yielding right-of-way to
equestrians. [Ord. No. 1990-29]
The driver of any vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to any equestrian on
any bridle path in the marginal land, where such bridle path crosses any
boulevard, road, or parkway when signaled to do so by such rider; the
raising of the arm of the rider shall be considered as a signal suitable for
this action.
§ 23-142. [Ch. 23, Sec. 41] Disorderly conduct. [Ord. No. 1990-29]
No person shall commit in public any indecent, lewd or filthy act, nor use
any threatening or obscene language or make any indecent gesture or
movement or make any indecent exposure of his person, solicit, pander,
or sell or offer to sell, give away, or offer to give away, or have in his
possession, or display or exhibit in public with or without any attempt to
sell or give away, any obscene or indecent book, pamphlet, paper, drawing,
lithograph, engraving, picture, photograph, model, cast, instrument or any
article for indecent or immoral use on the reservoir or marginal land.
§ 23-143. [Ch. 23, Sec. 42] Vagrants, etc. [Ord. No. 1990-29]
No beggar, peddler, hawker, tramp, mendicant, common drunkard,
pickpocket, criminal, dissolute person or person who wanders about and
begs or goes about from door to door or person who habitually violates this
chapter or any of the provisions hereof, or any amendment hereto, or rules
or regulations made pursuant hereto shall enter or be in or upon any part
of the reservoir or marginal land.
F. At any place on or alongside the roadway in the Iroquois Park area,
except upon designated parking areas;
G. At any place in the Iroquois Park area between the roadway and the
lake, except upon designated parking areas. [Ord. No. 1990-29]
§ 23-139 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-144
1:771
§ 23-144. [Ch. 23, Sec. 43] Breach of the peace. [Ord. No. 1990-29]
No person shall make, aid, or countenance, or assist in making any
improper noise, racket, disturbance, breach of the peace or anything
tending to a breach of the peace on the reservoir or marginal land or
body or group of persons for any unlawful purpose or for the annoyance or
disturbance of any person or the damage or destruction of property of the
City or of any other person on the reservoir or marginal land.
§ 23-145. [Ch. 23, Sec. 44] Possession of alcohol and/or illegal
drugs. [Ord. No. 2017-05; amended 9-9-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-71]
§ 23-146. [Ch. 23, Sec. 45] Hindering or interfering with City
employees. [Ord. No. 1990-29]
No person shall interfere with or in any manner hinder any employee or
agent of the City while engaged in any work or the improvement, care or
supervision of any portion of the reservoir, marginal land or drainage area
of the reservoir.
§ 23-147. [Ch. 23, Sec. 46] Bribery. [Ord. No. 1990-29]
No person shall corruptly, directly or indirectly, give, offer or promise
to give any money or other bribe, present or reward, promise, contract
obligation, or security for the payment of any money present, reward or any
other thing of value to any officer, agent, employee or representative of the
City, who is in charge of controlling, supervising, governing or inspecting
the reservoir, marginal land or drainage area, or any part thereof or work
thereon, either before or after his selection, appointment or qualifying, for
the purpose of influencing his act, vote, opinion, decision, or judgment on
any matter, question, cause, or proceeding which may then be pending or
may come or be brought before him to execute or perform any power vested
in him or any duty of him required, with partiality or favor, otherwise then
required by law, or as a consideration for some act done or about to be done
contrary to the duty of such officer, agent, employee or representative.
§ 23-148. [Ch. 23, Sec. 47] Special policemen.
A. No intoxicated person shall enter or remain in or upon the reservoir or
public grounds or places within the marginal land;
B. No person shall have in his possession or consume any illegal drugs in
or upon the reservoir or public grounds or places within the marginal
land.
C. No person shall have in his possession or consume any alcoholic liquor
in or upon the reservoir or public grounds or places within the marginal
land, except as permitted under Chapter 6, § 6-133D of this Code.
A. Appointment of Lake Police Officers. The City Manager may appoint
and employ such number of special police officers, who shall be known
§ 23-144 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 23-148
1:772
as "Lake Police," as the City may determine to be necessary to enforce
the provisions of this article. Each police officer so appointed shall
have authority as conservators of the peace to enforce the provisions
of this article and any and all ordinances, rules, and regulations of any
governmental authority applicable to the reservoir and marginal lands
or any of them, and it shall be his duty to do so. Officers referred
to hereunder shall not be subject to the Board of Fire and Police
Commissioner's Act and shall not be appointed by or subject to the
control and regulation of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners of
the City. [Ord. No. 1990-29]
B. Oath and bond. Each such officer before he enters upon the duties of his
employment shall take the oath prescribed by law for police officers and
shall be bonded by the City in the sum of $5,000 with sureties as the
City shall approved, conditioned upon the faithful performance of all of
the duties of the office. [Ord. No. 1977-51]
C. Uniforms and badges. Each such officer shall wear a uniform of such
material and pattern as may be prescribed by the City, to be furnished
by each such officer at his own expense except that the metal star or
badge shall be furnished by the City. Upon the resignation or removal of
such officer, the metal star or badge shall be immediately delivered to
the City. [Ord. No. 1977-51]
D. Powers and duties. Each such officer shall have the power and it shall
be his duty to preserve the peace and good order and to protect all
property within the reservoir and marginal lands; to arrest any person
found in the act of violating or attempting to violate any law of this
State or any ordinance, rule or regulation of the City relating to the
reservoir and marginal lands; and to arrest any person aiding and
abetting such violation or attempted violation. Each such officer shall
prepare complaints as provided by law; shall let to bail any person
arrested and charged with an offense as provided by law; and/or shall
take arrested persons to a county, municipal, or other building housing
governmental units, a police station, sheriff's office or jail or any other
location authorized by law for the initial processing of and posting of
bail for the arrested person. The City, when deemed necessary, may
detail any such officer for the discharge of any special duty and may
require such officers to perform police duty at any time of the day or
night, although certain hours shall be allotted each such officer for
duty; and such officer must be prepared to act on a moment's notice
whenever his service may be required in view of any violation or
threatened violation of any such law, ordinance, rule or regulation.
[Ord. No. 1990-29]
E. Power to execute process. Each such officer shall have the power and
authority within the limits of the reservoir or marginal lands to serve
and execute warrants or other legal process for the commission of any
crime or offense or the violation of any ordinance, rule, or regulation of
the City governing and controlling such zones and while serving or
executing or assisting in the service or execution of any such warrant or
§ 23-148 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-148
1:773
§ 23-149. [Ch. 23, Sec. 48] Actions, processes and procedure.
legal process, he shall be vested with all of the powers provided by law
to police officers for such purposes. [Ord. No. 1990-29]
F. Neglect of duty. Any such officer who shall neglect or refuse to perform
any duty required by him by ordinances, rules and regulations of the
City or who shall in the discharge of his duties as such officer be guilty
of fraud, favoritism, extortion, suppression, willful wrong or injury shall
in each case be subject to suspension and removal from his duties as
such Police Officer. [Ord. No. 1990-29]
G. Conduct of lake police officers. Police Officers shall be civil and
respectful to the public upon all occasions, perform their duty with
good temper and discretion and shall not at any time while on duty
make use of violent, intemperate or abusive language. No such officer
shall communicate to any person any information which may lead to the
escape from arrest or punishment of any person accused of crime.
[Ord. No. 1977-51]
H. Assisting lake police officers. Any person who upon command refuses or
knowingly fails reasonably to aid a person known by him to be a Lake
Police Officer in: apprehending a person whom the officer is authorized
to apprehend, or preventing the commission by another of any offense,
commits an offense under this Ordinance.
I. Police reports. Each such officer shall make prompt written police
reports of the name, address and date of birth of each person by him
taken into custody, together with the names, addresses and dates of
birth of all witnesses who may be necessary to the successful
prosecution of such persons, and also of such facts and matters relating
to the describing the offense(s) as may be important in the trial of the
case(s). [Ord. No. 1977-51]
J. Resisting lake police officers. Any person who knowingly resists or
obstructs the performance by one known to the person to be a Lake
Police Officer of any authorized act within his official capacity commits
an offense under this Ordinance. [Ord. No. 1977-51]
A. All actions or suits for the violation of or to enforce any City ordinance
or to recover any fine or enforce any penalty under the provisions of this
article or of any other ordinance of the City shall be brought and
prosecuted in the name of the City. All actions or suits for the violation
of or to enforce any laws, regulations and rulings of the State of Illinois
shall be brought and prosecuted in the name of the State of Illinois.
[Ord. No. 1977-51]
B. Arrest. A Lake Police officer may arrest a person when he:
(1) Has reasonable grounds to believe that the person is committing or
has committed an offense under any ordinances of the City or
under the laws of the State of Illinois, or
§ 23-148 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 23-149
1:774
§ 23-150. [Ch. 23, Sec. 49] Right of inspection, construction and
maintenance. [Ord. No. 1990-29]
The City, by its authorized representatives, shall have the right to go upon
and into the reservoir and marginal land and every part thereof and the
improvements thereon at any and all reasonable times for the purpose of
inspecting the same; also to gain access to other land; plant and care for
trees and other vegetation; to construct or cause to be constructed and
maintained sewer, water and gas pipes, electric and telephone lines and
pipes and lines for other services and their appurtenances; to improve
and protect the shoreline; and to do any other work pertaining to the
improvement, protection, sanitary control, and regulation of the reservoir
and its environs.
§ 23-151. [Ch. 23, Sec. 50] City's agents.
(2) Has a warrant commanding that such person be arrested, or
(3) Has reasonable grounds to believe that a warrant for the person's
arrest has been issued in this State or in another jurisdiction. [Ord.
No. 1977-51]
C. Warrant. Whenever any person who is charged with an offense under
any Ordinance of the City or who is charged with any offense under the
laws of the State of Illinois by any officer appointed under the terms of
this Ordinance, fails to appear at the time and place specified by any
legal process, such officer shall at the request of the prosecutor make
an appropriate complaint and appear in Court as may be necessary to
obtain a warrant for the arrest of each such person. [Ord. No.
1977-51]
D. Bail. Any person arrested for the violation of any provision of this Code
or any other ordinance for the regulation or control of Zones A, B, C, D,
E or F shall have the right to obtain release from custody by giving bail
as provided by law in the amount of $35 conditioned on his personal
appearance at the time and place fixed for his appearance in Court to
respond such charge(s). Bail may be posted in any manner provided by
law specifically including but not limited to placing the appropriate
cash bail (not in excess of $50 together with the appropriate portion(s)
of the ticket or complaint in a stamped envelope (to be provided by the
arresting officer) addressed to the Clerk of the Circuit Court in the
County in which the violation occurred and, in the presence of the
arresting officer depositing that envelope in a United States
Government mail box. [Ord. No. 1977-51]
A. The City, unless otherwise indicated, may act through its City Manager
or any duly authorized agent or employee of such department.
B. The City of Bloomington Public Works Department shall have charge of
and supervision over the lands owned by the City of Bloomington at
Lake Bloomington and the waters at Lake Bloomington, and shall be
§ 23-149 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-151
1:775
§ 23-152. [Ch. 23, Sec. 51] Exemption of acts of City. [Ord. No.
1990-29]
Nothing herein shall apply to or be construed to prevent or penalize
anything done or caused to be done by the City in constructing, operating,
improving, repairing, maintaining, patrolling, policing, protecting, or caring
for the reservoir, the aquatic life therein, the shores thereof, the marginal
land, the birds and natural life thereon, or any part of the waterworks
system of the City.
§ 23-153. [Ch. 23, Sec. 52] Rules and regulations.
The appropriate department of the City shall have power to establish
general rules and regulations for the administration of this article and such
other rules and regulations as may be deemed advisable or necessary to
make in giving full force and effect to the carrying out of the provisions of
this article and may amend and repeal any such rules and regulations.
§ 23-154. [Ch. 23, Sec. 53] Permits and licenses.
responsible for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. [Ord.
No. 2018-93]
A. All applications for permits or licenses herein provided for shall be
directed to the City.
B. All permits and licenses herein provided for that may be issued by the
City shall not be transferable in any way, but all benefits which may be
derived therefrom shall accrue only to the person to whom the permit
was originally issued by the City.
C. Each permit or license, whether or not issued for a consideration, shall
be subject to revocation by the City unless otherwise expressly
provided whenever the licensee or holder of such permit in any way
violates or permits the violation of any law, ordinance, rule or
regulation for the regulation, care, protection or control of the
reservoir, drainage area or water supply of the City. All such permits or
licenses may be consecutively numbered.
D. Each custodian of marginal land and each licensee or holder of any
permit from the City herein provided for shall at all times keep his post
office address on file with the City, and any provision for written notice
to any custodian, licensee or holder of any permit from the City herein
provided for shall be deemed for all purposes to have complied with
when the same in writing shall have been deposited in the United States
registered mail, postage prepaid, and properly addressed to such
designated address. The affidavit of the person so mailing such notice,
together with the registry receipt shall be prima facie evidence of the
mailing thereof.
§ 23-151 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 23-155
1:776
§ 23-155. [Ch. 23, Sec. 54] Penalties; disposition of moneys
collected. [Ord. No. 2017-05]
Any person committing an offense by violating any of the provisions of this
chapter, unless otherwise indicated, shall be deemed guilty of a fine only
offense and shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 for
each offense, and any license or permit in any manner relating thereto shall
be revoked. Upon second offense or any additional offenses of the same
provision, the fine shall double and the person may be banned from the lake.
Each day that the condition or act in violation of this article shall remain or
continue shall be deemed on the part of the person guilty of such violation
to be a separate and distinct offense.
§ 23-156. [Ch. 23, Sec. 54.1] Revocation and penalty.
§ 23-157. [Ch. 23, Sec. 55] Civil liability.
Any person violating any provision of this article shall become liable for
all damage and expense thereby caused to the City or any other person by
reason of such violation in addition to the criminal penalties provided.
A. Any person violating any of the provisions of § 23-115B(13), Steering
and Sailing Rules, as amended, in addition to any other penalties
authorized herein, may in the discretion of the Court be denied the
privilege of operating any craft on Lake Bloomington for a period of not
more than one year. [Ord. No. 1990-29]
B. Any person who operates any water craft on the lake during the period
when he is denied the privilege to so operate by virtue of the preceding
Section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof,
shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $500.
[Ord. No. 1990-29]
§ 23-155 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-157
1:777

ARTICLE II
Marginal Lands
DIVISION 1
Leasing
§ 23-201. [Ch. 23, Sec. 56] Authority of City to lease generally; term
of lease, etc. [Ord. No. 2015-89]
Portions of the marginal land around Lake Bloomington not required,
reserved or used exclusively for other public purposes may be leased from
time to time, jointly or severally to custodians of good reputation and
character, for periods not extending beyond January 1, 2131, for such
rentals and on such other terms and conditions and conferring and imposing
on such custodians such powers and duties as the City may deem best to
protect the impounding reservoir or artificial lake from pollution or other
injury and to better provide for the care, maintenance, improvement and
beautification of such artificial lake and of the surrounding zone of land and
subject to such regulations as may be from time to time determined by the
Council of the City.
§ 23-202. [Ch. 23, Sec. 57] Execution of leases; enforcement of
division.
The City is hereby authorized and empowered to execute all leases covered
by this Division and to do or cause to be done all other things necessary or
proper to carry this Division and the provision of all such leases into effect.
§ 23-203. [Ch. 23, Sec. 58] Authority of City to negotiate leases,
receive down payments, etc. [Ord. No. 2015-89]
The City may negotiate or cause to be negotiated any and all leases covered
by this Division; to give receipts for down payments to apply thereon; to
update rental payment terms and/or automatic increases in approved lease
extensions, new leases, or transfers; to allow nonprofit organizations to
apply for variances from the standard lease terms specific rental payments;
to enforce leases in all lawful ways; to accept the surrender of and to
terminate tenancies; to cancel leases and to make settlement and
adjustments in reference thereto; and to evaluate and sell to any custodian
all-rights and interest of the City in any dwelling house or other
improvement, not required for the protection of the lake, on any real estate
theretofore or about to be leased; but any such receipt for down payments
shall confer on the holder thereof no right, except to receive repayment of
the amount so paid, if the proper officers of the City elect not to execute a
lease pursuant thereto.
§ 23-204. [Ch. 23, Sec. 59] Recording leases.
Any and all leases on lake lands, or any part thereof, whether heretofore or
hereafter executed, may be filed for record in the Recorder's Office of the
§ 23-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-204
1:779
County, but any lease for a term of more than two years, whether heretofore
or hereafter executed shall as soon as practicable be recorded and indexed
in the office of the City Clerk of the City. Such record in the office of the City
Clerk shall be constructive notice to all custodians and persons claiming
directly or indirectly through or under them, respectively, of all provisions
of each such lease and all transfers thereof. Such record in the City Clerk's
Office, or certified copy thereof, shall be a prima facie evidence of the
instrument so certified.
§ 23-205. [Ch. 23, Sec. 60] Ratification of former leases,
cancellations, etc.
All written leases of lake lands belonging to the City heretofore executed
in behalf of the City and attested by its City Clerk and delivered to any
custodian who has paid rent therefor to the City and complied with the
provisions of any such leases are hereby ratified, approved and confirmed.
Each cancellation of a lease or termination of a lease made or caused to be
made by the City is hereby also ratified, approved and confirmed. Any and
all cancellations or modifications of leases and settlements and adjustments
made by the City incident to the surrender and cancellation or modification
of leases or the execution of any dwelling house or other improvement
on land owned by the City, which have been reduced to writing with any
custodian or former custodian and signed by the City and the consideration
therefor paid by the custodians are also hereby ratified, approved and
confirmed.
§ 23-206. [Ch. 23, Sec. 60.1] Prohibition against lease of multiple
lots - exceptions - affidavit required.
A. Except as provided herein, no person may lease more City-owned
property at Lake Bloomington than one lot as platted on unrecorded
plats of said property on file with the Water Department of the City.
[Ord. No. 1983-58]
B. This section shall not prohibit the leasing or transfer of any lease to
more than one platted lot if:
(1) The lease includes adjacent property not part of any other platted
lot and the lease is approved by the City Council; or
(2) The lease includes more than one platted lot and the improvements
thereon lie across platted lot lines or so close to them as to violate
setback requirements if the platted lots would be severed; or
(3) One or more of the lots included in the lease would be unbuildable
if severed; or
(4) All lots included in the lease have been transferred as a single lot
prior to 1951. [Ord. No. 1983-58]
C. This section shall not prohibit a person leasing a lot from the City from
leasing an additional lot in the name of a business if, but only if, there is
§ 23-204 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 23-206
1:780
§ 23-207. [Ch. 23, Sec. 60.2] Satellite dishes - composition and
location. [Ord. No. 1987-37]
Except as provided in § 23-107 herein, no person renting property at Lake
Bloomington may install or permit to be installed a satellite dish on such
leased property located between the Lake shore and any portion of the
principal or any accessory building located on such property other than one
of black mesh construction. All satellite dishes, of whatever construction,
shall be located only in areas defined as buildable for primary or accessory
structures under County zoning regulations. Except as provided in § 23-107
herein no person shall assume a lease of property at Lake Bloomington
which contains a satellite dish which does not conform to the requirements
of this section.
§ 23-208. [Ch. 23, Sec. 60.3] Approval of Building Safety
Department required. [Ord. No. 1987-37]
No person renting any property from the City at Lake Bloomington shall
install or permit to be installed at any location on such property a satellite
dish without the approval of the Building Safety Department of the City of
Bloomington on forms supplied by the City. The request shall be completed
and returned to the Building Safety Department along with a payment of a
$10 application fee.
§ 23-209. [Ch. 23, Sec. 60.4] Structural requirements.
Satellite dishes installed pursuant to this Ordinance shall conform with the
following requirements:
a legitimate business purpose for such second lease, which will be
used primarily for business purposes, the City Council is advised of
the multiple lease and knowingly gives its consent thereto. [Ord. No.
1983-58]
D. Persons seeking to lease City property at Lake Bloomington shall at the
time of application sign a sworn statement showing compliance with
this section and promising to refrain from violating the provisions of
this section in the future. Misstatements on said affidavit or violation of
the provisions of this section shall be grounds for termination of said
lease by the City. [Ord. No. 1983-58]
A. Installation and construction must comply with the Building Code
(Bloomington City Code Chapter 10).
B. Free standing satellite dishes shall not exceed 14 feet in height unless
certified as safe an adequate by a registered structural engineer or
architect;
C. Roof mounted satellite dishes shall have their structural integrity and
that of the roof system upon which installation is to be mounted
§ 23-206 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-209
1:781
§ 23-210. [Ch. 23, Sec. 60.5] Amortization of nonconforming
satellite dishes. [Ord. No. 1987-37]
All satellite dishes currently installed at Lake Bloomington which do not
comply with the requirements of § 23-207 are hereby declared to be legally
nonconforming. They shall be permitted to remain in their present location.
However, an agreement to replace or relocate such satellite dish, if
necessary to conform with the requirements of this Ordinance, shall be a
condition precedent to any consent on the part of the City of Bloomington
to transfer a lease at Lake Bloomington.
§ 23-211. [Ch. 23, Sec. 60.6] No undue hardship. [Ord. No. 1987-37]
In the event a lessee at Lake Bloomington establishes to the satisfaction of
the Building Safety Department that relocating a nonconforming satellite
dish to a location permitted in § 23-207 of this Ordinance would impose
a cost on the users of such satellite dish that is excessive in light of the
purchase and installation cost of said satellite dish, the Building Safety
Department is authorized to permit the installation of such screening as will
fulfill aesthetic goals of this Ordinance and complement the appearance of
the Lake and surrounding property.
§ 23-212. [Ch. 23, Sec. 60.7] County ordinances effective. [Ord. No.
1987-37]
Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to invalidate conflict with, or
impair the validity of any Ordinances or Resolutions of McLean County, or
to permit anything prohibited thereby.
§ 23-213. [Ch. 23, Sec. 60.8] Lease of H.M.A. Davis Lodge. [Ord. No.
2018-93]
The Director of Public Works of the City of Bloomington, or his designee,
is authorized to lease the H.M.A. Davis Lodge at Lake Bloomington at the
rate of $250 per day for each day such person, partnership, corporation
or association who desires to use such Lodge unless such partnership,
certified as safe and adequate by a registered structural engineer or
architect;
D. Satellite dishes shall not contain any form of advertising or
identification other than as permitted on signs in Bloomington City
Code Chapter 3. For purposes of this Ordinance property located at
Lake Bloomington shall be considered to be zoned R-1B;
E. Uses of satellite dishes shall not exceed three days in length. Satellite
dishes shall not be located or affixed to any movable object except
during location testing;
F. Only one satellite dish shall be allowed per leased premises. [Ord. No.
1987-37]
§ 23-209 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 23-213
1:782
corporation or association is a not-for-profit organization with tax exempt
status. The lease amount shall be reduced to $150 per day for any such
organization. The Director of Public Works shall request a $100 deposit,
which shall be refunded if, in the opinion of the Director of Public Works
or his designee, the Lodge is left in a clean and undamaged condition. The
Director, or his designee, shall require the person or entity desiring to lease
such Lodge to execute a release and hold harmless agreement to the City of
Bloomington, in a form acceptable to the Director.
§ 23-214. through § 23-220. (Reserved)
§ 23-213 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-214
1:783

DIVISION 2
Cutting Weeds, Clearing Debris, Removing Garbage
[Ord. No. 1979-120]
§ 23-221. [Ch. 23, Sec. 61] Advisability and necessity declared.
The Council of the City hereby determines that it is advisable, necessary
and for the best interest of the City and custodians of marginal lands of Lake
Bloomington for the City to provide for the cutting of noxious weeds and the
clearing of debris on lands leased to custodians.
§ 23-222. [Ch. 23, Sec. 62] Authority of the City to require work to
be done.
The City is hereby authorized and directed to cause noxious weeds to be cut
and debris to be removed from leased marginal lands of Lake Bloomington
in the event a custodian should fail to comply with the terms of the lease
agreement entered into between the custodian and the City.
§ 23-223. [Ch. 23, Sec. 63] Charges and expenses.
The City is hereby directed to compel each custodian of marginal lands
of Lake Bloomington to pay all expenses incurred by the City in cutting
noxious weeds or removing debris from the premises leased by the
custodian. Such charges shall be a lien in favor of the City on the leasehold
of the custodian until paid.
§ 23-224. [Ch. 23, Sec. 64] Garbage collection. [Ord. No. 1990-29]
The City will provide for refuse collection from marginal lands at Lake
Bloomington. In order to defray the cost of such refuse collection,
custodians of such marginal lands shall pay to the City of Bloomington an
amount equal to the gross amount of the City's refuse collection contract
for Lake Bloomington divided by the number of residential lot leases with
residential structures. Said custodians shall make an annual payment to
the City of Bloomington in an amount determined by the process described
herein for refuse collection.
§ 23-221 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-224
1:785
Chapter 24
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
§ 23-224 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 23-224
1:786
ARTICLE I
Title
§ 24-101. [Ch. 24, Sec. 1.1] Title. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
This chapter shall be known, cited and referred to as the "Land Subdivision
Code" of the City of Bloomington, Illinois.
§ 24-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-101
1:787

ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 24-201. [Ch. 24, Sec. 2.1] Jurisdiction. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
These regulations shall apply to every subdivision code (as defined herein)
occurring inside the corporate limits of the City of Bloomington, Illinois or
occurring in the unincorporated areas within 1 1/2 miles from the City's
corporate limits, as those limits exist at the time the Subdivision Code
occurs.
§ 24-202. [Ch. 24, Sec. 2.2] Policy.
§ 24-203. [Ch. 24, Sec. 2.3] Purpose.
Because every Subdivision Code of land within the jurisdiction of these
regulations is or may become a part of the City of Bloomington and because
each has or may have an impact on services provided by the City, as well as
on services provided by other governmental units serving the community,
this Code is adopted for the following purposes:
A. It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City to consider subdivision
codes and planned unit developments and the subsequent development
thereof as subject to the control of the City pursuant to the City of
Bloomington Comprehensive Plan for the orderly, planned, efficient,
and economical development of the City.
B. Land to be subdivided or developed as a planned unit development shall
be of such character that it can be used safely for building purposes
without danger to health or peril from fire, flood, or other menace, and
land should not be subdivided or developed as a planned unit
development until available public facilities and improvements exist
and proper provision has been made for drainage, water, sewerage, and
capital improvements such as schools, parks, recreation facilities,
transportation facilities and improvements. The existing and proposed
public improvements shall conform to and be properly related to the
proposals shown on the City of Bloomington Comprehensive Plan,
Official Map, and the Capital Improvements Program of the City, and it
is intended that this code should supplement and facilitate the
enforcement of the provisions and standards contained in Chapters 10,
44, and 45 of the Bloomington City Code, 1960, as amended, and in the
City of Bloomington Comprehensive Plan, Official Map and the Capital
Improvements Program of the City. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
A. To protect, provide and promote the public health, safety and general
welfare of the City;
B. To guide the future growth and development of the City, in accordance
with the Comprehensive Plan;
§ 24-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-203
1:789
§ 24-204. [Ch. 24, Sec 2.3.1] Planned unit development regulations
- purpose.
C. To provide for adequate light, air and privacy, to secure safety from fire,
flood, and other danger, and to prevent overcrowding of the land and
undue congestion of population;
D. To protect the character and the social and economic stability of all
parts of the City and to encourage the orderly and beneficial
development of all parts of the community;
E. To protect and conserve the value of land throughout the City and the
value of buildings and improvements upon the land, and to minimize the
conflicts among the uses of land and buildings;
F. To guide public and private policy and action in order to provide
adequate and efficient transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks,
playgrounds, recreation and other public requirements and facilities;
G. To provide the most beneficial relationship between the uses of land
and buildings and the circulation of traffic throughout the City, having
particular regard to the avoidance of congestion in the streets and
highways, and the pedestrian traffic movements appropriate to the
various uses of land and buildings, and to provide for the proper
location and width of streets and building setback lines;
H. To establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for
subdivision codes and resubdivisions, in order to further the orderly
layout and use of land, and to insure proper legal descriptions and
monumenting of subdivided land;
I. To insure that public facilities are available and will have a sufficient
capacity to serve the proposed subdivision code and areas reasonably
anticipated to be served by such facilities;
J. To prevent the pollution of air, streams, and ponds; to assure the
adequacy of drainage facilities; to safeguard the water table; and to
encourage the wise use and management of natural resources
throughout the City in order to preserve the integrity, stability and
beauty of the community and the value of the land;
K. To preserve the natural beauty and topography of the City and to insure
appropriate development with regard to these natural features;
L. To provide for open spaces through the most efficient design and layout
of the land, including the use of average density in providing for
minimum width and area of lots, while preserving the density of land as
established in the City's zoning ordinance. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
A. The purpose of the Planned Unit Development Regulations is to
encourage and allow more creative and imaginative design for land
development than is possible under the more conventional zoning
§ 24-203 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 24-204
1:790
regulations. The planned unit development also provides for more
efficient use of the land and thus may result in more economical land
development. Preservation of natural site qualities, better urban
amenities, more open spaces, and a higher quality project are also
intended results of the planned unit development process.
B. The process is intended to be an alternative to the conventional
subdivision code of land and lot by lot development contemplated by the
subdivision code regulations of this Code and the zoning district
regulations of Chapter 44 of the Bloomington City Code, 1960, as
amended. The following objectives may be attained through the use of
the planned unit development process:
(1) A maximum choice in the types of environment available to the
public by allowing a development that would not be possible under
the strict application of the other sections of this Code and Chapter
44 of the Bloomington City Code, 1960, as amended.
(2) Permanent preservation of common open space and recreation
areas and facilities.
(3) A pattern of development to preserve natural vegetation,
topographic and geologic features.
(4) The prevention and/or control of soil erosion and surface flooding.
(5) A creative approach to the use of land and related physical facilities
that results in better development and design and the construction
of aesthetic amenities.
(6) An efficient use of the land resulting in more economic networks of
utilities, streets, schools, public grounds and buildings and other
facilities.
(7) A land use which promotes the public health, safety, comfort,
morals and welfare.
(8) A combination and coordination of architectural styles, building
forms, and building relationships with a possible mixing of different
urban uses in an innovative overall design.
(9) Innovations in residential, commercial and industrial development
so that growing demands of the population may be met by greater
variety in type, design and layout of buildings and by the
conservation and more efficient use of open space ancillary to said
buildings.
(10) The combination of a number of review and approval procedures
into a single plan review and approval process.
(11) The use of public input and participation in the design and
development of innovative and creative land use proposals.
§ 24-204 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-204
1:791
§ 24-205. [Ch. 24, Sec. 2.4] (Reserved) [Ord. No. 1998-42]
§ 24-206. [Ch. 24, Sec. 2.5] Rules of construction.
The language set forth in this code shall be interpreted in accordance with
the following rules of construction, unless the context clearly requires a
different construction:
C. The planned unit development is intended to provide for projects
incorporating a single type of a variety of related uses which are
planned, developed and maintained as a unit. The planned unit
development should provide amenities not otherwise required by law
and often establishes facilities and open space greater than the
minimum required by code. Such development may consist of
subdivided lots, provided that the platted lots are maintained in unified
control with unsubdivided property maintained in separate ownership
but unified control.
D. The planned unit development may permit the transfer of dwelling units
from one portion of the tract to another and will permit the clustering of
dwelling units in one or more locations upon the tract. The uses
permitted within the planned unit development shall be the same as
those authorized in the zoning district in which it is located unless
otherwise provided by the allowable exceptions with provisions of
Chapter 44 of the Bloomington City Code, 1960, as amended.
E. The unique and substantially different character of planned unit
developments requires that they be processed under a special plan
review procedure. Planned unit developments are of a different
character than conventional subdivision codes or other projects
requiring site plan review, requiring the establishment herein of
specific and additional procedures, standards and exceptions to govern
the recommendations of the Planning Commission and the action by the
City Council.
F. A person, by choosing to develop property as a planned unit
development, elects to submit a contemplated development proposal to
a legislative and discretionary review by the Planning Commission and
Council. It is the intent of this Code that the planned unit development
review procedure be conducted as an alternative to subdivision code
review as under this code. All planned unit developments shall be
designed in such a manner as to conform to the provisions of the City of
Bloomington major street plans, trunk sewer extension plans, water
distribution system plans, and storm drainage plans. [Ord. No.
1998-42]
A. The singular includes the plural and the plural the singular;
B. The present tense includes the past and future and the future includes
the present.
§ 24-204 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 24-206
1:792
§ 24-207. [Ch. 24, Sec. 2.6] Definitions.
The following words and terms, whenever they occur in this Code, shall be
interpreted as herein defined.
ABUTTING (CONTIGUOUS, ADJACENT) — Having one or more common
boundary lines or district lines.
ALLEY —
AREA, GROSS — The entire area within the lot lines of the property
proposed for subdivision code/development, including any areas to be
dedicated/reserved for street and alley right-of-way and for the public uses.
BASEMENT — The story of a building which is partly below and partly
above grade, and having at least 1/2 its height above grade.
BLOCK — A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a street or streets and
any combination of boundary lines of public of institutionally owned lands,
railroad rights-of-way, rivers and lakes and/or other lines of demarcation. A
block may be located in part within an incorporated City or town.
BUILDING — Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering
any use or occupancy.
BUILDING PERMIT — A permit issued by the City of Bloomington for the
construction, erection or alteration of a structure or building[Ord. No.
2005-78]
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — A line within a lot, or other parcel of land,
so designated on the preliminary plan and the final plat, which denotes
the area between such line and the adjacent street right-of-way line where
C. The words "should or shall" are mandatory, while the word "may" is
permissive.
D. Terms connotating a particular gender include each and every other
gender.
E. Whenever a word or term defined hereinafter appears in the text of this
Code, its meaning shall be construed as set forth in the definition
thereof, and any word appearing in the parenthesis between a word and
its definition shall be construed in the same sense as that word.
F. All words and terms not defined herein shall be construed in their
generally accepted meaning.
G. The terms Corporate Authority, Mayor and Council, City Council and
Council all mean the Mayor and City Council of the City of Bloomington,
Illinois. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
A public right-of-way which is less than nine meters (30 feet) wide and
affords a secondary means of access to abutting property.
A.
Frontage on an alley shall not be construed as satisfying the
requirements related to frontage on a public street.
B.
§ 24-206 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-207
1:793
an enclosed building, and other obstructions are prohibited, except those
permitted obstructions as regulated by the Bloomington Zoning Code, 1960
as amended.
CELLAR — The portion of a building which is partly or completely below
grade and having at least 1/2 of its heights below grade.
CENTER LINE —
CERTIFIED PROFESSIONAL IN EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
(CPESC) — A person meeting the standards for, and certified by CPESC, Inc.
Marion, N.C. 28752 in conjunction with the Soil and Water Conservation
Society and the International Erosion Control Association, as being qualified
for educational, scientific, and service activities with public and private
agencies.[Ord. No. 2005-78]
CERTIFY or CERTIFICATION — Formally attesting that the specific
inspections and tests where required have been performed, and that such
tests comply with the applicable requirements of this Ordinance.[Ord. No.
2005-78]
CITY — The City of Bloomington, Illinois.
CITY CLERK — The City Clerk of Bloomington, Illinois, or her duly
authorized representative.
CITY MANAGER — The individual occupying that position on the staff of the
City of Bloomington, or his/her duly authorized representative.
CITY PLANNER — The individual occupying that position on the staff of the
City of Bloomington, Illinois, or his/her duly authorized representative.
CLEARING — Any activity which removes vegetative ground cover.[Ord.
No. 2005-78]
COLLECTION TILE SYSTEM — A tile system serving individual lots for the
purpose of receiving water discharged from sources such as footing tiles.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The composite of the functional and
geographic elements of the Comprehensive Plan of the City of Bloomington,
or any segment thereof in the form of plans, maps, charts, textual materials
and the Official Map, as adopted by the City Council.
CROSS SLOPE — The degree of inclination measured across pavements
rather than in the direction traffic moves on the pavement.
CUBIC YARDS — The amount of material in excavation and/or fill measured
by the method of "average end areas."[Ord. No. 2005-78]
A. The center line of any right-of-way having uniform width;
The original center line, where a right-of-way has been widened
irregularly;
B.
C. The new center line, whenever a road has been relocated.
§ 24-207 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 24-207
1:794
DEDICATE — Transfer of ownership of right-of-way, parcel of land or
improvement to this municipality or other public or quasi public entity
without compensation.
DEVELOPER — (See "Owner").
DEVELOPMENT — Both the act of changing a tract of land and the state
of a tract of land after its function has been purposefully changed by man
including, but not limited to, construction of structures on the land, and
alterations to the land, except grading that does not alter the natural flow
of stormwater.
DIRECTOR OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT — The individual occupying
that position on the staff of the City of Bloomington, Illinois, or his/her
designated representative.[Ord. No. 2017-96]
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS — The individual occupying that position
on the staff on the City of Bloomington or his/her designated
representative.[Ord. No. 2018-93]
DRAINAGE WAY, IMPROVED — A portion of a right-of-way or easement
used or intended principally for storm, surface or ground water drainage
which meets or exceeds the design and construction standards for public
drainage ways.
DRAINAGE WAY, UNIMPROVED — A portion of a right-of-way or easement
used or intended principally for storm, surface or ground water drainage
which does not meet or exceed the design and/or construction standards for
public drainage ways.
DRIVEWAY — A private access way for motor vehicles between a public or
private street and one or more structures or off-street parking areas.
DWELLING — A building designed or used principally for residential
occupancy, including, without limitation, single-family dwellings, two-family
dwellings and multiple-family dwellings.
EASEMENT — A quantity of land set aside over or under which a liberty,
privilege, or advantage in land without profit, is dedicated and is distinct
from ownership of the land. May be granted either to the public, a particular
person, a utility company, or a combination thereof.
ENGINEER — A Licensed Professional Engineer licensed by the State of
Illinois.
EROSION — All of the processes by which soil and rock are loosened and
moved downhill or downwind.[Ord. No. 2005-78]
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PERMIT — A permit issued by the
City of Bloomington for the construction or alteration of ground
improvements and structures for the control of erosion, runoff and
grading.[Ord. No. 2005-78]
ESCROW DEPOSIT — A deposit in cash or other approved securities to
assure the completion of improvements within a subdivision code or
planned unit development.
§ 24-207 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-207
1:795
EXCAVATION — Any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock,
or any other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed,
displaced, relocated or bulldozed and shall include the conditions resulting
therefrom.
EXISTING GRADE — The vertical location of the existing ground surface
prior to excavation or filling.[Ord. No. 2005-78]
FAMILY —
FIELD INSPECTOR — An individual, company or firm appointed by the
Director of Public Works to inspect construction to insure compliance with
approved plans and specifications.[Ord. No. 2018-93]
FILL — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material
is deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or
moved by man to a new location and shall include the conditions resulting
therefrom.
FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN — A final plan that is required to be
submitted to the City as specified in the Planned Unit Development
Regulations, Article V of this Code.
FINAL GRADE — The vertical location of the ground or pavement surface
after the grading work is completed in accordance with the site
development plan.[Ord. No. 2005-78]
FINAL PLAT — A map or plan of a subdivision code and any accompanying
material as described hereafter.
FINAL PUNCH LIST — A tabulation of deficiencies requiring corrective
action prior to final acceptance of a project.
FLOOD — A general or temporary condition of inundation of normally dry
land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid accumulation or the
runoff of surface waters from any source.
FRONTAGE — The measure of lineal contiguity between a lot or portion
thereof and another lot, public street, alley or public way.
One of the following:
One or more persons each related to each other by blood, marriage,
or legal adoption. Any foster children residing with such person
or persons in a "foster family home" as that term is defined in
§ 44-1607, of Chapter 44 of the Bloomington City Code, 1960, as
amended shall also be deemed to be part of the family.
(1)
One or more persons each related to each other by blood, marriage,
or legal adoption, and an aggregate of not more than two
individuals not related by blood, adoption or marriage living in a
dwelling unit.
(2)
A.
However, in no case shall more than two persons not related by blood,
adoption or marriage occupy an efficiency unit or one bedroom dwelling
unit.
B.
§ 24-207 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 24-207
1:796
FRONTAGE ROAD — A local street which is parallel to and either adjacent
to or within the right-of-way of an arterial street.
GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM (G.I.S.) — A computer system
maintained by Bloomington, Normal and McLean County that stores and
links non-graphic attributes or geographically referenced data with graphic
map features to allow a wide range of information processing and display
operations, as well as map production, analysis and modeling.
GRADING — Excavation or fill or any combination thereof and shall include
the conditions resulting from any excavation or fill.[Ord. No. 2005-78]
ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION (I.D.O.T.) — The division of
state government identified by this name.
LONG TERM LAND LEASE — The leasing of a portion of a tract of land for
a period of time of 10 years or more for new development where sale of said
tract of land would obligate the owner to comply with the subdivision code
regulations (Chapter 24) of the Bloomington City Code.
LOT — A quantity of land capable of being described with such certainties
that its location and boundaries may be established and which is designated
by its owner or developer as land to be conveyed, used or developed as a
unit or which has been conveyed, used or developed as a unit, including any
easements within its boundaries. Such lot shall have frontage on public or
private street.[Ord. No. 2003-107]
LOT AREA — The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the vertical planes
through front, side, and rear lot lines.
LOT DEPTH — Any distance between the midpoints of straight lines
connecting the foremost points of the side lot lines in front and the rearmost
points of the side lot lines in the rear.
LOT OF RECORD — A lot which is part of a subdivision code recorded in the
office of the McLean County Recorder of Deeds, or a lot or parcel described
by metes and bounds, the description of which has been legally recorded.
LOT WIDTH — Lot width shall be measured at the front yard setback
line.[Ord. No. 2003-107]
LOT, CORNER — A lot located at the intersection of two or more streets. A
lot abutting on a curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot
if straight lines drawn from the foremost points of the side lot lines to the
foremost point of the lot meet at an interior angle less than 135°.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE — A lot which has a pair of opposite lot lines
along two substantially parallel streets.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot which faces on one street or with opposite sides on
two streets.
LOT, OUT — A lot depicted on a preliminary plan or final plat which does
not meet the requirements of this Code for lots of record and which may not
be used for construction of buildings or parking lots.
§ 24-207 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-207
1:797
LOT, THROUGH — A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than
one street, through lots abutting two streets may be referred to as double
frontage lots.
MANUAL — A document entitled "A Manual of Practice for the Design of
Public Improvements in the City of Bloomington."38
MEDIAN — An area between opposite traffic lanes of a street or roadway or
an area between two parallel streets or roadways.
NATURAL DRAINAGE — Channels formed in the existing surface
topography of the earth prior to changes made by unnatural causes.[Ord.
No. 2005-78]
NO-ACCESS STRIP — An area at least one meter (three feet) wide along a
lot line within which no vehicular driveways shall be permitted.
OFFICIAL COMPREHENSIVE PLAN (COMPREHENSIVE PLAN) — The
composite of the functional and geographic elements of the Comprehensive
Plan of the City of Bloomington, or any segment thereof in the form of plans,
maps, charts, textual materials and the Official Map, as adopted by the City
Council.
OFFICIAL MAP — The map adopted by the City Council as part of the
Comprehensive Plan which is designated "Official Map" in that plan.
OFFICIAL ZONING MAP — (See Zoning Map).
OUTLOT — (See Lot, Out).
OWNER — Any person, firm, association, partnership, private corporation,
public or quasi-public corporation, or a combination of any of them, or other
legal entity having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be
subdivided or developed to commence and maintain proceedings under the
provisions of this Code.
PARCEL — All contiguous land used or legally described and recorded as a
single unit.
PARKING LOT —
PARKING SPACE/PAD — An off-street parking area adjacent to a driveway
which provides parking for a single motor vehicle.
PARKWAY — The area of land within a street right-of-way which is located
between the back of the curb and the right-of-way line.
An area not on public right-of-way, exclusive of driveways, which is used
for the parking of motor vehicles.
A.
For purposes of computing the number of parking space in a lot, all
areas used for parking under unified control on the same or contiguous
parcels of land shall be considered as one lot.
B.
38.Editor's Note: See the Manual included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 24-207 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 24-207
1:798
PAVEMENT — The portion of a street designated for vehicular use
measured from face of curb to face of curb or edge to edge of paved street
surface where there are no curbs.
PEDESTRIAN WAY — A right-of-way or easement across or within a block
designated for pedestrian use.
PERMITTEE — Any person to whom a site development permit is
issued.[Ord. No. 2005-78]
PERSON — Any individual, firm or corporation, public or private, the State
of Illinois and its agencies or political subdivisions, and the United States of
America, its agencies and instrumentalities, and any agent, servant, officer
or employee of any of the foregoing.[Ord. No. 2005-78]
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT — A planned unit development is a lot
or group of lots which is developed as a unit under single ownership or
unified control, which includes one or more principal buildings or uses, and
is processed under the planned unit development procedure of this chapter
of the Municipal Code.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the City of
Bloomington, Illinois.
PRELIMINARY PLAN — A tentative map or plan of a proposed subdivision
code as described in this chapter of the Municipal Code.
PROJECT — All of the various parts of proposed construction submitted to
the Director of Public Works for approval.[Ord. No. 2018-93]
PROPERTY LINE — The lines bounding a lot or parcel and delineating the
land in individual ownership.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS — Include streets, sidewalks, public utilities and
other structures, fixtures or land appurtenances which are or are intended
to be dedicated to the City of Bloomington and the public generally.
REMOVAL — Cutting vegetation to the ground or stumps, complete
extraction, or killing by spraying or by the use of any grading or clearing
technique.[Ord. No. 2005-78]
RESERVE — To set aside a parcel of land in anticipation of its acquisition by
this municipality (or other government entity) for public purposes.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land dedicated to or used by the public for
vehicular and/or pedestrian passage; storm, surface or ground water
drainage; or public utility placement.
ROADWAY — A portion of a right-of-way designated for motorized vehicular
use.
SEDIMENT — Mineral or organic solid material in suspension by being
transported or moved from it's site of origin by wind, water, gravity, or
ice and has come to rest on the earth's surface either above or below sea
level.[Ord. No. 2005-78]
§ 24-207 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-207
1:799
SETBACK — The minimum longitudinal distance between the building line
or structure and the related front, side or rear property line.
SETBACK LINE — A line shown on a plat delineating the setback.
SIDEWALK — A portion of a right-of-way used or intended principally for
pedestrian passage, which meets or exceeds the design standards for public
sidewalks.
SITE — A lot or parcel of land, or a contiguous combination thereof, where
grading work is performed as a single unified operation.[Ord. No.
2005-78]
SITE DEVELOPMENT — Altering terrain and/or vegetation and
constructing improvements.[Ord. No. 2005-78]
STORY — That portion of a building included between the upper surface of
a floor and the upper surface of the floor or roof next above. A basement
shall be counted as a story and a cellar shall not be counted as a story.
STORY HEIGHT — The vertical distance from top to top of two successive
tiers of beams or finished floor surfaces, and, for the topmost story, from the
top of the floor finish to the top of the ceiling joists, or, where there is not a
ceiling, to the top of the roof rafters.
STREAM — Any river, creek, brook, branch, flowage, ravine, or natural or
man-made drainage way which has a definite bed and banks or shoreline,
in or into which surface or groundwater flows, either perennially or
intermittently.[Ord. No. 2005-78]
STREET — That portion of a right-of-way used and maintained as principal
means of access to adjacent lots of record or property and meets the design
and construction standards for the classification it holds.
STREET, CUL-DE-SAC — A local street with one outlet which ends with a
turn around.
STREET, EXTERIOR — A street on the perimeter of a subdivision code.
STREET, INTERIOR — A street entirely within the confines of a subdivision
code.
STREET, PRIVATE — A street owned and maintained by private entity.
STREET, PUBLIC — A street owned and maintained by the public.
STREET, STANDARDS AND CLASSIFICATIONS — The current
classifications and standards as described in the Illinois Department of
Transportation "Design and Environment Manual" as modified by the City
Council pertaining to requirements of streets.
STRIPPING — Any activity which removes the vegetative surface cover
including tree removal, clearing, and storage or removal of topsoil.[Ord.
No. 2005-78]
STRUCTURE — Anything that is built or constructed, including but not
limited to, any usable, permanent, in place device or appliance outside the
building setback line within the lot making a projection of six inches or more
§ 24-207 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 24-207
1:800
above grade and having a base greater than 12 square feet. This does not,
however, exclude such underground or surface structures such as tunnels,
future foundations, or swimming pools in whole or in part below grade.
SUBDIVIDE — To subdivide means:
SUBDIVISION CODE — The configuration of lots of record, outlots, public
rights-of-way and public improvements which result from subdividing land
in accordance with the procedures, requirements and standards of this
Code.
TRAIL — That portion of right-of-way physically separated from motorized
vehicles and intended for non-motorized transportation and recreational
uses.
UNIFIED CONTROL — The combination of two or more tracts of land either
through unified ownership or other arrangements, wherein each owner has
agreed to allow use and develop their tracts as a single lot under the
provisions of the ordinance applicable to planned unit developments.
USE — The use of property is the purpose or activity for which the land,
or building thereon, is designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is
occupied or maintained, and shall include any manner of performance of
such activity with respect to the regulations of the Zoning Code.
VACANT — Land on which there are no structures or only structures
which are secondary to the use or maintenance of the land itself.[Ord. No.
2005-78]
VACATE — To terminate the legal existence of right-of-way or easement or
subdivision code, and to so note on the final plat recorded with the McLean
County Recorder of Deeds.
WAIVER — Deviation, relaxation, adjustment or modification of a
requirement of this code.
WETLANDS — Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water
or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and
that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. For the purpose of
A. The division of land into two or more lots, parcels, or tracts;
B. The dedication of streets, ways, or other areas for use of the public;
Any development of property which according to City Codes,
necessitates the extension of public utilities to such property by main
or by service connection;
C.
Any development of property which requires that a new street be
constructed;
D.
Any development of property that meets the definition of a planned unit
development as defined in this Code;
E.
F. Long term land lease for new development.
§ 24-207 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-207
1:801
this ordinance, wetlands shall be defined by the Illinois Department of
Conservation National Wetlands Inventory maps.[Ord. No. 2005-78]
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR — The Director of Community Development for
the City of Bloomington, Illinois, or his/her designated representative.[Ord.
No. 2017-96]
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS — The Zoning Board of Appeals of the City
of Bloomington, Illinois.
ZONING MAP — The Official Zoning Map is the map adopted by the
City Council showing all the zoning district boundaries within the City of
Bloomington, Illinois.[Ord. No. 1998-42]
§ 24-208. [Ch. 24, Sec. 2.7] Interpretation, conflict, and severability.
§ 24-209. [Ch. 24, Sec. 2.8] Saving provision. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
This Code shall not be construed as abating any action now pending under,
or by virtue of, prior existing subdivision code regulations, or as
discontinuing, abating, modifying, or altering any penalty accruing or about
to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm, or corporation,
A. Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of
these regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare. These
regulations shall be construed broadly to promote the purposes for
which they are adopted. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
B. Conflict:
(1) Public provisions. These regulations are not intended to interfere
with, abrogate, or annul any other provision of law except as
provided in these regulations. Where any provision of these
regulations imposes restrictions different from those imposed by
any other provision of these regulations or any other ordinance,
rule or regulation, or other provision of law, the provision which is
more restrictive or imposes higher standards will control.
(2) Private provisions. These regulations are not intended to abrogate
any easement, covenant, or other private agreement or restriction,
provided that where the provisions of these regulations are more
restrictive or impose higher standards or regulations than the
easement, covenant or other private agreement or restriction, the
requirements of these regulations shall govern.
(3) Severability. If any part or provision of these regulations or the
application of these regulations to any person or circumstances is
adjudged invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, the
judgment shall be confined in its operation to the part, provision, or
application directly involved in the controversy in which the
judgment shall be rendered and it shall not affect or impair the
validity of the remainder of these regulations. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
§ 24-207 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 24-209
1:802
or as waiving any right of the City under any section or provision existing
at the time of adoption of this Code, or as vacating or annulling any rights
obtained by any person, firm, or corporation, by lawful action of the City
except as shall be expressly provided for in this chapter.
§ 24-210. [Ch. 24, Sec. 2.9] Amendments. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
The Bloomington Planning Commission may from time to time recommend
to the City Council amendments to these regulations which shall then be
approved or disapproved by the City Council.
§ 24-211. [Ch. 24, Sec. 2.10] Conditions. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
In approving variances, exceptions, or waivers of conditions, the
Bloomington Planning Commission may require such conditions as will, in
its judgment, secure substantially the purposes described in § 24-203.
§ 24-212. [Ch. 24, Sec. 2.11] Resubdivision of land. [Ord. No.
1998-42]
Resubdivision of lot or outlot of record in an approved subdivision code
shall be permitted only if the resubdivided lots so formed shall meet all
the zoning, building and other regulations. The utilities must be provided
to each such resubdivided lots as per the City's standards. The approval
of the resubdivision shall be subjected to the same process as for a new
subdivision code.
§ 24-213. [Ch. 24, Sec. 2.12] Vacation of plats. [Ord. No. 2016-36]
In accordance with State law, any plat or part thereof may be vacated by
the owner of the parcel, at any time before the sale of any lot therein,
by written vacation instrument to which a copy of the plat is attached.
If there are public service facilities in any street, or other public way,
or easement shown on said plat, the instrument shall reserve to the City
or other public entity or public utility owning such facilities the property,
rights-of-way, and easements necessary for continuing public service by
means of those facilities and for maintaining or reconstructing the same. If
there are no public service facilities in any street or easement, then those
streets and easements shall be vacated without any reservation for utilities.
The vacation instrument shall be approved by the City Council in the same
manner as plats of subdivision code, and shall also be approved by the
public utilities involved. In the case of platted parcels wherein any lots have
been sold, the written instrument must also be signed by all the owners of
the lots in said parcel. In case where a public right-of-way, street or alley is
to be vacated, a public hearing shall be done in accordance with the City's
Policy on Street and Alley Vacations.39
§ 24-214. [Ch. 24, Sec. 2.13 through Ch. 24, Sec. 2.13.3] Waivers.
39.Editor's Note: The City's Policy on Street and Alley Vacations is included as an attachment
to this chapter.
§ 24-209 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-214
1:803
§ 24-215. [Ch. 24, Sec. 2.14] Obligation to comply.
A. General. Where the City Council finds that extraordinary hardships or
practical difficulties may result from strict compliance with this Code
and/or the purposes of the regulations in this code may be served to a
greater extent by an alternative proposal, the City Council may approve
waivers to these Subdivision Code regulations so that substantial
justice may be done and the public interest secured provided that such
waiver shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of
these regulations; and further provided that the City Council shall not
approve waivers unless it shall make findings based upon evidence
presented to it in each specific case that:
(1) The granting of the waiver will not be detrimental to the public
safety, health, or welfare or injurious to other property located in
the vicinity of the property in question;
(2) The conditions upon which the request for a waiver is based are
unique to the property for which the waiver is sought and are not
applicable generally to other property;
(3) Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or
topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a
particular hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished
from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of the regulations in
this Code is carried out;
(4) The waivers will not in any manner vary from the provisions of
Chapter 44 of the Bloomington City Code, 1960, as amended
(Zoning Regulations) unless such waiver has previously been
granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
B. Conditions. In approving waivers, the City Council may require such
conditions as will in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of
the standards or requirements of the Code. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
C. Procedures. A petition for any such waiver shall be submitted in writing
by the owner at the time when the Preliminary Plan is filed for the
consideration of the Planning Commission. Such petition shall state
fully the grounds for the application and all facts relied upon by the
petitioner The Planning Commission may recommend waivers from the
regulations of this Code in specific cases which, in the Planning
Commission's opinion, meet the standards for granting waivers as
provided in Subsection A. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to subdivide any
land within the corporate limits of the City of Bloomington or any
unincorporated area within 1 1/2 miles of the City's corporate limits
and meets the guidelines outlined in the intergovernmental boundary
line agreement between the City of Bloomington, Illinois and the Town
of Normal, Illinois dated July 14, 1986, without following the
§ 24-214 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 24-215
1:804
procedures, satisfying the requirements and meeting or exceeding the
standards specified in this Code, provided however, the provisions of
this Code shall not apply in the following instances:
(1) Conveyances of a lot comprising and containing all contiguous
property owned by a person, group of persons, firm of entity, as a
single parcel, to some other person, group of persons, firm or
entity.
(2) To the offer, sale or conveyance of one or more lots of record.
(3) To the sale or exchange of parcels of land between the owner of
adjoining and contiguous property which, if subject to the
requirements of this Code, would not necessitate the dedication of
public right-of-way or installation of public utilities; provided that
such transfer shall not create a lot which does not meet minimum
requirements of this Code.
(4) To conveyances made to correct discrepancies in prior
conveyances.
(5) To conveyances of land relating to the dedication of land for public
use or interest relating to or arising from the vacation of land
impressed with a public use.
(6) To conveyances of land the principal use of which is presently
agricultural and intended to be used principally for future
agricultural purposes.
B. In addition, it shall be unlawful to any person, firm or corporation to
develop, build on, use or improve any lot without dedicating such street
right-of-way as would have been required by this Ordinance if the lot
had been subdivided from a larger parcel immediately prior to such
development, construction, use or improvement.
C. The obligation to comply with this Subdivision Code will be waived by
the City where units are created pursuant to the Illinois Condominium
Property Act40 except where "foot-print" lots are created which are
equal to or larger than the individual units and a fee interest is
conveyed in the underlying property. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
D. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to develop, build
on, use or improve any parcel or lot within the corporate limits of the
City of Bloomington or any unincorporated area within 1 1/2 miles of
the City's corporate limits without following the procedures, and
satisfying the requirements and meeting or exceeding the standards
specified in this Code, or without meeting the requirements of the City's
Planned Unit Development Code. It being the intent of this section to
apply to all types of development both within the corporate limits and
40.Editor's Note: See 765 ILCS 605/1 et seq.
§ 24-215 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-215
1:805
§ 24-216. [Ch. 24, Sec. 2.15] Violation penalties. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
Any person found guilty of violation, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or
refusing to comply with, or resisting or opposing the investigation or
enforcement of any of the provisions of this Code, upon conviction thereof
shall be punished by a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $300 for the
first offense and not less than $50 nor more than $500 for the second and
each subsequent offense in any one-hundred-eighty-day period; provided,
however, that all actions seeking the imposition of fines only shall be filed as
quasi-criminal actions subject to the provisions of the Illinois Civil Practice
Act.41 A separate and distinct offense shall be regarded as committed each
day upon which said person shall continue any such violation, or permit
any such violation to exist after notification or knowledge of the existence
thereof.
§ 24-217. [Ch. 24, Sec. 2.16] (Reserved) [Ord. No. 1998-42]
§ 24-218. [Ch. 24, Sec. 2.17] Land trusts - disclosures of beneficial
interests. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
Whenever any trustee of a land trust, or any beneficiary of beneficiaries
of a land trust make application to the City of Bloomington for approval
of a subdivision code under this Code relating to the land which is the
subject of such trust, such application shall identify each beneficiary of
such land trust by name and address and define his/her interest therein as
required by Chapter 765 ILCS 405 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes. All such
applications shall be verified by the applicant in his/her capacity as trustee,
or by the beneficiary as a beneficial owner of interest in such land trust. If
such application is filed by a body politic or other corporate entity, it shall be
verified by a duly authorized officer of such body politic or other corporate
entity for whom such application is made. Such verifications shall be in the
form of one of the examples cited in Exhibits "A-2" and "A-3" (located in
Manual of Practice).42
§ 24-219. [Ch. 24, Sec. 2.18] Timing (Subdivision flow chart). [Ord.
No. 1998-42]
(To be added)
§ 24-220. [Ch. 24, Sec. 2.19] (Reserved) [Ord. No. 1998-42]
areas lying within 1 1/2 miles of the corporate limits of the City of
Bloomington. [Ord. No. 2003-107]
41.Editor's Note: See 735 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.
42.Editor's Note: The Manual of Practice is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 24-215 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 24-220
1:806
ARTICLE III
Submission and Review Procedures
§ 24-301. [Ch. 24, Sec. 3.1] Pre-application conference. [Ord. No.
2018-93]
Prior to the submission of a preliminary plan as required by § 24-302 of this
Code, the owner or developer of a proposed subdivision code or planned
unit development shall prepare a concept plan of such proposed subdivision
code or planned unit development and consult with the City Planner for the
purpose of reviewing such concept plan. The City Planner may invite other
individuals or entities as he deems appropriate. The purpose of such preapplication
conference is to review such concept plan which is a preliminary
concept and which may, after such pre-application conference, be then
refined by the owner or developer into a preliminary plan as required by
§ 24-302 of this Code. Said concept plan shall be drawn to engineering scale
and shall show the conceptual layout of the proposed subdivision code or
planned unit development including the general layout of streets, drainage,
sewerage and land uses and the present location of major natural features
such as streams and lakes. The City Planner, Director of Public Works and
Director of Community Development shall advise the owner or developer
at the pre-application conference whether the concept plan is consistent
with the subdivision code principles of planning defined in the Manual of
Practice for the Design of Public Improvements of the City of Bloomington43
and with the Official Comprehensive Plan, Zoning Code, this Code and other
applicable Codes of the City in order to assist the owner or developer prior
to the preparation of the preliminary plan required by § 24-302 of this
Code. This pre-application conference may be waived by mutual agreement
between the staff and the owner or developer.
§ 24-302. [Ch. 24, Sec. 3.2] Preliminary plan. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
Before subdividing any land subject to requirements of this Code, the owner
or developer shall comply with the following:
A. Submission. The owner or developer shall submit to the City Clerk, 22
paper copies of a preliminary plan in the form and providing all
information required by § 24-402. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
B. Filing fee. An application for approval of a preliminary subdivision code
plan shall be filed with the City Clerk and be accompanied by a fee
receipt reflecting payment to the City Treasurer of the fee as set forth
in the Schedule of Fees. In addition to said filing fee, the owner or
developer shall pay to the City Clerk the cost for the City to publish a
public notice of any hearing on the preliminary plan of the subdivision
code or planned unit development required to be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the City. Said cost shall be paid to
the City Clerk prior to said hearing. Failure to pay such cost prior to the
43.Editor's Note: The Manual of Practice is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 24-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-302
1:807
hearing shall result in the cancellation of such hearing. [Ord. No.
2018-89]
C. Scheduling and notification of public hearing. Upon receipt of a
preliminary plan and required filing fee, the City Clerk shall schedule
and give notice of a legislative public hearing before the Planning
Commission in the manner prescribed by § 24-302F. The legislative
public hearing shall be scheduled not later than at the first regularly
scheduled Planning Commission meeting occurring more than 15 days
after the filing date of the preliminary plan. Such notice shall contain:
(1) The name of the proposed subdivision code or planned unit
development and its address or commonly known location and legal
description;
(2) A statement of what the petition is requesting the Council to
approve;
(3) A statement of where copies of the petition, the preliminary plan or
preliminary development plan and all other supporting
documentation can be inspected by the public;
(4) A statement that all interested persons have the right to appear at
the public hearing on such preliminary plan or preliminary
development plan and present evidence; and
(5) The City Clerk on behalf of the Commission shall notify the owner
or developer of the proposed subdivision code or planned unit
development as to the time and place of the public hearing thereon
at least 15 days prior to the date of said hearing. [Ord. No.
1998-42]
D. Distribution of preliminary plan for review and comment. The City Clerk
shall route one or more copies of the preliminary plan to various City
staff members for review and comment. One copy of the plan shall be
provided to each member of the Planning Commission and each
member of the City Council prior to their respective consideration and
review of the plan. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
E. Administrative review and comment. The City Planner shall review said
plan and shall submit a written report containing said
recommendations to the Planning Commission for its consideration at
the public hearing on such preliminary plan application. The City Staff
shall review the preliminary plans and the City Planner will send the
review comments to the owner or the developer prior to scheduling
legislative hearing. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
F. Legislative public hearing and recommendation. The Planning
Commission shall conduct a legislative public hearing on the
preliminary plan during which it shall determine the extent to which the
plan conforms or fails to conform with the standards of this Code and
shall no later than 30 days after the adjournment of the legislative
§ 24-302 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 24-302
1:808
public hearing, transmit its recommendation on the plan to the City
Council. The Planning Commission may recommend approval of a
preliminary plan with an approval recommendation conditioned upon
the making of one or more changes in the proposal, which such changes
shall be enumerated in the Commission's transmittal to the City Council
or may transmit the plan to the Council without recommendation. When
the preliminary plan has been acted upon by the Planning Commission,
the Commission shall transmit its recommendation in writing to the
City Clerk as provided hereafter. If the Commission recommends
approval of the preliminary plan, it shall so indicate on the copy of
said Plan along with any additional requirements. Conversely, if the
Commission recommends disapproval of said Plan, it shall furnish the
City Council and the applicant a written statement setting forth the
reason for said recommendation and specifying with particularity the
aspects in which said preliminary plan fails to comply with the
requirements of this Code or does not comply with the official
Comprehensive Plan. Should the Planning Commission fail to act within
the 30 days from the adjournment of the public hearing, or fail to
adjourn the public hearing within 120 days of its commencement, the
plan shall be submitted to the Council without recommendation. [Ord.
No. 1998-42]
G. Council approval or rejection of a proposed preliminary plan. Within 30
days after receipt of the Planning Commission recommendation or
within 180 days from the filing date of the preliminary plan, whichever
occurs first, the City Council shall approve or reject the proposed
preliminary plan. Failure of the Council to act within the prescribed
time period shall constitute approval of the preliminary plan. The City
Clerk, upon approval of the preliminary plan by the City Council, shall
secure a reproducible Mylar and seven paper copies showing any
changes requested by the City Council of the plan from the owner/
developer. The City Clerk shall then cause seven copies of the approved
preliminary plan with such signatures affixed thereon to be made and
shall distribute such copies in the following manner:
(1) One copy together with the reproducible Mylar copy shall be sent
to the Director of Public Works;
(2) One copy shall be sent to the Director of Community Development;
(3) One copy shall be sent to the City Planner;
(4) One copy shall be sent to the Fire Chief;
(5) One copy shall be sent to the owner or developer;
(6) One copy shall be retained by the City Clerk for filing; and
(7) One copy shall be sent to appropriate Supt. of Schools. [Ord. No.
2018-93]
§ 24-302 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-302
1:809
§ 24-303. [Ch. 24, Sec. 3.3] Public improvement engineering plans
and specifications. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
Before subdividing any land subject to the requirements of this Code, an
owner or developer shall comply with the following:
H. Extension of time periods by mutual consent. Time periods for review
by the Planning Commission or Council may be extended by mutual
consent of the owner or developer and the Planning Commission or
Council. Any such extension shall stay the running of all subsequent
time periods. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
I. Extension of preliminary plans. Approved preliminary plans or portions
thereof on which no final plat has been submitted for review and
approval shall expire and be of no force or effect three years after this
approval, except:
(1) The filing of a final plat and necessary supporting documents
pursuant to §§ 24-303 and 24-305 shall extend the life of a
remaining valid preliminary plan for three years; or
(2) If the life of a preliminary plan is extended by action of the City
Council. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
A. Prerequisites. Approval and continuing validity of a preliminary
subdivision code plan. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
B. Submission. The owner or developer shall submit to the Director of
Public Works two sets of engineering plans and specifications for all
public improvements proposed in or necessary to serve lots depicted in
an approved preliminary plan or portion thereof, which plans and
specifications shall be in the form and include the content required by
§ 24-403. The public improvement engineering plans and specifications
shall conform to approved preliminary plans. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
C. Review and approval.
(1) The public improvement, plans and specifications shall be reviewed
and approved or disapproved by the Director of Public Works.
[Ord. No. 2018-93]
(2) The Director of Public Works will require the owner or developer to
submit all data, plans, specifications and additional materials as
may be necessary to completely and accurately determine the
extent of compliance or noncompliance with the City's public
improvement design standards and accepted engineering practice
and to demonstrate that the construction and installation will meet
or exceed all public improvement requirements as outlined in "A
Manual of Practice for the Design of Public Improvements in the
City of Bloomington."44 [Ord. No. 2018-93]
44.Editor's Note: The Manual of Practice is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 24-302 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 24-303
1:810
§ 24-304. [Ch. 24, Sec. 3.4] Public improvement installation and
inspection procedures. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
The owner or developer of property desiring to install public improvements
in an area depicted on a proposed or approved preliminary plan or approved
or proposed final subdivision code plat shall perform such installation in
accordance with the following procedure:
(3) The public improvement plans and specifications shall be approved
by Director of Public Works which meet or exceed the City
subdivision code, public improvement design standards and
otherwise demonstrate good and acceptable engineering design
and practice. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
(4) Approval or disapproval by the Director of Public Works shall be in
writing and shall make reference to the public improvement plans
and specifications. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
A. Prerequisites to installation.
(1) For installations before final plat approval:
(a) Approval and continuing validity of an approved preliminary
plan;
(b) Approval of public improvement engineering plans and
specifications for any and all public improvements which are to
be installed. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
(2) For installation after final plat approval:
(a) Approval of a final plat;
(b) Posting of a final plat, public improvement payment,
performance and workmanship bond and security therefor, in
the amount and form specified in § 24-406 for all public
improvements depicted in, adjacent to or necessary to serve
lots or outlots depicted in an area for which final plat approval
has been obtained. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
B. Inspection. During installation of public improvements, either before or
after final plat approval, the owner or developer shall comply with the
requirements of Section 1.15 of "A Manual of Practice for the Design of
Public Improvements in the City of Bloomington"45 by which the
Director of Public Works shall make periodic inspections. Failure to
comply and install or maintain such installations in a manner that
permits inspection shall constitute grounds for rejecting or revoking
preliminary plan or final plat approval, forfeiting pledged security and,
in addition, shall constitute a violation of this chapter. [Ord. No.
2018-93]
45.Editor's Note: The Manual of Practice is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 24-303 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-304
1:811
§ 24-305. [Ch. 24, Sec. 3.5] Final plat submission and review
procedure. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
Before subdividing any land, subject to requirements of this Code, an owner
or developer shall comply with the following final plat submission, review
and approval procedure:
C. Plan review and inspection fee. The cost incurred by the City for review
of public improvement plan and specifications as required by § 24-303
of this Code and the inspection and testing of public improvements as
required by § 24-304B of this Code, shall be paid by the owner or
developer. Such cost shall be equal to the actual cost incurred by the
City of Bloomington in labor, materials, transportation and overhead for
such review, inspection and testing as calculated by the Director of
Public Works. At the time such plans and specifications are filed with
the Director, the owner or developer shall pay to the City a fee in an
amount as set forth in the Schedule of Fees. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
D. (Reserved) [Ord. No. 1998-42]
A. Prerequisites.
(1) Approval and continuing validity of a preliminary subdivision code
plan. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
(2) Approval of the public improvement plans and specifications
proposed in, adjacent to or necessary to serve lots or outlots
depicted in the area for which final plat approval is sought. [Ord.
No. 1998-42]
(3) Prior to recording the final plat, payment of any and all applicable
fees. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
(4) Prior to recording the final plat, the posting of any required final
plat public improvement payment, performance and workmanship
bond; filing and establishment of any required adjacent street
substandard roadway improvement guarantees and security;
making of any required public land dedications or cash
contribution in lieu thereof and obtaining and filing with the City of
any off-site easements or right-of-way for public improvements
serving the site. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
B. Submission. The owner or developer shall submit to the City Clerk two
reproducible Mylars, 16 paper prints and one digital computer aided
drafting file copy of a Final Plat, in a form and providing all the
information, data and supporting material required by § 24-404 and
retaining the design characteristics of the approved Preliminary Plan
and public improvement engineering plans and specifications. The two
transparent Mylars shall be considered the official copy. [Ord. No.
1998-42]
C. Distribution of final plat for review and comment.
§ 24-304 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 24-305
1:812
(1) The City Clerk shall route final plat to City Staff members for
review and comment as follows:
(a) One copy to Director of Public Works;
(b) One copy to City Planner.
(2) A copy of the final plat shall be made available to members of the
City Council prior to their consideration of the plan. [Ord. No.
2018-93]
D. City Council review and approval or disapproval. Within 30 days from
the submission of a final plat and supporting material, the City Council
shall review the final plat to determine the extent to which it conforms
with the approved preliminary plan and approved public improvement
plans and specifications and shall further review the supporting
material to determine its conformance with the requirements of this
Code. If the final plan substantially conforms with the approved
preliminary plan and public improvement plans and specifications and
if the supporting material meets all Code requirements, then the
Council shall approve the final plat by Ordinance within 30 days from
the date of its review. The Council may approve such plats subject to the
subsequent posting of final plat payment, performance and
workmanship bond; adjacent substandard roadway improvement
guarantee, and related security documents and reserves. If the final
plat does not in some way substantially conform with the approved
preliminary plan or if the supporting material does not conform with all
Code requirements, then the Council, within 30 days from the date of
its review, shall take one of the following actions:
(1) By ordinance, approve the final plat.
(2) By ordinance, approve the final plat with conditions.
(3) By ordinance, disapprove the final plat.
(4) Refer the final plat to the Planning Commission for legislative
public hearing, at which time and place the Planning Commission
shall determine the extent to which the final plat conforms or fails
to conform with the standards of this Code. The Planning
Commission shall, not later than 30 days after the adjournment of
the legislative public hearing, transmit its recommendation on the
final plat to the City Council. Within 60 days from the receipt of the
Planning Commission's recommendation with respect to the final
plat, the City Council shall, by Ordinance, approve or disapprove
the plat. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
E. Recording. Within seven days from the date of adoption of a Ordinance
approving the final plat, or within seven days from the date on which
the last event referred to this Code or characterized in the Ordinance as
a prerequisite to recording of the final plat occurs, whichever is later,
the City Clerk shall record a copy of the final plat, a certified copy of the
§ 24-305 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-305
1:813
Ordinance approving the Final Plat, and any supporting certificates
necessary to accomplish the recording in the Office of the Recorder of
Deeds of McLean County. If such final plat is not recorded within 90
days of City Council approval such plan shall become null and void.
[Ord. No. 1998-42]
F. Expedited final plat submission, review and approval. Notwithstanding
the sequential procedure for subdivision code plan submission, review
and approval specified elsewhere in this Division, an owner or
developer meeting the prerequisites specified in this paragraph may
utilize the expedited final plat process described herein:
(1) Prerequisites:
(a) The plat depicts a total of not more than three lots and outlots.
(b) The plat includes all contiguous property in common
ownership or unified control.
(c) The proposed subdivision code shall not necessitate the
construction or installation of public street improvements.
(d) No waivers of this Code be requested other than waivers of
bonds and fees.
(e) The developer has approved construction plans for any public
improvements needed. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
(2) Submission. Any person desiring to utilize the expedited final plat
procedure, shall submit the following to the City Clerk:
(a) A written request to waive the preliminary plan, submission,
review, and approval procedure.
(b) Six copies of a construction plan and floodplain map (if
applicable). The construction map shall show all information
concerning existing and proposed utilities as required for a
preliminary plan. The floodplain plan (if applicable) will outline
the area in the flood hazard area.
(c) Two Mylar and 16 paper prints copies of the final plat in a form
providing all information, data and supporting material
required by § 24-404.
(d) A fee receipt reflecting payment to the City Treasurer of the
appropriate fee as set forth in the Schedule of Fees. [Ord. No.
2018-89]
(3) Distribution of final plat for review and comment. The City Clerk
shall route one or more copies of the final plat to the City staff
members for review and comment. One copy of the final plat shall
be made available to the members of the City Council prior to their
consideration of the plat. The City staff shall submit a written
§ 24-305 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 24-305
1:814
§ 24-306. [Ch. 24, Sec. 3.6] Final development plans for planned
unit developments.
recommendation to the City Council prior to their consideration of
the plat. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
(4) City Council review, referral and approval or disapproval. Within 30
days from the submission of a final plat under this expedited review
and procedure, the City Council shall review the submission to
determine the extent to which it conforms with the requirements of
this Code. If the material meets all Code requirements, then the
Council shall approve the final plat by ordinance within 30 days
from the date of its review. The Council may approve such plats
subject to the subsequent payment of fees, posting of a final plat
payment, performance and workmanship bond. Within 30 days
from the date of its review, the Council shall take one or more of the
following actions:
(a) By ordinance, approve the final plat;
(b) By ordinance, approve the final plat with conditions;
(c) By ordinance, disapprove the final plat;
(d) Require the submission of a preliminary plan.
(e) Refer the final plat to the Planning Commission for legislative
public hearing, at which time and place the Planning
Commission shall determine the extent to which the final plat
conforms with the standards of this Code. The Planning
Commission shall, not later than 30 days after the adjournment
of the legislative public hearing, transmit its recommendation
on the final plat to the City Council. Within 60 days from the
receipt of the Planning Commission recommendation with
respect to such final plat, the Council shall, by Ordinance,
approve or disapprove same. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
(5) Conformance with other requirements. Except as provided in this
section, the recording of final plats, the posting of bonds, the
submission of as-built plans and the release of bonds shall be as
provided in this chapter. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
A. Prerequisites.
(1) Approval and continuing validity of a preliminary planned unit
development plan. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
(2) Approval of the public improvement plans and specifications
proposed in, adjacent to or necessary to serve lots or outlots
depicted in the area for which final plat approval is sought. [Ord.
No. 1998-42]
§ 24-305 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-306
1:815
(3) Prior to recording the final planned unit development plan payment
of any and all applicable fees. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
(4) Prior to recording the final plat, the posting of any required final
plat public improvement payment, performance and workmanship
bond; filing and establishment of any required adjacent street
substandard roadway improvement guarantees and security;
making of any required public land dedications or cash
contribution in lieu thereof and obtaining and filing with the City of
any off-site easements or right-of-way for public improvements
serving the site. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
B. Submission. The owner or developer shall submit to the City Clerk two
Mylars, 16 paper prints and one digital computer aided drafting file
copy of a Final Development Plan, in a form and providing all the
information, data and supporting material required by § 24-404 and
retaining the design characteristics of the approved preliminary
development plan and public improvement engineering plans and
specifications. [Ord. No. 2003-107]
C. Distribution of final development plan for review and comment. The
City Clerk shall route one or more copies of the final development plan
to City staff members for review and comment. One copy of the final
development plan shall be made available to members of the City
Council prior to their consideration of the plan. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
D. Review, referral and approval or disapproval. Within 30 days from the
submission of a final development plan and supporting materials, the
City Manager shall review the final development plan to determine the
extent to which it conforms with the approved preliminary development
plan and approved public improvement plans and specifications and
shall further review the supporting material to determine its
conformance with the requirements of this Code. If the final
development plan substantially conforms with the approved
preliminary development plan and public improvement plans and
specifications and if the supporting material meets all Code
requirements, then the City Manager shall approve the final
development plan within 30 days from the date of its review. If the final
development plan does not in some way substantially conform with the
approved preliminary development plan or if the supporting material
does not conform with all Code requirements, then the City Manager,
within 30 days from the date of its review, shall take one of the following
actions:
(1) Approve the final development plan;
(2) Approve the final development plan, with conditions;
(3) Refer the final development plan to the Planning Commission for
legislative public hearing, at which time and place the Planning
Commission shall determine the extent to which the final
§ 24-306 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 24-306
1:816
development plan conforms or fails to conform with the standards
of this Code. The Planning Commission shall, not later than 30 days
after the adjournment of the legislative public hearing, transmit its
recommendation on the final development plan to the City Council.
Within 60 days from the receipt of the Planning Commission's
recommendation with respect to the final development plan, the
City Council shall, by ordinance, approve or disapprove the plan.
The City Clerk shall then cause seven paper, one reproducible
Mylar and one digital computer aided drafting file copy of the
approved final development plan with such signatures affixed
thereon to be made and shall distribute such copies in the following
manner:
(a) One paper and one reproducible Mylar copy together with the
computer digital copy shall be sent to the Director of Public
Works;
(b) One copy shall be sent to the Director of Community
Development;
(c) One copy shall be sent to the City Planner;
(d) One copy shall be sent to the Fire Chief;
(e) One copy shall be sent to the owner or developer; and
(f) One copy shall be retained by the City Clerk for filing.
(g) One copy shall be sent to appropriate Supt. of Schools [Ord.
No. 2018-93]
E. (Reserved) [Ord. No. 1998-42]
F. Changes in the final development plan.
(1) Minor changes in the location, siting, height or character of the
buildings and structures may be authorized by the City Manager, if
required by engineering or other circumstances not foreseen at the
time of adoption of the ordinance approving the final development
plan. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
(2) No change authorized by this subsection may cause any of the
following:
(a) A change in the use or character of the development;
(b) An increase in the intensity of use of over 10%;
(c) An increase in any dimension of a building or structure by
more than 5% in any direction.
(d) A reduction in approved open space of 5% or more.
§ 24-306 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-306
1:817
(e) A reduction in off-street parking and loading space of 5% or
more provided minimum code requirements are met.
(f) A reduction in required pavement widths of 5% or more
provided minimum code requirements are met. [Ord. No.
1998-42]
G. Revocation of approved planned unit development.
(1) The City Council may consider an approved final planned unit
development plan subject to revocation if construction falls more
than two years behind the schedule filed with the final development
plan or if development exceeds five years. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
(2) The owner of property in a planned unit development plan or the
owner of any portion thereof may petition for revocation of such
planned unit development plan in whole or in part. [Ord. No.
1998-42]
(3) Upon initiation by the City Council or the owner of property in an
approved planned unit development requesting vacation of such
planned unit development in whole or in part, the City Council shall
refer such item to the City Planning Commission for public hearing
and recommendation. Notice of such hearing shall be provided by
the Planning Commission in the manner set forth for legislative
public hearings by the Planning Commission. Additionally, the
Planning Commission shall provide personal notice to all persons
having an ownership interest in such planned unit development.
Such personal notice shall be provided based on ownership
recorded with the Recorder of Deeds of McLean County. Personal
notice shall be by regular U.S. Mail or personal delivery at least five
days prior to the public hearing on revocation. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
(4) The Planning Commission shall conduct a legislative public hearing
and make a recommendation to the City Council regarding
revocation of the planned unit development. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
(5) Upon receipt of the Planning Commission recommendation, the
City Council shall take up and consider the petition to revoke in
whole or in part the subject planned unit development. The City
Council may approve, deny, in whole or in part, revocation of the
subject planned unit development. The City Council may impose
reasonable conditions on such revocation in order to advance the
health, safety, and welfare of the citizens. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
(6) In the event the City Council revokes an approved planned unit
development plan, in whole or in part, then the City Clerk shall file
a notice of such revocation with the McLean County Recorder of
Deeds. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
(7) Revocation of an approved planned unit development plan shall
preclude any additional construction pursuant to such revoked
§ 24-306 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 24-306
1:818
§ 24-307. [Ch. 24, Sec. 3.7] Payment, performance and
workmanship guarantees. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
Either prior to the approval of a final subdivision code plat or prior to its
recording and within the time framework, if any, specified in the Ordinance
of approval, the owner developer shall post, secure and file with the City
Clerk a final plat public improvement payment, performance and
workmanship bond with appropriate evidence of security and file and (if
applicable) establish an adjacent substandard roadway improvement
guarantee and security in the manner, amount and form described
respectively in § 24-406.
§ 24-308. [Ch. 24, Sec. 3.8] Submission of record drawings. [Ord.
No. 1998-42]
After installation, completion, inspection, testing and receipt of engineering
approval, but before City acceptance for maintenance of any public
improvements within a subdivision code, the owner or developer shall
submit record drawings of the public improvement plans in the form and
with the content required by Section 1.16 of "A Manual of Practice for the
Design of Public Improvements in the City of Bloomington."46
§ 24-309. [Ch. 24, Sec. 3.9] Acceptance for maintenance.
plan, except construction determined necessary by the City to
wind up the development and put the same in a safe and sanitary
condition. Any security posted to guarantee installation of required
public improvements shall continue in effect until all approved
public improvements are completed, all wind up construction is
completed, and all claims against such security are resolved. [Ord.
No. 1998-42]
(8) Upon revocation of an approved planned unit development plan,
the property for which such plan is revoked shall retain its zoning
district classification absent such plan. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
A. Completion of all public improvements. After the developer has
complied with the requirements of Section 1.16 of "A Manual of
Practice for the Design of Public Improvements in the City Of
Bloomington" the Director of Public Works shall provide written
acceptance.47 [Ord. No. 2018-93]
B. Completion of all public improvements except sidewalks and permanent
ground cover.
(1) If the developer has complied with all of the requirements of
Sections 1.16 and 1.17 of "A Manual of Practice for the Design of
Public Improvements in the City of Bloomington" except the
46.Editor's Note: The Manual of Practice is included as an attachment to this chapter.
47.Editor's Note: The Manual of Practice is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 24-306 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-309
1:819
§ 24-310. [Ch. 24, Sec. 3.10] Final security release.
§ 24-311. [Ch. 24, Sec. 3.11] (Reserved) [Ord. No. 1998-42]
completion and inspection of an approved proposed sidewalk and
permanent ground cover, then the developer may post a payment,
performance, and workmanship guarantee in the manner and form
described in § 24-406 guaranteeing the construction of the
proposed sidewalk and permanent ground cover which guarantee
shall be secured by posting a cash escrow or an Irrevocable Letter
of Credit with the City of Bloomington in an amount determined
by the Director of Public Works. If the guarantee and security is
posted for the approved proposed sidewalk and permanent ground
cover, then the Director of Public Works shall accept for
maintenance all public improvements except sidewalk and
permanent ground cover within, adjacent to, or serving lots or
outlots depicted on a final plat.
(2) If the developer constructs the approved proposed sidewalk and
permanent ground cover as guaranteed, then the City shall, upon
approval by the Director of Public Works, release to the developer
the posted cash escrow or an Irrevocable Letter of Credit securing
such sidewalk and permanent ground cover construction. If the
approved proposed sidewalk and permanent ground cover for
which a guarantee and cash escrow has been posted is not
constructed within two years of posting such guarantee and cash
escrow, the City may use the funds in the cash escrow or an
Irrevocable Letter of Credit to construct the approved proposed
sidewalk and permanent ground cover billing the developer for any
deficiency and refunding to the developer any surplus from the
cash escrow or an Irrevocable Letter of Credit account. [Ord. No.
2018-93]
A. Final plat public improvement payment, performance and workmanship
bonds. One year after the date of accepting public improvements for
maintenance, unless a material or workmanship claim is submitted to
the surety company or escrow agent, the security for final plat public
improvement, payment, performance and workmanship bonds shall
expire and may be released upon certification of satisfactory condition
by the Director of Public Works. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
B. Adjacent substandard roadway improvement guarantees and security.
The adjacent substandard roadway improvement guarantee and
security shall expire pursuant to § 24-406B unless the Director of Public
Works has earlier certified completion of improvements to adjacent
substandard roadways, and the security may be released without
further action. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
§ 24-309 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 24-311
1:820
ARTICLE IV
Form and Content
§ 24-401. [Ch. 24, Sec. 4.1] Concept plan. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
A proposed concept plan shall be drawn to engineering scale and shall
show the conceptual layout of the proposed subdivision code or planned unit
development including the general layout of streets, drainage, sewerage,
and land uses and the present location of major natural features such as
streams and lakes.
§ 24-402. [Ch. 24, Sec. 4.2 through Ch. 24, Sec. 4.2.3] Preliminary
plans and supporting material.
§ 24-403. [Ch. 24, Sec. 4.3 through Ch. 24, Sec. 4.3.2] Public
improvement engineering plans and specifications.
A. General. The owner or developer submitting a preliminary plan shall
submit all information required by this section in the form specified.
Failure of an owner or developer to provide this information in the form
required shall be sufficient grounds for the City to refuse to accept the
filing of a preliminary plan or to reject the preliminary plan at any stage
in the review and approval process. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
B. Minimum area included in a preliminary plan. A preliminary plan shall
include not less than all contiguous property in common ownership or
unified control. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
C. Required form and content of a preliminary plan. Plans, drawings,
surveys, maps, schematics, and comparable material shall be submitted
in the form and content as specified in Section 1.05 of "A Manual of
Practice for the Design of Public Improvements in the City of
Bloomington."48 [Ord. No. 1998-42]
A. General. The owner or developer submitting public improvement
engineering plans and specifications shall submit all the information
required by this section in the form specified. Failure of an owner or
developer to provide this information in the form required shall be
sufficient grounds for the City to refuse to accept the filing of public
improvement engineering plans and specifications, to reject the plans
and specifications at any stage in the review and approval process, to
reject a final plat depicting lots or outlots served by such public
improvements. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
B. Minimum material submitted. Engineering plans and specifications
shall be submitted for all public improvements proposed in or necessary
to serve lots depicted in an approved preliminary plan or portion
thereof. Such materials shall include, without limitation, plans, profiles,
standard details, and special details drawn in sufficient detail and
48.Editor's Note: The Manual of Practice is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 24-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-403
1:821
§ 24-404. [Ch. 24, Sec. 4.4 through Ch. 24, Sec. 4.4.4] Final plat.
§ 24-405. [Ch. 24, Sec. 4.5 through Ch. 24, Sec. 4.5.4] Final
development plans for planned unit developments.
supported with sufficient data to make possible a complete and
accurate determination of the extent of compliance or noncompliance
with the City's Manual of Practice for Design of Public Improvements
in the City of Bloomington49 and sufficient to permit construction and
installation of the proposed improvements without additional or
supporting engineering data. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
A. General. The owner or developer submitting a final plat shall submit all
information required by this section in the form specified. Failure of an
owner or developer to provide this information in the form required
shall be sufficient grounds for the City to refuse to accept the filing of a
final plat or to reject the final plat in any stage of the review and
approval process. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
B. Area included in a final plat.
(1) A final plat shall not include any area not included in an approved
and then valid preliminary plan. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
(2) A final plat shall not depict any public improvements or lots served
by, which are to be served by, or which under this Code require
service by public improvements unless the public improvement
engineering plans and specifications for such public improvements
have been submitted, reviewed and approved. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
C. Required form and content of final subdivision code plats and
supporting documents. Final plats, certificates, and comparable
material shall be submitted in the form and content as specified in
Section 1.05 of "A Manual of Practice for the Design of Public
Improvements in the City of Bloomington."50 [Ord. No. 1998-42]
D. Dedication of streets.
(1) All streets within a subdivision code shall be located within
dedicated public or private right-of-way. All streets and right-of-way
shall be public unless specifically stated otherwise on both the
preliminary plan and the final plat. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
(2) For private streets, a separate legal instrument, such as a covenant
running with the land, shall be submitted which sets forth the
manner by which the private streets within the subdivision code
shall be maintained. Such legal instrument may provide an
indenture establishing an association or similar organization to be
responsible for maintenance of such streets. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
49.Editor's Note: The Manual of Practice is included as an attachment to this chapter.
50.Editor's Note: The Manual of Practice is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 24-403 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 24-405
1:822
§ 24-406. [Ch. 24, Sec. 4.6 through Ch. 24, Sec. 4.6.2] Payment,
performance and workmanship guarantees.
A. General. The owner or developer submitting a final development plan
shall submit all information required by this section in the form
specified. Failure of an owner or developer to provide this information
in the form required shall be sufficient grounds for the City to refuse to
accept the filing of a final development plan or to reject the final
development plan in any stage of the review and approval process.
[Ord. No. 1998-42]
B. Area included in a final development plan.
(1) A final development plan shall not include any area not included in
an approved and then valid preliminary development plan. [Ord.
No. 1998-42]
(2) A final development plan shall not depict any public or private
improvements or lots served by, which are to be served by, or which
under this Code require service by public or private improvement
unless the utility plat for such public and private improvements has
been submitted, reviewed and approved. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
C. Required form and content of final development plans and supporting
documents. Final development plans, certificates, and comparable
material shall be submitted in the form as specified in Section 1.05 of "A
Manual of Practice For the Design of Public Improvements in the City of
Bloomington."51 [Ord. No. 1998-42]
D. Dedication of streets.
(1) All streets within a planned unit development shall be located
within dedicated public or private right-of-way. All streets and
right-of-way shall be public unless specifically stated otherwise on
both the preliminary plan and the final plat. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
(2) For private streets, a separate legal instrument, such as a covenant
running with the land, shall be submitted which sets forth the
manner by which the private streets within the planned unit
development shall be maintained. Such legal instrument may
provide an indenture establishing an association or similar
organization to be responsible for maintenance of such streets.
[Ord. No. 1998-42]
A. Final plat public improvement payment, performance and workmanship
bond.
(1) Nature of the obligation.
51.Editor's Note: The Manual of Practice is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 24-405 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-406
1:823
(a) Any owner, developer or subdivider shall submit a final plat
public improvement payment, performance and workmanship
bond obligating the signer(s) to do each of the following:
[1] Install all public improvements depicted on an approved
preliminary plan, engineering plans and specifications or
final plat.
[2] Pay all plan review and inspection fees.
[3] Prepare and submit to the City one complete set of plans
showing such required land improvements as actually
installed in the manner described in § 24-407.
(b) All public improvement shall be completed within two years
following the approval of the final plat by the Mayor and City
Council of the City and prior to acceptance of the
improvements for maintenance. In addition, the execution of
the subdivider's final plat public improvement payment,
performance and workmanship bond shall obligate the
signer(s) to guarantee the improvements against faulty
materials and workmanship for a period of one year following
acceptance of the improvements for maintenance. [Ord. No.
1998-42]
(2) Penal amount of bond and security.
(a) Penal amount. The penal amount of the final plat public
improvement payment and performance and workmanship
bond shall be the higher of the following:
[1] If some or all of the improvements have been installed,
inspected, and approved, then 100% of the Director of
Public Works' written estimate of the cost of installing all
public improvements not then installed and inspected, plus
10% of the Director of Public Works' estimate for all
improvements installed as a one year guarantee for the
materials and workmanship of all improvements. Also, the
developer must pay all plan review and inspection fees not
paid, prepare all as built plans and specifications not then
submitted. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
[2] If none of the improvements have been installed, then
110% of the Director of Public Works' written estimate of
the cost of installing all public improvements,
guaranteeing the materials and workmanship of all the
improvements. Also, the developer must pay all plan
review and inspection fees not paid and prepare as built
plans and specifications not then submitted. [Ord. No.
2018-93]
§ 24-406 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 24-406
1:824
(b) Security. The final plat public improvement payment,
performance, and workmanship bond shall be secured in one of
the following ways:
[1] By posting a cash escrow amount in an Illinois bank or
savings and loan association in the amount specified in
§ 24-406A(2)(a) as adjusted by any releases authorized by
the Director of Public Works. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
[2] By posting an irrevocable letter of credit in the amount
specified in § 24-406A(2)(a) from a local bank or savings
and loan association naming the City as a beneficiary
thereof. The renewable irrevocable letter of credit shall be
for a minimum length of time of two years with a twomonth
notice to the City prior to expiration.
[3] By posting a corporate surety bond payable to the City in
the amount as specified in § 24-406A(2)(a). Such bond
shall be in a form with surety and conditions approved by
the City's Corporation Counsel. The surety bond shall be
from an insurance company authorized to conduct
business in the State of Illinois. Said bond shall be
acknowledged before a notary Public by the principal. The
owner or developer shall keep such corporate surety bond
in full force and effect until one year after official action of
the City of Bloomington accepting the subdivision code for
maintenance or until such later date as any written claim
against the bond by the City is finally resolved. [Ord. No.
1998-42]
(3) Form of bond and security documents.52
(a) The form of the final plat public improvement payment,
performance and workmanship bond secured by corporate
surety is as provided in Exhibit "F" or "F-1" (located in Manual
of Practice).
(b) The form of the final plat public improvement payment,
performance and workmanship bond secured by cash escrow is
provided in Exhibit "G."
(c) The form of the final plat public improvement payment,
performance and workmanship bond secured by an irrevocable
letter of credit is as provided in Exhibit "H" (located in Manual
of Practice). [Ord. No. 1998-42]
(4) Releases from escrow accounts posted as security. As installation of
public improvements progresses, and is inspected and approved by
the Director of Public Works, releases from such escrow accounts,
may be authorized by the Director of Public Works in writing, based
52.Editor's Note: The Manual of Practice is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 24-406 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-406
1:825
upon his/her estimate of the cost for work completed, inspected
and approved, provided however, no release shall be made which
would reduce the escrow account to an amount less than 10%
of the Director of Public Works' original estimate of the cost of
installing all public improvements, paying all plan review and
inspection fees and preparing as-built plans until all public
improvements in the Subdivision Code have been accepted for
maintenance, at which time the escrow account shall be released
to an amount of not less than 10% of the Director of Public Works'
original estimate of cost. Funds then remaining in the escrow
account may be released one year after acceptance of the
subdivision code for maintenance or on such later date as any
written claim against the escrow account by the City is finally
resolved. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
B. Adjacent substandard roadway improvement guarantee and security.
(1) Nature of the obligation. Any owner, developer, or subdivider
developing a subdivision code bordering on one or more roadways
is obligated to contribute 1/2 the cost of improving such roadway or
roadways to minimum City standards for the zoning classification
of the adjacent land, the obligation shall endure for 10 years from
the date the final plat is recorded. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
(2) Guarantee and security.
(a) Security. The adjacent substandard roadway improvement
guarantee shall be secured in one of the following ways:
[1] By posting a corporate surety bond with the owner or
developer as principal and an insurance company duly
authorized to do business in the State of Illinois as surety
in a penal amount not less than that determined by
§ 24-406B(1).
[2] By posting a cash reserve account with the City of
Bloomington in the amount determined by § 24-406B(1).
[3] By posting an irrevocable letter of credit in the amount
determined by § 24-406B(1) from a local bank or savings
and loan association naming the City as beneficiary
thereof.
(b) Form of guarantee.53
[1] The form of the adjacent substandard roadway
improvement guarantee and security secured by corporate
surety is as provided in Exhibit "I" (located in Manual of
Practice).
53.Editor's Note: The Manual of Practice is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 24-406 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 24-406
1:826
§ 24-407. [Ch. 24, Sec. 4.7] Record drawings as-built plans. [Ord.
No. 1998-42]
Record drawing shall be submitted in accordance with Section 1.16 of the
"Manual of Practice for the Design of Public Improvements for the City of
Bloomington."54
§ 24-408. [Ch. 24, Sec. 4.8] (Reserved) [Ord. No. 1998-42]
[2] The form of the adjacent substandard roadway
improvement guarantee secured by cash escrow is as
provided in Exhibit "J" (located in Manual of Practice).
[3] The form of the adjacent substandard roadway
improvement guarantee and security secured by an
irrevocable letter of credit is as provided in Exhibit "K"
(located in Manual of Practice). [Ord. No. 1998-42]
54.Editor's Note: The Manual of Practice is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 24-406 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-408
1:827

ARTICLE V
Specific Regulations for Planned Unit Developments
§ 24-501. [Ch. 24, Sec. 5.1 through Ch. 24, Sec. 5.2.1] Permitted
uses in planned unit developments. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
In addition to the lawfully authorized uses permitted in each zoning district,
the following additional uses are permitted in a residential planned unit
development:
§ 24-502. [Ch. 24, Sec. 5] Land use intensity ratings and related
requirements for residential planned unit developments.
A. Residential planned unit developments in the R-1A, R-1B, R-1C, R-1H
and R-2 Zoning Districts.
(1) Detached single-family dwelling units. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
(2) Semidetached single-family dwelling units (one dwelling unit joined
to one other dwelling unit by a party wall). [Ord. No. 1998-42]
(3) Attached single-family dwelling units, townhouses and row houses
in groups of no more than five dwelling units per building. [Ord.
No. 1998-42]
(4) Uses authorized in the underlying zoning district by special use
permit or after site plan review. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
B. Residential planned unit developments in the R-3A and R-3B Districts.
(1) Semidetached single-family dwelling units (one dwelling unit joined
to one other dwelling unit by a party wall). [Ord. No. 1998-42]
(2) Attached single-family dwelling units, townhouses and row houses
in groups of no more than five dwelling units per building. [Ord.
No. 1998-42]
(3) Multifamily dwellings or apartment dwellings. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
A. Minimum land area requirement for a residential planned unit
development.
(1) In R-1A, R-1B, R-1C, R-1H and R-2 planned unit developments - two
hectares (five acres).
(2) In R-3A and R-3B planned unit developments - two hectares (five
acres). [Ord. No. 1998-42]
B. Minimum dwelling unit requirement. No residential planned unit
development shall contain less than five dwelling units. [Ord. No.
1998-42]
§ 24-501 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-502
1:829
§ 24-503. [Ch. 24, Sec. 5.3] Specific regulations for commercial
planned unit developments.
C. Density, floor area and common recreation space and requirements for
residential planned unit developments. In accordance with the
following table: [Ord. No. 1998-42]
Zoning
District
Maximum
Net Density
(Dwelling
Units per
Acre)
Maximum
Floor Area
(Percent of
Land Area)
Minimum
Open Space
(Percent of
Land area)
Minimum
Common
Recreation
Space
(Percent of
Land Area)
R-1A 2.00 10.0 80.0 2.5
R-1B 4.00 20.0 76.0 3.6
R-1C 8.00 34.8 73.0 4.9
R-2 10.00 40.0 72.0 5.2
R-3A 23.00 52.8 71.0 6.2
R-3B 58.00 80.0 68.0 8.0
R-4 8.00 34.8 73.0 4.9
D. Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements - two parking spaces for
each dwelling unit. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
E. Architectural plans.
(1) When townhouses (row houses) are proposed as a part of a planned
unit development in the R-1A, R-1B, R-1C and R-2 districts, building
elevations and architectural renderings shall be required with
submission of the preliminary development plan.
(2) For all residential planned unit developments, typical building
elevations and architectural renderings shall be required with
submission of the preliminary development plans. [Ord. No.
1998-42]
A. Permitted uses. Uses authorized in the underlying zoning district by
special use permit or after site plan review. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
B. Minimum land area requirement for a commercial planned unit
development - two hectares (five acres). [Ord. No. 1998-42]
C. Minimum use requirement. No commercial planned unit development
shall contain less than three commercial uses. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
D. Maximum floor area requirement. 31% of the gross land area in the
planned unit development. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
§ 24-502 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 24-503
1:830
§ 24-504. [Ch. 24, Sec. 5.4] Specific regulations for industrial
planned unit developments.
E. Minimum landscaped open space requirement. 15% of the gross land
area in the planned unit development. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
F. Minimum off-street parking requirement. Parking spaces shall be
provided in accordance with Section 7.22 of Chapter 44 of City Code.
[Ord. No. 1998-42]
A. Permitted uses. Uses authorized in the underlying zoning district by
special use permit or after site plan review. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
B. Minimum land area requirement for an industrial planned unit
development - two hectares (five acres). [Ord. No. 1998-42]
C. Minimum use requirement. No industrial planned unit development
shall contain less than three industrial uses. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
D. Maximum floor area requirement. 50% of the gross land area in the
planned unit development. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
E. Minimum landscaped open space requirement. 10% of the gross land
area in the planned unit development. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
F. Minimum off-street parking requirement. Parking spaces shall be
provided in accordance with Section 7.22 of Chapter 44 of City Code.
[Ord. No. 1998-42]
§ 24-503 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-504
1:831

ARTICLE VI
Erosion and Sediment Control
§ 24-601. [Ch. 24, Sec. 6.1] Purpose. [Ord. No. 2005-78]
The City Council of the City of Bloomington therefore declares that the
purpose of this ordinance is to safeguard persons, protect property, prevent
damage to the environment, and promote the public welfare by guiding,
regulating and controlling the design, construction, use and maintenance
of any development or other activity which disturbs or breaks the topsoil
or otherwise results in the movement of earth on land situated in the City
of Bloomington. It is the intention of this ordinance that the delivery of
sediment from sites affected by land disturbing activities be limited, as
closely as practicable, to that which would have occurred if the land had
been left in its natural undisturbed state.
§ 24-602. [Ch. 24, Sec. 6.2 ] General principles. [Ord. No. 2005-78]
It is the objective of this ordinance to control soil erosion and sedimentation
caused by development activities, including clearing, grading, stripping,
excavating, and filling of land, in the City of Bloomington. Measures taken
to control soil erosion and off-site sediment runoff shall be adequate to
assure that sediment is not transported from the site by a storm event
of five year frequency or less. The following principles shall apply to all
development activities within the City of Bloomington and to the
preparation of the submissions required under § 24-603 of this ordinance:
A. Development shall be related to the topography and soils of the site so
as to create the least potential for erosion. Areas of steep slopes where
high cuts and fills may be required should be avoided wherever
possible, and natural contours should be followed as closely as possible.
[Ord. No. 2005-78]
B. Natural vegetation should be retained and protected wherever
possible. Areas immediately adjacent to natural watercourses, lakes,
ponds, and wetlands should be left undisturbed wherever possible.
Temporary crossings of watercourses, when permitted, must include
appropriate stabilization measures. [Ord. No. 2005-78]
C. Special precautions shall be taken to prevent damages resultant from
any necessary development activity within or adjacent to any stream,
lake, pond, or wetland. Preventative measures shall reflect the
sensitivity of these areas to erosion and sedimentation. [Ord. No.
2005-78]
D. The smallest practical area of land shall be exposed for the shortest
practical time during development. [Ord. No. 2005-78]
E. Sediment basins or traps, filter barriers, diversions, and any other
appropriate sediment or runoff control measures shall be installed prior
§ 24-601 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-602
1:833
to site clearing and grading and maintained to remove sediment from
run-off waters from land undergoing development. [Ord. No. 2005-78]
F. The selection of erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be
based on assessment of the probable frequency of climatic and other
events likely to contribute to erosion, and on evaluation of the risks,
costs, and benefits involved. [Ord. No. 2005-78]
G. In the design of erosion control facilities and practices, aesthetics and
the requirements of continuing maintenance shall be considered. [Ord.
No. 2005-78]
H. Provisions shall be made to accommodate the increased run-off caused
by changed soil and surface conditions during and after development.
Drainage ways shall be designed so that their final gradients and the
resultant velocities and rates of discharge will not create additional
erosion on-site or off-site and in a manner which will not cause flooding
or other hardships off-site from the site. [Ord. No. 2005-78]
I. Permanent vegetation and structures shall be installed and functional
as soon as practical during development. [Ord. No. 2005-78]
J. Those areas being converted from agricultural purposes to other land
uses shall be vegetated with an appropriate protective cover prior to
development. The protective cover shall be properly replaced and
maintained in accordance with all other applicable local, State, and
national codes/laws during site development until the permanent
vegetation and structures have become functional. [Ord. No.
2005-78]
K. All waste generated as a result of site development activity shall be
properly disposed of in an approved manner and shall be prevented
from being carried off the site by either wind or water. Wastes
generated from the placement of concrete, asphalt or similar materials
will be properly controlled such that no sediment from said items will
be allowed to enter the sewer systems, water ways or other bodies of
water. The Developer, Owner or their agent shall provide details
regarding the locations of appropriate washout areas prior to the start
of any work involving said items and shall be responsible for ensuring
the wastes resulting from usage of said items are disposed of in an
approved manner. [Ord. No. 2005-78]
L. All construction sites shall provide measures to prevent sediment from
being tracked onto public or private roadways. Any sediment tracked
onto public or private roadways shall be removed as soon as possible
but not later than the end of the work day during which said sediment is
tracked onto the public or private roadway. [Ord. No. 2005-78]
M. All construction sites or additions to subdivisions approved by the City
Council and under construction at the time of passage of this ordinance
must provide the City of Bloomington with a copy of the Stormwater
Pollution Prevention Plan created by the developer, or their
§ 24-602 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 24-602
1:834
§ 24-603. [Ch. 24, Sec. 6.3 through Ch. 24, Sec. 6.3.10] Erosion and
sediment control permit. [Ord. No. 2005-78]
representative, per State and/or Federal Regulations regarding
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permits. [Ord. No.
2005-78]
N. All developments, subdivisions, or other construction sites approved by
the City Council after the passage of this ordinance which are required
by State or Federal law to create and maintain a Stormwater Pollution
Prevention Plan shall submit said plan to the Public Works Department
prior to any work being performed. The Stormwater Pollution
Prevention Plan shall be maintained per Federal and State regulations.
Any revisions to the Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan shall be
provided to the City within three working days of their implementation.
All inspection reports and other reports required by Federal or State
law shall be maintained per Federal and State laws and provided to the
Public Works Department upon demand for said items. [Ord. No.
2018-93]
O. All construction sites or additions to subdivisions approved by the City
Council under construction at the time of passage of this ordinance
must comply with the Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan submitted
by the developer, or their representative, per State and/or Federal
Regulations regarding National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
permits. The owner, builder or their representative should contact the
developer to obtain a copy of the Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan,
determine what requirements are set forth in the Stormwater Pollution
Prevention Plan and implement said measures. The owner, builder or
their representative shall provide the City with an Erosion Control Plan
outlining the erosion and sediment control measures to be used on their
lot. The City reserves the right to require further erosion and sediment
control measures on a lot by lot basis. [Ord. No. 2005-78]
A. Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in this ordinance, no
person, owner, or agent thereof shall allow the commencement of or
performance of any clearing, grading, stripping, excavating, or filling of
land which meets the following provisions without having first obtained
a Erosion and Sediment Control Permit from the Public Works
Department of the City of Bloomington.
(1) Any land disturbing activity (i.e., clearing, grading, stripping,
excavation, fill, or any combination thereof) that will affect an area
in excess of 5,000 square feet;
(2) Any land disturbing activity that will affect an area in excess of
1,000 square feet if the activity is within 25 feet of a lake, pond,
stream, or wetland; or
(3) Excavation, fill, or any combination thereof that will exceed 100
cubic yards. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
§ 24-602 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-603
1:835
B. Exemptions. A permit shall not be required for any of the following
provided that the person responsible for any such development shall
implement necessary soil erosion and sediment control measures to
satisfy the principles set forth in § 24-602 of this Ordinance and the
City's Manual of Practice for the Design of Public Improvements:55
(1) Excavation below final grade for the basement and footings of a
single-family residence and appurtenant structures on a site in
excess of five acres for which a building permit has been issued by
the City of Bloomington;
(2) Agricultural use of land, including the implementation of
conservation measures included in a farm conservation plan
approved by the Soil and Water Conservation District, and
including the construction of agricultural structures;
(3) Installation, renovation, or replacement of a septic system to serve
an existing dwelling or structure. [Ord. No. 2005-78]
C. Application for permit. Application for an Erosion and Sediment Control
permit shall be made by the owner of the property or his authorized
agent to the Director of Public Works on a form furnished for that
purpose. Each application shall bear the name(s) and address(es) of the
owner or developer of the site and of any consulting firm retained by
the applicant together with the name of the applicant's principal
contact at such firm, and shall be accompanied by a filing fee. Each
application shall include certification that any land clearing,
construction, or development involving the movement of earth shall be
in accordance with the plans approved upon issuance of the permit.
Each application shall include the gross area of the site and the
impervious area included within the site and the area of the site to be
disturbed. Each application for more than one acre shall be signed by a
Licensed Professional Engineer or a Certified Professional in Erosion
and Sediment Control. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
D. Fee schedule.
(1) Subdivisions with public improvements. Fee for ESCP is included in
Inspection Fee.
(2) Sites less or equal to one acre: the fee shall be as set forth in the
Schedule of Fees.
(3) Sites greater than one acre and less than or equal to 50 acres: the
fee shall be set forth in the Schedule of Fees.
(4) Sites greater than 50 acres: the fee shall be as set forth in the
Schedule of Fees. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
55.Editor's Note: The Manual of Practice is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 24-603 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 24-603
1:836
E. Submissions. Submitted permit applications shall be in conformance
with site development guidelines contained in the City of Bloomington's
Manual of Practice for the Design of Public Improvements. [Ord. No.
2005-78]
F. Bonds. The applicant for a permit to disturb five acres or more is
required to file with the Director of Public Works a faithful performance
bond or bonds, letter of credit or cash or other improvement security
satisfactory to the City's Corporate Counsel in an amount deemed
sufficient by the Director of Public Works to cover all costs of
improvements, landscaping, maintenance of improvements and
landscaping, and soil erosion and sediment control measures for such
period as specified by the City of Bloomington, and engineering and
inspection costs to cover the cost of failure or repair of improvements
installed on the site. The erosion control security may be included in the
Land Subdivision Performance and Workmanship Bond. [Ord. No.
2018-93]
G. Review and approval. Each application for an Erosion and Sediment
Control permit shall be reviewed and acted upon according to the
following procedures:
(1) The Director of Public Works will review each application for an
Erosion and Sediment Control permit to determine its conformance
with the provisions of this ordinance. The Director of Public Works
may also refer any application to the McLean County Soil and
Water Conservation District and/or any other local government or
public agency within whose jurisdiction the site is located for
review and comment. Within 60 days after receiving an application,
the Director of Public Works shall in writing:
(a) Approve the permit application if it is found to be in
conformance with the provisions of this ordinance, and issue
the permit;
(b) Approve the permit application subject to such reasonable
conditions as may be necessary to secure substantially the
objectives of this ordinance, and issue the permit subject to
these conditions; or
(c) Request changes and/or additional information, necessary to
secure substantially the objectives of this ordinance, and the
procedure for submitting a revised application.
(d) Disapprove the permit application, indicating the deficiencies
and the procedure for submitting a revised application and/or
submission.
(2) No Erosion and Sediment Control permit shall be issued for an
intended development site unless:
§ 24-603 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-603
1:837
(a) The development, including but not limited to subdivisions and
planned unit developments, has been approved by the City
Council where applicable, or
(b) All relevant federal and state permits (i.e., for floodplains and
wetlands) have been received for the portion of the site subject
to soil disturbance.
(3) The application for an Erosion and Sediment Control permit for a
site which includes a structure shall not alleviate the applicant
from the responsibility of obtaining all other permits which may be
required by local or state laws.
(4) Failure of the Director of Public Works to act on an original or
revised application within 60 days of receipt shall authorize the
applicant to proceed in accordance with the plans as filed unless
such time is extended by agreement between the Director of Public
Works and the applicant. Pending preparation and approval of a
revised plan, development activities may be allowed to proceed
with the permission of the Director of Public Works, in accordance
with the conditions established by same. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
H. Expiration of permit. Every site development permit shall expire and
become null and void if the work authorized by such permit has not
been commenced within one year of permit issuance or is not
completed by a date which shall be specified in the permit; except that
the Director of Public Works may, if the permittee presents satisfactory
evidence that unusual difficulties have prevented work being
commenced or completed within the specified time limits, grant a
reasonable extension of time if written application is made before the
expiration date of the permit. The Director of Public Works may require
modification of the erosion control plan to prevent any increase in
erosion or off-site sediment runoff resulting from any extension. [Ord.
No. 2018-93]
I. Appeals. The applicant, or any person or agency which received notice
of the filing of the application, may appeal the decision of the Director
of Public Works as provided in § 24-603G to the Construction Board of
Appeals. Upon receipt of an appeal, the Construction Board of Appeals
shall schedule and hold a public hearing, after giving 15 days' notice
thereof. The Construction Board of Appeals shall render a decision
within 30 days after the hearing. Factors to be considered on review
shall include, but need not be limited to, the effects of the proposed
development activities on the surface water flow to tributary and
downstream lands, any comprehensive watershed management plans,
or the use of any retention facilities; possible saturation of fill and
unsupported cuts by water, both natural and domestic; runoff surface
waters that produce erosion and silting of drainage ways; nature and
type of soil or rock which when disturbed by the proposed development
activities may create earth movement and produce slopes that cannot
be landscaped; and excessive and unnecessary scarring of the natural
§ 24-603 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 24-603
1:838
§ 24-604. [Ch. 24, Sec. 6.4 through Ch. 24, Sec. 6.4.7] Design and
operation standards and requirements. [Ord. No. 2005-78]
landscape through grading or removal of vegetation. Failure to file an
appeal within five business days from the permit issuance date or the
starting of work on a job site shall be deemed in agreement with the
conditions of the permit and remove any right to appeal the conditions
of said permit. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
J. Retention of plans. Plans, specifications, and reports for all site
developments shall be retained, in original form, microfilm, or digital
format by the Director of Public Works. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
A. Applicability. All clearing, grading, stripping, excavating, and filling
which is subject to the permit requirements of this ordinance shall be
subject to the applicable standards and requirements set forth in this
§ 24-604 and A Manual Of Practice For The Design of Public
Improvements.56 [Ord. No. 2005-78]
B. Responsibility. The permittee shall not be relieved of responsibility for
damage to persons or property otherwise imposed by law, and the City
of Bloomington or its officers or agents will not be made liable for such
damage, by (1) the issuance of a permit under this ordinance, (2)
compliance with the provisions of that permit or with conditions
attached to it by the Director of Public Works, (3) failure of City of
Bloomington officials to observe or recognize hazardous or unsightly
conditions, (4) failure of City of Bloomington officials to recommend
denial of or to deny a permit, or (5) exemptions from the permit
requirements of this ordinance. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
C. Handbooks adopted by reference. The standards and specifications
contained in latest editions of the Illinois Urban Manual (the Blue Book,
developed and issued by the United States Department of Agriculture -
Natural Resources Conservation Service and the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency, and the Illinois Procedures and Standards for Urban
Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control (the Green Book, issued by the
Association of Illinois Soil and Water Conservation Districts) cited in
§ 24-603, are hereby incorporated into this § 24-604 and made a part
hereof by reference for the purpose of delineating procedures and
methods of operation under site development and erosion and
sedimentation control plans approved under § 24-603. In the event of
conflict between provisions of said manuals and of this ordinance, the
following order of precedence shall apply:
(1) City of Bloomington Ordinances and A Manual of Practice For The
Design of Public Improvements.57
(2) Urban Manual (Blue Book).
56.Editor's Note: The Manual of Practice is included as an attachment to this chapter.
57.Editor's Note: The Manual of Practice is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 24-603 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-604
1:839
(3) Illinois Procedures and Standards for Urban Soil Erosion and
Sedimentation Control (Green Book) [Ord. No. 2005-78]
D. Maintenance of control measures. All soil erosion and sediment control
measures necessary to meet the requirements of this ordinance shall be
maintained periodically by the applicant (owner or developer) or
subsequent landowner during the period of land disturbance and
development of the site in a satisfactory manner to ensure adequate
performance. If a change in owner or developer occurs during the
period of land disturbance and development of the site, the subsequent
or successor owner or developer shall be required to obtain a new
Erosion and Sedimentation Control Permit. [Ord. No. 2005-78]
E. Inspection.
(1) For sites greater than or equal to one acre, the Director of Public
Works, or his appointee, shall make inspections as hereinafter
required and shall either approve that portion of the work
completed or shall notify the permittee wherein the work fails to
comply with the site development or erosion and sedimentation
control plan as approved. Applicant shall maintain and make
available upon demand plans approved by the Director of Public
Works for grading, stripping, excavating, and filling work. In order
to obtain inspections and to ensure compliance with the approved
erosion and sediment control plan and permit the grading or
building permit, and this Ordinance, the permittee shall notify the
Director of Public Works within two working days of the completion
of the construction stages specified below:
(a) Upon completion of installation of sediment and runoff control
measures (including perimeter controls and diversions), prior
to proceeding with any other earth disturbance or grading,
(b) After stripping and clearing,
(c) After final grading,
(d) After seeding and landscaping, and
(e) After final stabilization and landscaping, prior to removal of
sediment controls.
(2) If stripping, clearing, grading and/or landscaping are to be done in
phases or areas, the permittee shall give notice and request
inspection at the completion of each of the above work stages in
each phase or area. If an inspection is not made and notification of
the results given within five working days after notice is received
by the Director of Public Works from the permittee, the permittee
may continue work at his/her own risk, without presuming
acceptance by the Director of Public Works. Notification of the
results of the inspection shall be given in writing.
§ 24-604 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 24-604
1:840
(3) For sites less than one acre the Director of Public Works shall make
inspections as hereinafter required and shall either approve that
portion of the work completed or shall notify the permittee wherein
the work fails to comply with the site development or erosion and
sedimentation control plan as approved. In order to obtain
inspections and to ensure compliance with the approved erosion
and sediment control plan, and permit the grading or building
permit, and this Ordinance, the permittee shall notify the Director
of Public Works within two working days of the completion of the
construction stages specified below:
(a) Upon completion of installation of sediment and runoff control
measures (including perimeter controls and diversions), prior
to proceeding with any other earth disturbance or grading,
(b) After final grading,
(c) After final stabilization and landscaping, prior to removal of
sediment controls. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
F. Special precautions.
(1) If at any stage of the grading of any development site the Director
of Public Works determines by inspection that the nature of the site
is such that further work authorized by an existing permit is likely
to imperil any property, public way, stream, lake, wetland, or
drainage structure, the Director of Public Works may require, as a
condition of allowing the work to be done, that such reasonable
special precautions to be taken as is considered advisable to avoid
the likelihood of such peril. "Special precautions" may include, but
shall not be limited to, a more level exposed slope, construction of
additional drainage facilities, berms, terracing, compaction, or
cribbing, installation of plant materials for erosion control, and
recommendations of a registered soils engineer and/or engineering
geologist which may be made requirements for further work.
(2) Where it appears that storm damage may result because the
grading on any development site is not complete, work may be
stopped and the permittee required to install temporary structures
or take such other measures as may be required to protect
adjoining property or the public safety. On large developments or
where unusual site conditions prevail, the Director of Public Works
may specify the time of starting grading and time of completion or
may require that the operations be conducted in specific stages so
as to insure completion of protective measures or devices prior to
the advent of seasonal weather patterns. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
G. Amendment of plans. Major amendments of the site development or
erosion and sedimentation control plans shall be submitted to the
Director of Public Works and shall be processed and approved or
disapproved in the same manner as the original plans. Field
§ 24-604 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-604
1:841
§ 24-605. [Ch. 24, Sec. 6.5 through Ch. 24, Sec. 6.5.4] Enforcement.
[Ord. No. 2005-78]
modifications of a minor nature may be authorized by the Director of
Public Works by written authorization to the permittee. The Director of
Public Works shall be authorized to determine the level of modification.
[Ord. No. 2018-93]
A. Exceptions. The Construction Board of Appeals may, in accordance with
the following procedures, authorize exceptions to any of the
requirements and regulations set forth in this ordinance:
(1) Application for any exception shall be made by a verified petition of
the applicant for a site development permit, stating fully the
grounds of the petition and the facts relied upon by the applicant.
Such petition shall be filed with the site development permit
application. In order for the petition to be granted, it shall be
necessary that the Construction Board of Appeals find all of the
following facts with respect to the land referred to in the petition:
(a) That the land is of such shape or size or is affected by such
physical conditions or is subject to such title limitations of
record, that is impossible or impractical for the applicant to
comply with all of the requirements of this ordinance;
(b) That the exception is necessary for the preservation and
enjoyment of a substantial property right of the applicant; and
(c) That the granting of the exception will not be detrimental to
the public welfare or injurious to other property in the vicinity
of the subject property.
(2) Each application for an exception shall be referred to the Director
of Public Works for review. A fee for appeals is required in
accordance with Sec 121.1.1 of Chapter 10 of City Code. The
Director of Public Works shall transmit its recommendations to the
Construction Board of Appeals, which shall review such
recommendations prior to granting or denying the exception.
(3) The Construction Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on
each application for exception, within 30 days after receiving
application, in the manner provided with respect to appeals. After
public hearing, the Construction Board of Appeals may approve the
site development permit application with the exceptions and
conditions it deems necessary or it may disapprove such site
development permit application and exception application or it may
take such other action as appropriate. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
B. Stop-work order; revocation of permit. In the event any person holding
an Erosion and Sediment Control permit pursuant to this ordinance
violates the terms of the permit, or carries on site development in such
a manner as to materially adversely affect the health, welfare, or safety
§ 24-604 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 24-605
1:842
of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of the development
site or so as to be materially detrimental to the public welfare or
injurious to property or improvements in the neighborhood, the
Director of Public Works may suspend or revoke the Erosion and
Sediment Control permit and/or issue a stop-work order. The stopwork
order may also suspend all construction work on a site until
the violations are corrected. The stop-work order may be issued in
conjunction with other local, state or federal agencies as necessary.
(1) The stop-work order issued by the Director of Public Works must be
in writing and delivered to the permittee or his agent or the person
performing the work. The stop-work order shall be effective
immediately, shall state the specific violations cited, and shall state
the conditions under which work may be resumed.
(2) Any person performing work, for which an Erosion and Sediment
Control permit is required, shall be deemed in violation of this
ordinance and subject to the penalties as provided in § 24-605C.
[Ord. No. 2018-93]
C. Violations and penalties. No person shall construct, enlarge, alter,
repair, or maintain any grading, excavation or fill, or cause the same to
be done, contrary to or in violation of any terms of this ordinance. Each
day during which any violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance
is committed, continued, or permitted shall constitute a separate
offense. Upon conviction of any such violation, such person,
partnership, or corporation shall be punished by a fine of not less than
$250 for the first or second offense or $500 for each subsequent
offense. In addition to any other penalty authorized by this section, any
person, partnership, or corporation convicted of violating any of the
provisions of this ordinance shall be required to restore the site to the
condition existing prior to commission of the violation, or to bear the
expense of such restoration. [Ord. No. 2005-78]
D. Separability. The provisions and sections of this ordinance shall be
deemed to be separable, and the invalidity of any portion of this
ordinance shall not affect the validity of the remainder. [Ord. No.
2005-78]
§ 24-605 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-605
1:843

ARTICLE VII
Dedication and Reservation Requirements
§ 24-701. [Ch. 24, Sec. 7.1] Park and recreational areas. [Ord. No.
1998-42]
Generally all subdivision codes of property with a residential use
classification shall be designed so that park and recreational areas are
provided in the manner and to the extent prescribed by this section, so as to
accommodate the open space and recreational needs of those persons living
within the confines of the Subdivision Code.
§ 24-702. [Ch. 24, Sec. 7.2] Dedication requirements.
The dedications of land or cash contributions in lieu thereof required by
this Ordinance shall also be required as a condition to the annexation of
any land to the City and provisions therefor shall be incorporated in any
pre-annexation agreement governing such land. As a condition of approval
of a final plat of a subdivision code, each owner, subdivider or developer
or property with a residential zoning classification, shall be required to
dedicate land for park and recreational purposes, to serve the immediate
and future needs of the residents of the development or to contribute cash
in lieu of said actual land dedication, or to make a combination of cash
contribution and land dedication at the election of the City in accordance
with the following criteria and formula:
A. Requirement and population table. The ultimate density of a proposed
development bears directly on the amount of land required for park
purposes. The total requirement shall be four hectares or 10 acres of
land per 1,000 of ultimate population. Projected population is based
upon the maximum number of dwelling units per hectare (acre)
permitted in the respective zoning district and the projected number of
occupants per unit and unless the developer has specific plans showing
the actual number of units proposed. [Ord. No. 2003-107]
B. Location. The "Bloomington Park and Recreation Comprehensive Plan"
as adopted by the City Council, shall be used as a guideline in locating
sites. A central location which will serve equally the entire development
is most desirable. In large developments, these sites can be located
throughout the development according to accepted standards for park
area distances. The area of proposed retention or detention facilities
included within a proposed preliminary subdivision code plan may be
considered by the City to satisfy some but not more than 50% of the
land dedication requirements contained herein at the recommendation
of both the Director of Parks, Recreation and Cultural Arts and Director
of Public Works. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
C. Cash contribution alternatives. In the event the City should determine
that a cash contribution shall be made by the owner, subdivider or
developer in lieu of land dedication, the City shall apply the population
ratio of 0.4 hectares (1.0 acre) of land for 100 ultimate population
§ 24-701 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-702
1:845
§ 24-703. [Ch. 24, Sec. 7.3] Criteria for accepting a dedication or
requiring a contribution in lieu of park and recreational areas.
within the development or area to be subdivided times the fair market
value as established in § 24-703 of this Code. [Ord. No. 2003-107]
A. When the amount of land the owner, subdivider or developer would
otherwise be required to dedicate for park purposes is calculated to be
less than 4.0 hectares (10 acres) in size or the public street frontage is
less than 100 meters (300 feet), the City may determine:
(1) To accept the proposed land dedication.
(2) That the available land is inappropriate for park and recreational
purposes, and the owner, subdivider or developer will be required
to pay a cash contribution in lieu of the land dedication.
(3) That the City desires to accept the proposed dedication and agrees
to acquire additional land from the owner to increase the park size
to 4.0 hectares (10 acres) by paying the owner fair cash market
value as described in § 24-703A for the additional acreage plus
reasonable development costs incurred by owner to serve the
additional land. [Ord. No. 2003-107]
B. The cash contribution in lieu of park and recreation land dedication
shall be held in trust by the City or other public body designated by the
City, solely for the acquisition and development of park and recreation
land as herein before classified, which may be available to serve the
immediate or future needs of the residents of that subdivision code or
development or for the improvement of other existing local park and
recreational land which already serves such areas.
(1) Fair market. The cash contribution in lieu of dedicating land for
park and recreational use in the subdivision code shall be based on
the fair market value of the acres of land in the subdivision code
that otherwise would have been dedicated as park and recreational
sites. The amount of such contribution shall be a sum equal to the
fair market value of the amount of land required in accordance with
the formula contained in § 24-702 of this Code. "Fair Market Value"
shall be determined as of the time of filing the preliminary plan in
accordance with the following:
(a) The fair market value as determined by the Council, based
upon the current assessed value adjusted to equal market
value in accordance with the current practices of the
Supervisor of Assessments of the County of McLean, Illinois; or
(b) If the owner objects to such determination by the Council as
provided in Subsection B(1)(a) of this section, the owner may
at the owner's expense, obtain an appraisal of said subdivision
code by a qualified real estate appraiser approved by the
§ 24-702 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 24-703
1:846
§ 24-704. [Ch. 24, Sec. 7.4] Reservation of additional land. [Ord.
No. 1998-42]
Where the "Bloomington Park and Recreation Comprehensive Plan" or the
standards of the City call for a larger amount of park and recreational land
in a particular subdivision code than the developer is required to dedicate,
the land needed beyond the developer's contribution shall be reserved for
subsequent purchase by the City, provided that such acquisition is made
within one year from the date of recording of the final plat which includes
the area to be dedicated as park.
§ 24-705. [Ch. 24, Sec. 7.5] Combining with adjoining
developments. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
Where the subdivision code is less than 16 hectares (40 acres), public
open space which is to be dedicated should, where possible, be combined
with dedications from adjoining developments in order to produce usable
recreation areas without creating hardship on a particular developer.
§ 24-706. [Ch. 24, Sec. 7.6] Topography and grading. [Ord. No.
1998-42]
The slope, topography and geology of the dedicated site as well as its
surroundings must be suitable for its intended park purposes. Grading on
sites dedicated for park and recreational uses shall not differ greatly from
surrounding land.
Council - which appraisal may be accepted by the Council if
found reasonable; or
(c) The Council and the owner may agree to the fair market value.
(2) Criteria for requiring dedication and a fee. There will be situations
in subdivision codes when a combination of land dedication and a
contribution in lieu of land are both necessary. These occasions will
arise when:
(a) Only a portion of the land to be developed is proposed as the
location for a park or school site. That portion of the land
within the subdivision code falling within the park location
shall be dedicated as a site as aforesaid, and a cash
contribution in lieu thereof shall be required for any additional
land that would have been required to be dedicated.
(b) A major part of the local park or recreation site has already
been acquired and only a small portion of land is needed from
the development to complete the site. The remaining portion
shall be required by dedication, and a cash contribution in lieu
thereof shall be required.
(3) The estimated population per dwelling unit shall be the City
average household size. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
§ 24-703 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-707
1:847
§ 24-707. [Ch. 24, Sec. 7.7] Improved sites. [Ord. No. 1998-42]
All sites shall be dedicated in a condition ready for full service of electrical,
water, sewer, storm sewer and streets as applicable to the location of the
site, or acceptable provisions made therefor. All sites shall be graded and
seeded.
§ 24-707 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 24-707
1:848
Chapter 25
LIBRARY
§ 25-101. [Ch. 25, Sec. 1] Public library established - name. [Ord.
No. 2008-41]
There hereby is established a free public library for the use and benefit of
the inhabitants of the City of Bloomington, which shall be known as "The
Withers Public Library," now know as the "Bloomington Public Library."
§ 25-102. [Ch. 25, Sec. 2] Supervision and control. [Ord. No.
2008-41]
The Bloomington Public Library shall be under the supervision and control
of the Board of Trustees thereof.
§ 25-103. [Ch. 25, Sec. 3] Board of Trustees created - appointment.
[Ord. No. 2008-41]
A Board of Library Trustees consisting of nine members is hereby created.
The said trustees shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the approval of the
Council, three of said trustees to be so appointed or reappointed before the
first day of July of each year to take the place of the retiring trustees.
§ 25-104. [Ch. 25, Sec. 4] Terms of - reappointment and removal.
[Ord. No. 2014-04]
Said trustees respectively shall hold office for three years from the first day
of July following their appointment. This term may be extended after the
three years for no more than two additional three-year terms. Members of
the Board shall serve no more than three consecutive three-year terms (a
total of nine years). The Mayor, by and with the consent of the Council, may
remove any trustee for misconduct or neglect of duty.
§ 25-105. [Ch. 25, Sec. 5] Vacancies - how filled - compensation.
[Ord. No. 2008-41]
Vacancies in the Board of Trustees occasioned by removals, resignation or
otherwise shall be reported to the Mayor and be filled in like manner as
original appointments. No trustee shall receive any compensation.
§ 25-106. [Ch. 25, Sec. 6] Oath. [Ord. No. 2008-41]
The trustees shall, before entering upon the duties of their office, severally
take and subscribe the oath prescribed by law for City officers.
§ 25-107. [Ch. 25, Sec. 7] Organization - powers - funds.
A. Said trustees shall annually meet and organize by the election of one of
their number President, and by the election of such other officers as
§ 24-707 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-107
1:849
§ 25-108. [Ch. 25, Sec. 8] Annual report and estimate.
they may deem necessary. They shall make and adopt such bylaws,
rules, and regulations for their own guidance and for the governance of
the Library as may be expedient, not inconsistent with the laws of the
State of Illinois or of the Code of the City.
B. They shall have the exclusive control of expenditure of all monies
collected to the credit of the library fund, and of the construction of any
library building and of the supervision, care, and custody of the
grounds, rooms, or buildings constructed, leased, or set apart for that
purpose; provided that all monies received for such library shall be
deposited in the treasury of said City to the credit of the library fund
and shall be kept separate and apart from other monies of such City,
and drawn upon by the proper officers of said City only upon properly
authenticated vouchers of said Board.
C. Said Board shall have the power to purchase or lease grounds, to
occupy, lease, or erect an appropriate building or buildings for the use
of said library. Said Board shall have power to appoint and fix the
compensation a suitable librarian, who shall have the authority to hire
such other employees as may be necessary to fix their compensation
and to remove such appointees; subject to the approval of the Board,
but these powers are subject to Division 1 of Article 10 of the Illinois
Municipal Code in municipalities in which that Division is in force. The
Board shall, in general, carry out the sprit and intent of this ordinance
in establishing and maintaining a Public Library, which shall be forever
free to the use of the inhabitants of said City, always subject to such
reasonable rules and regulations as the Library Board may adopt in
order to render the use of said Library of the greatest benefit to the
greatest number; and said board may exclude from the use of said
Library any and all persons who shall willfully violate such rules. Said
board may extend the privileges and use of said Library and Reading
Room to persons residing outside of such City upon such terms and
conditions as said board may from time to time by its regulations
prescribe. [Ord. No. 2008-41]
A. The said Board of Directors shall make on or before the second Monday
of June an annual report to the City Council, stating the conditions of
their trust on the first day of May of that year, the various sums of
moneys received from the library fund and from other sources, and how
such moneys have been expended and for what purposes; the number of
books and periodicals on hand, the number added by purchase, gift, or
otherwise during the year; the number lost or missing; the number of
visitors attending; the number of books loaned out, and the general
character and kind of such books, with such other statistics,
information, and suggestions as they may deem of general interest.
B. All such portions of said report as relate to the receipt and expenditure
of money, as well as the number of books on hand, books lost or missing,
and books purchased, shall be verified by an affidavit. On or before
§ 25-107 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 25-108
1:850
§ 25-109. [Ch. 25, Sec. 10] Injuring library materials - penalty. [Ord.
No. 2008-41]
Any person who shall willfully or maliciously cut, write upon, injure, deface,
tear, or destroy any book, newspaper, plate, picture, record, engraving,
statue, CD, audio book, DVD or other item belonging to the Bloomington
Public Library shall be liable for the replacement cost of the item or
property.
§ 25-110. [Ch. 25, Sec. 11] Injury to furniture, etc. - penalty. [Ord.
No. 2008-41]
Any person who shall willfully or maliciously commit any injury upon the
Bloomington Public Library, or upon the grounds, buildings, furniture,
fixtures or other property thereof, shall be liable for the replacement or
repair of the damage.
§ 25-111. [Ch. 25, Sec. 12] Failure to return circulating materials -
penalty. [Ord. No. 2008-41]
Any person who shall fail to return any circulating materials belonging to
the Bloomington Public Library, shall be liable to a fine determined by the
policies duly made and adopted by the Trustees of said library.
§ 25-112. [Ch. 25, Sec. 13] Theft of library materials.
February 15 of each year said Board shall submit to the City Manager a
budget for the next succeeding fiscal year.
C. In the performance of their duties as such directors, they shall be
governed by the laws of the State of Illinois as they now are in effect, or
may be hereafter changed, and in accordance with the Code and
ordinances or resolutions of the Council of the City as are now in effect
or may be hereafter enacted.
A. Definitions. As used in this section:
LIBRARY FACILITY — The Bloomington Public Library and any and all
means through which it makes library materials available to persons,
including but not limited to a Bookmobile and any mail or delivery
services.
LIBRARY MATERIAL — Includes any book, plate, picture, photograph,
engraving, painting, sculpture, statue, artifact, drawing, map,
newspaper, pamphlet, broadside, magazine, manuscript, document,
letter, microfilm, sound recording, audiovisual material, magnetic or
other tape, electronic date processing record or other documentary,
writing or printed material regardless of physical form or
characteristics, or any part thereof, belonging to, or on loan to or
otherwise in the custody of a library facility.[Ord. No. 1988-12]
B. Offense. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
§ 25-108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-112
1:851
Chapter 26
LICENSES
(1) Borrow from a library facility any circulating materials and willfully
without good cause fail to return the library material; or
(2) Willfully without good cause fail to return such material within 30
days after receiving written notice from the library demanding the
return of such library material. [Ord. No. 2008-41]
C. Sentence. A person convicted of a violation of this ordinance shall be
fined twice the replacement cost of the library material not returned,
but not to exceed $500 and be ordered to reimburse the library for the
actual replacement cost of the library materials not returned in
accordance with established Board policies. [Ord. No. 2008-41]
§ 25-112 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 25-112
1:852
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 26-101. [Ch. 26, Sec. 1] Scope of chapter.
Except as provided in other chapters of the Bloomington City Codes all
matters pertaining to licenses issued or to be issued by the City of
Bloomington shall be governed by the provisions of this chapter.
§ 26-102. [Ch. 26, Sec. 2] Definitions.
CITY MANAGER — The City Manager or his authorized representative.
CODE — The Bloomington City Code.
PERSON — Any natural persons, partnerships, corporations, association or
other legal entity.
THIS CHAPTER — Chapter 26.
§ 26-103. [Ch. 26, Sec. 3] Unlicensed activity.
A person commits the offense of unlicensed activity if he engages in or
carries on any business or occupation or performs or undertakes the
performance of any act for which a license is required by any provision of
the Bloomington City Codes within the limits of the City without first having
obtained a license therefor.
§ 26-104. [Ch. 26, Sec. 4] Application.
Any person who desires a license which is subject to the provisions of this
chapter shall make a written application therefor to the City Manager upon
a form provided by the City Clerk. The application shall be accompanied by
the required license fee and the bonds if any.
§ 26-105. [Ch. 26, Sec. 5] Review of applications.
A. The City Manager shall within one week of receipt thereof review each
license application and evaluate the same so as to determine whether
the applicant meets the qualifications required of the applicant by this
Code. If the applicant meets the qualifications the City Manager shall
approve the application and issue the license upon the applicant's
compliance with the requirements of § 26-106 of this chapter;
otherwise he shall disapprove the application and deny the license.
Failure to approve an application within one week of receipt of an
application shall be deemed a denial of the license.
B. No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business, and no
permit shall be issued for any thing or acts if the premises and building
to be used for the purpose do not fully comply with the requirements of
the Code of the City. No such license or permit shall be issued for the
conduct of any business or performance of any act which would involve
a violation of the Zoning Ordinance of the City.
§ 26-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-106
1:853
§ 26-106. [Ch. 26, Sec. 6] Issuance of license.
Each license approved by the City Manager shall be issued by the City Clerk
upon the presentation to him of a receipt from the Director of Finance of
the payment to said Director of the license fee, and not otherwise. Each
license shall be signed by the City Manager attested by the Clerk under
the corporate seal, and no person shall be deemed to be licensed in any
case until the actual payment of the license fee or tax and the issuing of the
license in due form signed, attested, and sealed as herein required.
§ 26-107. [Ch. 26, Sec. 7] Term of license.
All licenses shall expire on December 31st and renewals shall be granted
for a period of one year.
§ 26-108. [Ch. 26, Sec. 8] Registration of licenses.
It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to register, in suitable books, all
licenses issued under the provisions of this Code and other Ordinances
of the City, entering the name of the licensee, the date of issuance or
renewal of the license, for what purpose granted, the date of expiration, the
amount paid, the name of the surety on the bond, and in case of vehicles,
the number of the same, which shall also be inserted in the license; if
transferred, to whom, the date of the transfer, and in case of licenses to sell
liquor, the place where the same is to be sold must be designated. A column
shall be set apart for remarks.
§ 26-109. [Ch. 26, Sec. 9] Fees.
§ 26-110. [Ch. 26, Sec. 10] Bonds.
A. Amount. Prior to issuance or renewal of any license, the licensee shall
pay to the Finance Department, the annual or quarterly fees indicated
in the chapters of this Code regulating such licenses.
B. Payment. License fees shall be paid in advance on an annual or
quarterly basis. A licensee receiving a license during any quarter shall
pay the license fee for the entire quarter. License fees shall not be
refunded. No administrative or clerical fee shall be charged for
issuance of a license.
C. Lost licenses. The City Clerk shall issue a duplicate license to any
licensee whose license is lost or destroyed, and shall charge a fee in an
amount set forth in the Schedule of Fees therefor. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
A. Amount. Prior to issuance or renewal of any license, the licensee shall
furnish or have in effect a bond which remains in effect until canceled,
in the amounts with sureties as specified in the chapters of this Code
regulating such license.
§ 26-106 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 26-110
1:854
§ 26-111. [Ch. 26, Sec. 11] Renewals.
Licenses may be renewed in the same manner as they are issued. In lieu
of submitting a new applications a licensee may submit to the City Clerk
an affidavit stating that the facts and statements made on the original
application are unchanged.
§ 26-112. [Ch. 26, Sec. 12] Transfers.
Any person to whom any City license has been issued may with the written
consent of the City Managers assign or transfer the same to any other
person or persons. Thereafter the assignee or assignees thereof may
surrender the assigned license and have a new license issued for the
unexpired term of the old licenses authorizing the assignee or assignees to
carry on the same business, occupation or activity at such place as may be
named in such old license; provided, that in all cases the party applying for
such new license, shall give a new bond with surety which shall conform to
the requirements of this chapter.
§ 26-113. [Ch. 26, Sec. 13] Posting of license.
Every licensee shall cause his license to be framed and kept in plain view in
a conspicuous place on the licensed premises or at his place of business, or
in the absence of a licensed premise or place of business, he shall carry it
on his person while performing activities authorized by the license.
§ 26-114. [Ch. 26, Sec. 14] Revocation.
B. Approval. Prior to the issuance or renewal of any licenses the bond
therefor shall be approved by the Corporation Counsels and thereafter
filed with the City Clerk.
C. Term. All bonds shall contain a provision that they remain in effect until
the Surety provides the City with 30 days' written notice of cancellation
and that such cancellation shall not relieve the Surety of any liability for
any acts or omissions occurring prior to the expiration of such 30 days.
[Ord. No. 1976-88]
A. The City Manager may suspend or partially suspend any license for up
to 30 days, or revoke or partially revoke the same if, after giving the
licensee a right of reply to charges made against him, he finds:
(1) That the licensee has violated the provisions of the Code regulating
his licensed activities; or
(2) That the licensee has committed an act or omission which, if proven
in courts would be a violation of a Bloomington City Ordinance; or
(3) That the licensee has committed an act or omission which, if proven
in court, would be a violation of a state or federal law; or
§ 26-110 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-114
1:855
§ 26-115. [Ch. 26, Sec. 15] Waiver of fees for vending for disabled
veterans.
The City Council shall have the power to waive the fees for vending licenses
required under any provision of this Code upon application for such license
by disabled veterans, who are residents of the City; providing, such waiver
is recommended by an Adjutant of a Veterans Post of the County.
§ 26-116. [Ch. 26, Sec. 16] Penalty. [Ord. No. 1974-124]
Any person who violates the provisions of § 26-103 of this chapter shall be
fined not to exceed $500.
(4) That the licensee has committed any other action which renders
the continuation of his license inconsistent with the purposes for
which the license was issued.
B. Suspension or revocation as provided herein, shall be in addition to any
other penalties which may be imposed by law or by ordinance upon the
licensee for the offense which caused the suspension or revocation.
§ 26-114 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 26-116
1:856
ARTICLE II
Parolee Group Homes
§ 26-201. [Ch. 26, Sec. 20] Definition of terms.
GROUP HOME FOR PAROLEE — A residential structure housing, in one
dwelling unit, three or more unrelated parolees. Three or more unrelated
parolees living in one dwelling unit shall not be considered to be a "family"
for purposes of the Zoning Code unless all such parolees are actually related
by blood, adoption or marriage.[Ord. No. 2007-38]
PAROLEE — A person who has been placed on parole or mandatory
supervised release pursuant to Illinois statutes or regulations and who
is still subject to conditions of parole or mandatory supervised visitation
established by the Illinois Prisoner Review Board, or, a person who has been
placed on parole or mandatory supervised release for a felony offense for
which such person was convicted in a jurisdiction other than Illinois and
who is still subject to the conditions of parole or mandatory supervised
release established by said other jurisdiction.
§ 26-202. [Ch. 26, Sec. 21] License required. [Ord. No. 2007-38]
No person shall open, conduct, manage, own, operate or maintain a Group
Home for Parolees unless such person shall first have obtained a special
use permit and license from the City. No license shall be transferred upon
change of ownership or management. Upon change of ownership or
management, such new owner or manager must apply for a new license.
§ 26-203. [Ch. 26, Sec. 22] Application for license.
An application to conduct and operate a Group Home for Parolees shall
be made to the City Clerk on form blanks prepared by the City Clerk. All
applications shall be accompanied by a license fee in an amount set forth in
the Schedule of Fees. The application shall be under oath and shall contain:
§ 26-204. [Ch. 26, Sec. 23] Investigations - term of license. [Ord.
No. 2018-89]
Upon receipt of an application for a license hereunder, the City Manager
shall cause a thorough investigation to be made of the premises proposed
to be licensed, and of the application, and if satisfied that the conditions
imposed as a condition of the special use permit have been met or will be
A. The name and address of the applicant if an individual, and if a firm,
partnership or association, of every member thereof, and in the case of
a corporation, the name and address thereof and of its officers and
registered agent;
B. The location of the group home for which a license is sought; and
C. The name of the person or persons under whose management or
supervision the home will be conducted. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
§ 26-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-204
1:857
met once the group home commences operations, and if the applicant is
otherwise qualified pursuant to § 26-207 of this chapter, he shall issue a
license for the remainder of the year and annually thereafter. The full fee,
in an amount set forth in the Schedule of Fees, shall be paid even though
the license is issued only for a fractional part of a year. The City Manager
shall, in his discretion, designate such City departments or personnel as he
believes necessary to inspect the premises or licensees from time to time
to ensure compliance with the requirements of this article. During the first
year of such license, the City Manager shall direct City staff to inspect the
premises at least twice, and at least annually thereafter.
§ 26-205. [Ch. 26, Sec. 24] Denial of license.
An application for a license may be denied for any of the following reasons:
§ 26-206. [Ch. 26, Sec. 25] Compliance with this article; revocation.
[Ord. No. 2007-38]
The City Manager shall revoke any license issued under this article for
noncompliance with any of the provisions of this article. Licensees who have
had a license revoked may appeal such revocation to the McLean County
Circuit Court as provided by law.
§ 26-207. [Ch. 26, Sec. 26] Conditions for obtaining a license to
operate a parolee group home or for operating a parolee group
home.
A. Failure to meet any of the minimum standards as adopted herein. [Ord.
No. 2007-38]
A. A special use permit to operate a group home must have been issued by
the City Council, and the licensee must comply with all conditions of the
special use permit as a condition for operating under a license issued
pursuant to this section.
B. A parolee group home must be staffed by at least one responsible adult
at all times. Such responsible adult must not have any felony
convictions or any misdemeanor convictions of an offense involving
moral turpitude.
C. Persons convicted of sex offenses, and who are required to register with
the State of Illinois as sex offenders, are not eligible for residence in a
parolee group home; nor are persons convicted of crimes of physical
violence eligible for residence in a parolee group home.
D. The City Manager, in deciding whether to issue or renew a license to
operate a parolee group home, shall consider whether the applicant has
shown that the operation of the home will not unreasonably endanger
the public safety; in making such determination, the City Manager shall
consider whether curfews, video surveillance, records of persons
entering and leaving such homes, and similar restrictions shall be
§ 26-204 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 26-207
1:858
required as a condition of such license, and if so, shall designate in
writing the additional conditions imposed under this subsection. The
City Manager shall also consider whether to require the inclusion of a
neighborhood representative on the Board of Directors of the parolee
group home, and if so, shall designate such condition in writing. The
licensee shall obey such additional conditions.
E. The licensee shall immediately report to the City Manager the name
and date of birth of all parolees residing in the parolee group home, and
shall immediately notify the City Manager of any changes in the identity
of the tenants of the group home, including the name and date of birth
of any new parolees residing in the group home. [Ord. No. 2007-38]
§ 26-207 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-207
1:859
Chapter 27
WATER
§ 26-207 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 26-207
1:860
ARTICLE I
Division of Water - General
§ 27-101. [Ch. 27, Sec. 1] Creation of Division of Water Treatment
and Division of Water Distribution. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
There is hereby created a Division of Water Treatment and Division of Water
Distribution, within the Water Division of the Department of Public Works
which Divisions shall be under the supervision, management and control of
the Director of Department of Public Works. The Director of Public Works
shall have charge of the supplying and distribution of water within or
without the limits of said City from the water supply and distribution system
now owned and operated by said City, which said supplying and distribution
is authorized and directed.
§ 27-102. [Ch. 27, Sec. 2] Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this chapter:
AGENCY — Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.[Ord. No. 1994-43]
APPLICANT — The person(s), business or corporation applying for a permit
or for water service.[Ord. No. 1994-43]
APPROVED BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES OR METHODS —
Approved by the Research Foundation for Cross-Connection Control of the
University of Southern California, Association of State Sanitary Engineers,
American Water Works Association, American National Standards Institute
or certified by the National Sanitation Foundation.[Ord. No. 1994-43]
AUXILIARY WATER SYSTEM — Any water source or system on or available
to the premises other than the public water supply system and includes the
water supplied by the system. These auxiliary waters may include water
from another purveyor's public water supply system; or water from a source
such as wells, lakes or streams, or process fluids; or used water. These
waters may be polluted or contaminated or objectionable or constitute
a water source or system over which the water purveyor does not have
control.[Ord. No. 1994-43]
BACKFLOW — The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances
into the distribution pipes of a potable water system from any source other
than the intended source of the potable water supply.[Ord. No. 1994-43]
BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE — Any device, method or type of
construction intended to prevent backflow into a potable water system. All
devices used for backflow prevention in Illinois must meet the standards
of the Illinois Plumbing Code and the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency.[Ord. No. 1994-43]
CITY — The City of Bloomington.[Ord. No. 1994-43]
§ 27-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-102
1:861
CONTAMINATION — An impairment of the quality of the water by entrance
of any substance to a degree which could create a health hazard.[Ord. No.
1994-43]
CROSS-CONNECTION — Any physical connection or arrangement between
two otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable water
and the other a substance of unknown or questionable safety or quality,
whereby there may be a flow from one system into the other.
CURB SHUTOFF VALVE — The valve normally located between the curb
and property line used to control the water service for a customer. Also
known as a curb stop or curb box.[Ord. No. 1994-43]
CUSTOMER — The owner and/or person in possession or control of any
premises supplied by or in any manner connected to a public water
system.[Ord. No. 1994-43]
CUSTOMER'S WATER SYSTEM — Any water system located on the
customer's premises. A building plumbing system is considered to be a
customer's water system.[Ord. No. 1994-43]
DISCONNECT WATER SERVICE — To stop the supply of water to a
customer.[Ord. No. 1994-43]
DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY — An assembly composed of single,
independently acting check valves approved under ASSE Standard 1015. A
double check valve assembly must include tight shutoff valves located at
each end of the assembly and suitable connections for testing the watertightness
of each check valve.[Ord. No. 1994-43]
FIXED PROPER AIR GAP — The unobstructed vertical distance through the
free atmosphere between the water discharge point and the flood level rim
of the receptacle.[Ord. No. 1994-43]
HEALTH HAZARD — Any condition, device or practice in a water system or
its operation resulting from a real or potential danger to the health and wellbeing
of customers. The word "severe" as used to qualify "health hazard"
means a hazard to the health of the user that could be expected to result in
death or significant reduction in the quality of life.[Ord. No. 1994-43]
INSPECTION — A plumbing inspection to examine carefully and critically
all materials, fixtures, piping and appurtenances, appliances and
installations of a plumbing system for compliance with requirements of the
Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890.[Ord. No. 1994-43]
DIRECT CROSS-CONNECTION — A cross-connection formed when a
water system is physically joined to a source of unknown or unsafe
substance.
A.
INDIRECT CROSS-CONNECTION — A cross-connection through which
an unknown substance can be forced, drawn by vacuum or otherwise
introduced into a safe potable water system. [Ord. No. 1994-43]
B.
§ 27-102 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 27-102
1:862
IRRIGATION SYSTEM — An in-ground plumbing system with sprinkler
heads, which is designed for the express purpose of providing water to
lawns and shrubbery.[Ord. No. 2007-30]
NON-POTABLE WATER — Water not safe for drinking, personal or culinary
use as determined by the requirements of 35 Ill. Adm. Code 604.[Ord. No.
1994-43]
OWNER — The person having an ownership interest in premises connected
to the public water system, which interest is filed of record in the McLean
County Recorder's Office.[Ord. No. 1994-43]
PLUMBING — The actual installation, repair, maintenance, alteration or
extension of a plumbing system by any person. Plumbing includes all piping,
fixtures, appurtenances and appliances for a supply of water for all
purposes, including without limitation lawn sprinkler systems, from the
source of a private water supply on the premises or from the watermain in
the street, alley or at the curb to, within and about any building or buildings
where a person or persons live, work or assemble. Plumbing includes
all piping, from discharge of pumping units to and including pressure
tanks in water supply systems. Plumbing includes all piping, fixtures,
appurtenances, and appliances for a building drain and a sanitary drainage
and related ventilation system of any building or buildings where a person
or persons live, work or assemble from the point of connection of such
building drain to the building sewer or private sewage disposal system five
feet beyond the foundation walls.[Ord. No. 1994-43]
POLLUTION — The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic,
radiological, or biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so
as to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of the water.[Ord. No.
1994-43]
POTABLE WATER — Water which meets the requirements of 35 Ill. Adm.
Code 604 for drinking, culinary and domestic purposes.[Ord. No. 1994-43]
POTENTIAL CROSS-CONNECTION — A fixture or appurtenance with
threaded hose connection, tapered spout or other connection which would
facilitate extension of the water supply line beyond its legal termination
point.[Ord. No. 1994-43]
PREMISE — The property to which the City provides water service. Any
property which has its own water service connection and/or water meter
shall be considered a separate premise for purposes of this definition.[Ord.
No. 1994-43]
PROCESS FLUID(S) — Any fluid or solution which may be chemically,
biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or
concentration such as would constitute a health, pollutional or system
hazard if introduced into the public or a customer's potable water system.
This includes but is not limited to:
A. Polluted or contaminated waters;
B. Process waters;
§ 27-102 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-102
1:863
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY — All watermains, pipes and structures through
which water is obtained and distributed to the public, including wells
and well structures, intakes and cribs, pumping stations, treatment plants,
reservoirs, storage tanks and appurtenances, collectively or severally,
actually used or intended for use for the purpose of furnishing water for
drinking or general domestic use and which serve at least 15 service
connections or which regularly serve at least 25 persons at least 60 days
per year. A public water supply is either a "community water supply" or a
"non-community water supply."[Ord. No. 1994-43]
RECONNECT WATER SERVICE — To restore the supply of water to a
customer.[Ord. No. 1994-43]
REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPAL BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE —
A device containing a minimum of two independently acting check valves
together with an automatically operated pressure differential relief valve
located between the two check valves and approved under ASSE Standard
1013. During normal flow and at the cessation of normal flow, the pressure
between these two checks shall be less than the supply pressure. In case of
leakage of either check valve, the differential relief valve, by discharging to
the atmosphere, shall operate to maintain the pressure between the check
valves at less than the supply pressure. The unit must include tightly closing
shutoff valves located at each end of the device, and each device shall be
fitted with properly located test cocks.[Ord. No. 1994-43]
SURVEY — The collection of information pertaining to a customer's piping
system regarding the location of all connections to the public water supply
system and must include the location, type and most recent inspection and
testing date of all cross-connection control devices and methods located
within that customer's piping system. The survey must be in written form
and should not be an actual plumbing inspection.[Ord. No. 1994-43]
SYSTEM HAZARD — A condition through which an esthetically
objectionable or degrading material not dangerous to health may enter the
public water supply system or a customer's potable water system.[Ord. No.
1994-43]
USED WATER — Any water supplied by a public water supply system to a
customer's water system after it has passed through the service connection
Used waters originating from the public water supply system which
may have deteriorated in sanitary quality;
C.
D. Cooling waters;
Questionable or contaminated natural waters taken from wells, lakes,
streams or irrigation systems;
E.
F. Chemicals in solution or suspension;
Oils, gases, acids, alkalis and other liquid and gaseous fluids used in
industrial or other processes or for firefighting purposes. [Ord. No.
1994-43]
G.
§ 27-102 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 27-102
1:864
and is no longer under the control of the water supply official
custodian.[Ord. No. 1994-43]
WATER PURVEYOR — The owner or official custodian of a public water
system.[Ord. No. 1994-43]
WATER SERVICE — The supplying of water by the City to a customer.[Ord.
No. 1994-43]
WATER SERVICE CONNECTION — The opening, including all fittings, pipe
and appurtenances at the watermain through which water is supplied to the
customer.[Ord. No. 1994-43]
§ 27-103. [Ch. 27, Sec. 3] Issuance and record of permits. [Ord. No.
2018-93]
The Director of the Department of Public Works shall issue all permits
required by this chapter and shall maintain a record of all such permits
issued.
§ 27-104. [Ch. 27, Sec. 4] Record of water service pipes and curb
shutoff valves. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
The Department of Public Works shall maintain a record of all water service
pipes connected with any watermains or water pipes forming a part of the
water system of the City showing the exact location of said service pipes
and curb shutoff valves.
§ 27-105. [Ch. 27, Sec. 5] Record of watermains, valves and
hydrants. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
The Department of Public Works shall maintain maps or charts showing the
location of all watermains, distributing pipes, valves and hydrants belonging
to the City.
§ 27-106. [Ch. 27, Sec. 6] Enforcement of chapter; police powers.
[Ord. No. 2018-93]
The Director of Public Works, or any officers he may designate for that
purpose, shall enforce the provisions of this chapter, and for that purpose
shall be qualified as police officers in accordance with the provisions of this
Code and other ordinances of the City.
§ 27-102 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-106
1:865

ARTICLE II
Conditions of Service
§ 27-201. [Ch. 27, Sec. 7] Application for water service. [Ord. No.
2018-93]
Effective October 1, 1994, every customer shall file an application for water
service on forms provided by the Department of Public Works. There shall
be a separate application filed for each individual premise for which a
customer desires water service. Applications shall be required regardless of
whether the City already provides water service to a premise and regardless
of whether the customer has an application on file for a different premise.
There shall be a $10 fee assessed for each application, which fee shall
be reflected on the first water bill issued for the premise for which the
application was made. Failure to file an application and/or provide all of the
information requested shall be cause for the City to deny water service and
disconnect same.
§ 27-202. [Ch. 27, Sec. 8] Rules governing use of City water.
The following rules governing the use of City water are hereby adopted:
A. Waste of water not permitted. Customers shall keep their water service
pipes and all plumbing connected with the City's water system in good
repair and protected from freezing at their own expense. Hydrants,
taps, hoses, water closets, urinals, baths or other fixtures shall not be
kept running when not in use. In conditions of extreme cold weather
water may be kept running at a trickle to prevent pipes from freezing. If
it is found that there is an unreasonable or unnecessary waste of water
in any building, structure or premise to which water is supplied from
the City's water system, the Director of Public Works may cause the
water service to be disconnected to stop the waste of water. [Ord. No.
2018-93]
B. Disconnection of water service. In any case where the water service has
been disconnected for any reason provided in this chapter, and the
water is found reconnected or when in the opinion of the Director of
Public Works the disconnection of the water service by closing the curb
shutoff valve is not a sufficient protection against the further use of the
water, it shall be lawful to cause the water service to be disconnected by
whatever means necessary. Upon a re-application for water service, an
additional charge covering all the expenses of disconnecting the water
service shall be made. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
C. Unauthorized reconnection of water service. No customer shall
reconnect or cause or allow the reconnection of water service to any
premise to which the City has disconnected water service in any
manner other than provided in this chapter. Only the City Manager, the
Public Works Director, his officers, and employees may reconnect a
water service. Any customer who reconnects water service to a premise
contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be liable for payment of a
§ 27-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-202
1:867
fine as provided in § 27-210 of this chapter in addition to any other
fees or charges assessed as a result of special measures which must be
taken to disconnect the service as a result of the reconnection. In any
prosecution charging an unauthorized reconnection of water service,
the person lawfully in possession and/or in control of the premises shall
be presumed to have made, caused or allowed the reconnection of the
water service. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
D. Right of entry.
(1) The officers, agents and employees of the Water Division shall have
free access to all and every part of any building, structure or
premises to which water is supplied from the City's water system
for the purpose of:
(a) Reading water meters and/or remote reading devices;
(b) Examining and/or repairing the water pipes, taps, fixtures,
hydrants, valves, shutoff boxes and any other appurtenances
related or connected to the City's water system; and
(c) Disconnecting and/or reconnecting water service as provided
in this chapter.
(2) Such officers, agents and employees shall also have the right to
take such steps as are necessary to repair pipes, taps, fixtures,
hydrants, valves, shutoff boxes and other appurtenances related to
or connected with the City water system and/or disconnect or
reconnect water service as provided in this chapter, including but
not limited to conducting excavations on the customer's premises.
E. No person shall in any manner obstruct, or cause to be obstructed or
refuse or prevent, the free access of any officer, agent or employee of
the Water Division to all or any part of any building, structure or
premise for the purposes set forth herein. Any person who so obstructs
the access of any such officer or person or who shall refuse to permit
such entry or access or who shall do or cause to be done any act or
thing for the purpose of preventing such entry or access, shall be
punished as provided in § 1-106 of Chapter 1 of this Code. [Ord. No.
2018-93]
F. Separate storm and sanitary drainage required. No water service shall
be provided to any premises where stormwater and sanitary drainage
are not separated as required by the chapter governing sewers and
sewage disposal. [Ord. No. 2012-51]
G. Plumbing code requirement. No water service shall be provided turned
on for service into any premise in which the plumbing does not comply
with the Plumbing Code of the City and the requirements of this
chapter. Water service may be provided for construction work in
unfinished buildings, subject to the provisions of this chapter. [Ord.
No. 2012-51]
§ 27-202 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 27-203
1:868
§ 27-203. [Ch. 27, Sec. 9] Interference with watermains, service
pipes, hydrants, etc. [Ord. No. 1994-43]
It shall be unlawful to interfere with or use any watermain, water service
pipe, hydrant or any other part of the City's water system without first
being authorized by the proper authorities of the City, and at the same time
procuring any required permits from the proper department(s) of the City
government, as required in the Code of the City or any that may hereafter
be passed by the City concerning such matters.
§ 27-204. [Ch. 27, Sec. 10] Rules and regulations governing
plumbing work in connection with City water system.
The following rules and regulations governing plumbing work in connection
with the City water system are hereby adopted:
A. Authorized persons. No person, firm or corporation except licensed
plumbers shall make any water service connections to or attachments
with the watermains of the City, nor make any repairs, additions to or
alterations of any tap, pipe, valve or other fixture connected with said
watermains on the outside or street side of the water meter; provided
that the foregoing shall not apply to authorized employees of the City.
[Ord. No. 1994-43]
B. Permit required. A permit shall be obtained from the Plumbing
Inspector before any addition or alterations are made to any tap, pipe,
valve or other fixture. [Ord. No. 1994-43]
C. Separate curb shutoff per premise. No person shall connect any water
pipe or conduct water into more than one premise unless separate and
distinct curb shutoff valves and meters are provided for each premise or
unit served. No water service pipe shall be allowed to cross lots into
adjoining premises. Existing water service connections that violate the
rules of this chapter shall be brought up to current standards by the
customers whenever work is done to the water service connection or if
requested by the City. The City may request a customer to bring an
existing water service connection up to current standards whenever the
City has reason to disconnect water service for one of the premises
controlled by a mutual curb shutoff valve. In such event, the City will
serve notice on the customer requesting the service connection be
brought up to current standards by a date certain. Should the customer
fail to change the service as requested, the Director of Public Works
may seek an order from the Circuit Court compelling the customer to
change the service and authorizing the City to change the service in
default of the customer doing so. Any such order shall assess the cost of
changing the service to the customer and shall provide for the
placement of a lien on the premises for the costs should the customer
fail to pay them. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
D. Curb shutoff valve. Every water service connection shall have a curb
shutoff valve located on public right-of-way within six feet of the
§ 27-203 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-204
1:869
property line behind the curb. All curb shutoff valves used for service
pipes of 1 1/4 inch or less shall utilize heavy brass inverted stopcocks;
all curb shutoff valves used on service pipes of 1 1/2 - two inch shall
utilize ball valves of the gate valve type. Four inch and larger water
service pipes shall utilize gate valves for the curb shutoff. All such curb
shutoff valves shall be approved by the Plumbing Inspector before they
are installed. All curb shutoff valves shall be equipped with a curb box
of the extension type with an arch pattern base. A stationary operating
rod shall be installed on the shutoff valve. The curb box shall be set
at the permanent earth grade. Adequate masonry blocking shall be
provided under the shutoff valve. [Ord. No. 1994-43]
E. Water service pipe, location. No water service pipe between City
watermains and the water meter shall be laid less than four feet below
the surface of the street grade or lawn. All water services shall be laid
straight from the curb shutoff valve to the building and shall be firmly
bedded on solid earth. Water services shall not be back filled until the
Plumbing Inspector has inspected the service by means of a pressure
test. Water and sewer services shall not be run in the same trench,
except by special permission of the Plumbing Inspector. All water
service pipes shall be extended to a minimum of one foot beyond the
property line. [Ord. No. 1994-43]
F. Water service pipe, material permitted. The material used for water
service pipe shall, in each every case, be subject to the inspection of the
Plumbing Inspector or his agent, and if found defective or below the
standard, its use shall not be permitted. All service pipes, from the City
watermains to the water meter shall be type K copper or Ductile Iron
Special Thickness Class 52. [Ord. No. 1994-43]
G. Watermain tap sizes. No taps less than 3/4 inch shall be made in any
watermain or distributing pipe, and no service pipe shall be connected
therewith of less than 3/4 inch waterway. No tap greater than 3/4 inch
shall be made in any watermain or distributing pipe having less than an
eight inch waterway. A one inch tap may be made in any watermain or
distributing pipe having a waterway of eight inches or over. Taps over
one inch are not permitted. When a larger tap is required than is
allowed to be tapped into any particular watermain or distributing pipe,
a side-tap, using a sleeve and valve may be made by the City water
personnel. A curb shutoff valve will also be required when such a side
tap is made. Multiple taps shall be at least 18 inches apart and shall not
be in the same line along the length of the watermain. [Ord. No.
1994-43]
H. Watermain tap locations. All taps in the watermains or distributing
pipes of the City water system shall be made on the side of said
watermains and not higher than 22 1/2° above horizontal. Water service
pipes from said taps shall be securely blocked with masonry materials
to prevent damage from earth settlement. [Ord. No. 1994-43]
§ 27-204 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 27-204
1:870
I. Meter and remote reading device locations. All water meters and
remote reading devices shall be so located that they will be easily
accessible to Public Works Department personnel. If the meter is set
within the building, it must be attached to the service pipe immediately
after such pipe has entered the wall of the building. All outside meters
shall be enclosed in a pit not less than 36 inches in diameter, made of
masonry, high density plastic or fiberglass as approved by the Plumbing
Inspector with a remote reading device. Remote reading devices shall
be mounted between three feet and five feet above the ground and shall
have a clear zone around the sides of the box of 3/8 inch on the sides,
4 1/2 inches on the top and five inches on the bottom. Remote reading
devices shall be wired in accordance with the standards set forth by the
City. Plumbers shall install all meters and remote devices at the address
designated by the permit. All meters and remote reading device
installations shall be left in proper working order. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
J. Water usage fee - new construction.
(1) No plumber shall leave the curb shutoff valve open and the water
service on to any premise unless all water is flowing through a
meter, and said meter and remote reading device are operational
for the premise or a water usage fee is being paid.
(2) The water usage fee is billed monthly from the time the excavation
permit is issued to the time the water meter and remote reading
device are operating correctly. The fee is twice the minimum water
bill stated in § 27-501. Sewer charges and taxes do not apply to the
water usage fee. Failure to obtain an excavation permit prior to
connecting the water service shall result in a fine as per § 27-210,
"Violations." The Director of Public Works may make special
provisions on large or unusual construction projects. [Ord. No.
2018-93]
K. New water service connections.
(1) Owners of property lying within the corporate limits who want to
install a water service connection between such property and an
existing watermain built by the City shall obtain a permit from the
Director of Public Works and pay their prorated share of the cost of
the watermain as determined by the Director of Public Works
before permission will be given to tap the watermain. This tap-on
fee is a one time charge per property. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
(2) All water service connections shall meet all the requirements of
this chapter. The installation and cost of the water service
connection is the responsibility of the property owner.
(3) All new water service connections shall be provided with new
meters and new remote reading devices. All water meters shall be
issued by the Public Works Department. No premise shall be
allowed a new water service unless there is a watermain in the
§ 27-204 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-204
1:871
§ 27-205. [Ch. 27, Sec. 11] Furnishing water outside the City. [Ord.
No. 1994-43]
It shall be the policy of the City of Bloomington to furnish water outside
the corporate limits through its distribution system extended providing the
additional water use does not exceed the capacity of the existing water
system.
§ 27-206. [Ch. 27, Sec. 12] Requirements for service outside
corporate limits.
Water service outside corporate limits must meet the following
requirements:
street or alley adjacent to the property to be served. Said
watermain shall be of four-inch size or larger in the case of existing
watermains, and no watermain construction shall be allowed of less
than eight inches in size. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
L. Abandoned water service connections. All abandoned water services
shall be capped at the watermain. [Ord. No. 1994-43]
A. The cost of extensions of watermains must be assumed by the
customers or divided between the customers and the City on the basis
of engineering recommendations and a mutual agreement to be
approved by the City Council. [Ord. No. 1994-43]
B. Water rates shall be as set forth in § 27-501 of this chapter or as may
otherwise be specified and in effect from time to time. [Ord. No.
1994-43]
C. Every property owner whose property is served and connected to the
City's water system shall first enter into a written agreement in a form
set by the City setting forth the terms of cost and other appropriate
requirements and shall among other provisions include the following:
"As a covenant running with the land, Customer agrees that in the
event any portion of the above-described property hereafter becomes
contiguous with the corporate boundaries of the City of Bloomington
in any of the manners prescribed by law, the City of Bloomington may,
in its sole discretion, but only after more than 90 days have elapsed
from the date of its enacting a resolution requesting that said abovedescribed
property be annexed, discontinue furnishing of any and all
water services to any property, building improvement or appurtenance
upon said above described property or any part thereof, and in its
discretion may continue to refuse the furnishing of such water services
until said area property has become annexed to the City of Bloomington
in the manner prescribed by law." [Ord. No. 1994-43]
D. The property owner or customer must also agree that he (or it) will not
permit or allow any other person, firm or corporation to connect or
annex to said water system or use water therefrom or in any other way
§ 27-204 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 27-206
1:872
§ 27-207. [Ch. 27, Sec. 13] Resale of City water for profit
prohibited.
§ 27-208. [Ch. 27, Sec. 13(A)] Audits of bulk water users.
benefit from the service provided to the customer under the terms of
the said agreement without written permission from the Director of
Public Works of the City. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
E. Water customers outside the City shall further agree that all extensions
of the water system remain the property of the subject to the control of
the City and that the water customer and his property shall be subject
to and shall be obligated to the enforcement of liens for nonpayment of
water and said customers shall abide by all ordinances, rules, and
regulations of the City with regard to the construction, use and
maintenance of watermains and for the payment of services for water
services; and upon the penalty of violation that a thirty-day notice of
disconnection may be given by the City. In the event of disconnection
for violation or breach of any covenant or condition of the water
agreement, it is strictly provided that no rebate, reimbursement or
claim shall be due and owing to the water customer. [Ord. No.
1994-43]
A. No private person, partnership or corporation shall resell water
purchased from the City of Bloomington at a price greater than the
amount charged to such person, partnership or corporation by the City
for the purchase of such water. [Ord. No. 1994-43]
B. This section shall not prohibit landlords from charging a fixed monthly
or annual amount to reimburse such landlords for the cost of supplying
water as a term of a lease when the actual amount of water used by an
individual tenant cannot be ascertained, but such fixed amount, and the
method for computing such amount, shall be disclosed to the individual
tenant and to City inspectors upon request. The fixed amount must be a
reasonable estimate of the per capita cost to such landlord of supplying
water based on pervious usage rates and current water rates. [Ord.
No. 1994-43]
C. Violators of this section shall be fined a minimum of $100 and a
maximum of $500 for each violation of this section. Overcharging shall
be a separate offense for each month the violation continues. In the
case of tenants of rented dwelling units or mobile home lots which are
overcharged in violation of this section a separate offense shall have
been committed for each individual dwelling, unit or mobile home lot
tenant so overcharged for each month of overcharging. [Ord. No.
1994-43]
D. This section shall not apply to any unit of local government or to any
entity regulated as a water utility by the Illinois Commerce
Commission. [Ord. No. 1994-43]
§ 27-206 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-208
1:873
A. City audits authorized.
(1) The City has the right to conduct, at City expense, an audit of the
records of persons designated in § 27-207A of this chapter using
generally accepted accounting practices, for the purpose of
determining whether the provisions of § 27-207 of this chapter
have been violated. Such audits will be conducted by persons who
are certified public accountants pursuant to the Illinois Public
Accounting Act (225 ILCS 450). Compliance with this section is
declared to be a condition of receiving water from the City of
Bloomington. [Ord. No. 2001-56]
(2) The auditors designated by the City shall submit their report of
such audits to the Director of Finance of the City of Bloomington.
B. Compliance with audit requests. Persons or entities audited shall
comply with the audit request within seven days of receiving the
request by making their records available to auditors designated by the
City or by supplying copies of requested classes of documents to
auditors designated by the City. The City will pay for copies at the rate
of $0.10 per page. [Ord. No. 2001-56]
C. Penalties. Persons or entities audited who do not comply with requests
for records in the manner set forth in Subsection B of this section shall
be fined $100 per day for each day the noncompliance continues, up to
a maximum fine of $1,000. Persons or entities audited who cannot
supply sufficient information to permit auditors designated by the City
to confirm that the persons, partnerships or corporations have complied
with the requirements of § 27-207 of this chapter shall be fined $1,000
per violation, with each month being a separate violation. The failure of
a person or entity to comply with requests for records as set forth above
for a period of 10 days shall be conclusive proof that such person,
partnership or corporation is unable to supply sufficient information to
permit auditors to confirm that the persons, partnerships or
corporations have complied with the requirements of § 27-207 of this
chapter and shall be fined for a violation. The fine for violation shall be
in addition to the fine for failure to comply with the request for records.
In addition to said fine or fines, the persons or entities audited shall pay
to the City the cost of the audit. [Ord. No. 2001-56]
D. Appeal process. Persons or entities audited who have been found by
auditors designated by the City to have failed to comply with the
requirements of § 27-207 of this chapter may appeal the results of the
audit report by submitting to the Director of Finance of the City of
Bloomington an audit conducted by persons who are certified public
accountants pursuant to the Illinois Public Accounting Act (225 ILCS
450), covering the same period of time as the audit conducted by
auditors designed by the City, in which such auditors state that the
persons or entities previously audited by the City have been audited,
using generally accepted accounting practices, and are in compliance
with the requirements of § 27-207 of this chapter. The Director of
§ 27-208 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 27-208
1:874
§ 27-209. [Ch. 27, Sec. 14] Supplying water to the Town of Normal,
Illinois. [Ord. No. 1994-43]
The City shall furnish water to the Town of Normal for emergency purposes
if and when all the requirements of water supply for the present customers
of Bloomington water are supplied and there is an excess, such excess may
be made available to Normal. The Town of Normal shall be billed at the
present existing published rates the same as is paid by any other customer
in Bloomington.
§ 27-210. [Ch. 27, Sec. 15] Violations.
Finance shall issue a decision as to which audit should be used in
order to determine compliance with § 27-207 of this chapter. Person
or entities audited who disagree with the decision of the Director of
Finance may appeal such decision to the McLean County Circuit Court
as provided by law. However, such appeal shall not stay the requirement
of immediate payment of any fines. In the event the decision of the
Director of Finance is reversed on appeal, the City shall refund any
fines paid. [Ord. No. 2001-56]
A. Any customer who in any manner violates any of the provisions of this
chapter or who omits, neglects or refuses to comply with the orders or
regulations concerning the use of water or who resists any officer of the
City in performing the duties imposed upon such officer by any of the
provisions of this chapter shall upon conviction be fined not less than
$50 nor more than $100 for each and every offense unless another fine
is provided for specifically.
B. Any customer who violates any water use restriction imposed by the
City Manager pursuant to § 27-202B of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be fined not less than $50 nor more than $500 for a
first offense by an owner-occupant of residential property; and not less
than $100 nor more than $1,000 for a subsequent offense by an owneroccupant
or an offense by any other person.
C. Any person, business or corporation who violates § 27-204J, "Water
Usage Fee - New Construction" shall pay a fine of $100.
D. Any plumber or other person violating any of the rules contained in this
chapter shall for such offense forfeit and pay as a penalty any sum not
less than $50 nor more than $100 and be liable in damages to any
person for injuries resulting from the violation of said rules. For any
injury or damage to said water system or fixtures caused by the
carelessness, neglect, or want of skill in any plumber or plumbers or his
or their employees, he or they shall be liable to an action on his or their
bond for the damages sustained by said City by reason of the breach or
breaches of the condition of said bond.
E. The City may refuse to grant any excavation, utility, building or
plumbing permits to any person or corporation who has past due
§ 27-208 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-210
1:875
charges for water service, equipment and/or permit fees until all such
charges are paid in full or a payment plan is developed. The City may
also refuse to grant permits to any person or corporation who has
installed any water meter, remote reading device or other plumbing
equipment improperly until any noted problems are corrected.
F. The fines imposed under this section shall be per occurrence and shall
be independent of any other fines or penalties imposed by the City or by
any others. [Ord. No. 1994-43]
§ 27-210 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 27-210
1:876
ARTICLE III
Meters
§ 27-301. [Ch. 27, Sec. 16] All water to be metered.
§ 27-302. [Ch. 27, Sec. 17] Water meter replacement.
A. All water services, whether for domestic or commercial purposes, shall
be metered.
B. All watermains that are the maintenance responsibility of the property
owner shall be metered at the property line, and a back flow device
approved by the Director of Public Works shall be installed at the
location of such meter.
C. All irrigation systems shall be supplied by a separate water tap on the
water main, with a separate curb stop, a water meter, a remote reading
device and an approved cross-connection control device. However, an
irrigation system may, with the written consent of the Director of Public
Works, be connected to an existing domestic water service, provided
that: the domestic water service is properly sized to provide both
domestic service and irrigation flows (as determined by the Public
Works Department) and the irrigation system meets all other criteria
for it's construction, particularly that it is supplied with a curb stop
valve separate from the domestic water service. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
A. When, in the opinion of the Director of Public Works, a water meter
must be replaced because the water meter is outmoded or inaccessible
to City employees the water meter shall be replaced by City employees.
The fees charged for said replacement are stated in the following
section.
B. The rate schedules set forth apply only to the cost of labor and
equipment for City employees to replace outmoded or inaccessible
water meters. It does not include the cost of any plumbing work which
may be necessary to allow water meters to be accessible to City
employees. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property,
and not the City, to pay for the cost of any such necessary plumbing
work. If the owner of the property refuses to hire a licensed plumber to
do such work, the Director shall cause such work to be performed by a
licensed plumber and will bill the owner for the expense of such work. If
the owner refuses City employees access to his property, the City will
obtain appropriate court orders to allow such work to be done.
C. The City shall have the authority to file a collection action against the
property owner for delinquent charges under this section. In addition,
the City shall have the concurrent authority to proceed against such
property owner under § 27-506 of this chapter.
D. When the owner or occupant of property containing an outmoded or
inaccessible water meter fails to schedule a time during normal
§ 27-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-302
1:877
§ 27-303. [Ch. 27, Sec. 18] Fees.
§ 27-304. [Ch. 27, Sec. 19] Ownership. [Ord. No. 1994-43]
All water meters, wiring and remote reading devices installed as required
by this chapter are and shall remain the property of the City.
§ 27-305. [Ch. 27, Sec. 20] Damage to meters. [Ord. No. 1994-43]
When a water meter is damaged by freezing or by hot water backing
through the meter or by other physical injury, the customer shall be
required to pay the cost of labor and repairs. Water service to any premises
may be disconnected for nonpayment of meter repair as provided in
§ 27-505 of this chapter.
§ 27-306. [Ch. 27, Sec. 21] Testing meters. [Ord. No. 2003-30]
Any municipal water meter, except outmoded meters, shall be taken out
and tested upon complaint of the customer. If when tested the meter is
not within 3% of being accurate, it shall be repaired or replaced at City
expense. If when tested the meter is accurate to within 3%, a $50 charge
shall be added to the next water bill.
§ 27-307. [Ch. 27, Sec. 22] Shutoff valves. [Ord. No. 1994-43]
Every meter shall have a shutoff valve on the inlet side and on the outlet
side.
business hours when City employees may enter the building to install
a new water meter after a written request from the City for such
scheduling, or when an owner or occupant of a building schedules
an appointment but then fails to keep said appointment and City
employees are unable to enter the building to replace the outmoded
or inaccessible water meter, the City shall have authority to disconnect
water service to said property until such time as the owner or occupant
permits City employees to replace the outmoded or inaccessible water
meter contained in said building. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
A. All water meters shall be obtained from the Public Works Department at
a fee to be determined by the Director of Public Works.
B. Fees for meters, parts thereof, or other equipment relating to water
service not paid for in cash shall be billed to the customer. If payment
therefor is not received within 60 days of invoice, the Director of
Finance shall notify the Director of Community Development and the
Director of Public Works to not issue building permits, certificates of
occupancy, or any other required permit to such customer unless such
bill is paid in full. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
§ 27-302 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 27-307
1:878
ARTICLE IV
Hydrants and Watermains
§ 27-401. [Ch. 27, Sec. 23] Taking water from, or injury to,
hydrants.
No person or persons, other than members of the Fire Department of
the City for the uses and purposes of said Department, and those duly
authorized by the Code of the City, shall open any of the hydrants of the City
water system or attempt to take water therefrom or in any manner interfere
with or injure any of said hydrants, except as follows:
§ 27-402. [Ch. 27, Sec. 24] Hydrant wrenches. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
It shall be unlawful for anyone to possess hydrant wrenches and the
Director of Public Works or Fire Chief or their designee shall collect all
hydrant wrenches wherever found from any and all persons and shall only
issue approved type wrenches to those parties entitled to the said wrenches
under the above Section. Said wrenches shall at all times be under the
custody of the Director of Public Works or Fire Chief or their designee.
§ 27-403. [Ch. 27, Sec. 25] Meters connected to hydrants.
A. The rural township fire department may be permitted to fill their
vehicular tanks at any hydrant. [Ord. No. 1994-43]
B. The Water Resources Manager of the Public Works Department shall
instruct the person or persons designated by the Director of Public
Service in the proper use and procedure in using hydrants and water in
the Public Service Department for all their necessary work and that the
said Water Resources Manager of the Public Works Department shall
instruct all persons that no water shall be drawn from any hydrant, nor
shall any person operate any hydrant other than the firemen except
those designated by the Director of Public Works. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
C. No person, firm or corporation not coming within Subsection B shall
use any hydrants without first securing permission from the Director of
Public Works. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
A. Except for City personnel as otherwise permitted, no person shall draw
water from any fire hydrant of the City except through a water meter
rented from the City of Bloomington as herein provided. Non-rented
meters shall be removed by the City without notice and will shall be
confiscated.
B. Hydrant meters are available for rent upon payment of a $25 service
charge and a $75 deposit. The remainder of the $75 deposit shall be
returned when the meter is returned in good condition and after
subtracting the water charges based on the normal water rates. Sewer
charges do not apply in calculating the water charges for water used
through a hydrant meter. If the water charges exceed the $75 deposit
§ 27-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-403
1:879
§ 27-404. [Ch. 27, Sec. 26] Watermains.
the remaining balance shall be paid by the renter of the meter. Charges
not paid shall be considered delinquent and are subject to other
provisions of this chapter. [Ord. No. 1994-43]
A. Watermains may be extended whenever such extension is deemed
necessary by the Director of Public Works.
B. Underground electrical wire or cables shall not be located within five
feet horizontally of any watermains. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
§ 27-403 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 27-404
1:880
ARTICLE V
Water Rates - Billing
§ 27-501. [Ch. 27, Sec. 27] Water rates.
A. Effective on billing cycles beginning May 1, 2008, the cost of City water
shall be ascertained according to the amount of water used during the
month for which the charge is made and shall be graduated as follows:
[Ord. No. 2008-24]
Rate Per 100 Cubic Feet
Inside City Outside City
First 2,300
cubic feet
per month
$3.27 $7.40
Next 11,700
cubic feet
per month
$3.16 $7.23
Next
486,000
cubic feet
per month
$2.79 $6.32
Over
500,000
cubic feet
per month
$2.19 $5
Bloomington
Township
$3.27
Village of
Hudson
$2.52
Village of
Towanda
$2.52
B. Effective on billing cycles beginning May 1, 2009, the cost of City water
shall be ascertained according to the amount of water used during the
month for which the charge is made and shall be graduated as follows:
[Ord. No. 2008-24]
§ 27-501 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-501
1:881
Rate Per 100 Cubic Feet
Inside City Outside City
First 2,300
cubic feet
per month
$3.50 $7.92
Next 11,700
cubic feet
per month
$3.38 $7.74
Next
486,000
cubic feet
per month
$2.99 $6.77
Over
500,000
cubic feet
per month
$2.35 $5.35
Bloomington
Township
$3.50
Village of
Hudson
$2.74
Village of
Towanda
$2.74
C. Effective on billing cycles beginning May 1, 2010, the cost of City water
shall be ascertained according to the amount of water used during the
month for which the charge is made and shall be graduated as follows:
[Ord. No. 2008-24]
Rate Per 100 Cubic Feet
Inside City Outside City
First 2,300
cubic feet
per month
$3.75 $8.47
Next 11,700
cubic feet
per month
$3.62 $8.28
Next
486,000
cubic feet
per month
$3.20 $7.24
Over
500,000
cubic feet
per month
$2.51 $5.72
§ 27-501 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 27-501
1:882
Rate Per 100 Cubic Feet
Inside City Outside City
Bloomington
Township
$3.75
Village of
Hudson
$2.99
Village of
Towanda
$2.99
D. Effective on billing cycles beginning May 1, 2011, the cost of City water
shall be ascertained according to the amount of water used during the
month for which the charge is made and shall be graduated as follows:
[Ord. No. 2008-24]
Rate Per 100 Cubic Feet
Inside City Outside City
First 2,300
cubic feet
per month
$4.01 $9.06
Next 11,700
cubic feet
per month
$3.87 $8.86
Next
486,000
cubic feet
per month
$3.42 $7.75
Over
500,000
cubic feet
per month
$2.69 $6.12
Bloomington
Township
$4.01
Village of
Hudson
$3.26
Village of
Towanda
$3.26
E. The rates charged for water taken by truck from the City Pumping
Station at Lake Bloomington or the City Pumping Station at Mason and
Division Streets shall be $0.25 per 40 gallons and such water shall be
used as potable water only.
F. Effective May 1, 2008, the rates charged for water shall in no case be
less than the monthly which shall be determined by the water meter
size as follows: [Ord. No. 2008-24]
§ 27-501 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-501
1:883
2008
Inside City Outside City
Meter Size Amount Amount
5/8 x 1/2
inch
$2 $3.50
5/8 x 3/4
inch
$3.50 $5
3/4 inch $4.50 $6
1 inch $6.50 $8.50
1 1/2 inch $9 $11.50
2 inch $13 $17
3 inch $23 $32
4 inch $37 $53
6 inch $75 $107
8 inch $119 $160
G. Effective May 1, 2009, the rates charged for water shall in no case be
less than the monthly service charge which shall be determined by the
water meter size as follows: [Ord. No. 2008-24]
2009
Inside City Outside City
Meter Size Amount Amount
5/8 x 1/2
inch
$1.75 $3.25
5/8 x 3/4
inch
$4 $5.50
3/4 inch $5 $6.50
1 inch $7 $9
1 1/2 inch $9.50 $12
2 inch $14 $18
3 inch $24 $34
4 inch $40 $57
6 inch $80 $115
8 inch $128 $172
H. Effective May 1, 2010, the rates charged for water shall in no case be
less than the monthly service charge which shall be determined by the
water meter size as follows: [Ord. No. 2008-24]
§ 27-501 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 27-501
1:884
2010
Inside City Outside City
Meter Size Amount Amount
5/8 x 1/2
inch
$1.50 $3
5/8 x 3/4
inch
$4.50 $6
3/4 inch $5.50 $7
1 inch $7.50 $9.50
1 1/2 inch $10 $12.50
2 inch $15 $19
3 inch $26 $37
4 inch $43 $61
6 inch $86 $123
8 inch $137 $184
I. Effective May 1, 2011, the rates charged for water shall in no case be
less than the monthly service charge which shall be determined by the
water meter size as follows: [Ord. No. 2008-24]
2011
Inside City Outside City
Meter Size Amount Amount
5/8 x 1/2
inch
$1.25 $2.75
5/8 x 3/4
inch
$5 $6.50
3/4 inch $6 $7.50
1 inch $8 $10
1 1/2 inch $10.50 $13
2 inch $16 $20
3 inch $28 $39
4 inch $46 $66
6 inch $92 $131
8 inch $146 $196
J. Rate review: The adequacy of the water service charge shall be
reviewed, not less often than annually, by Certified Public Accountants
for the City of Bloomington in their annual audit report. The water
§ 27-501 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-501
1:885
service charge shall be revised periodically to reflect a change in local
capital costs or operations, maintenance and replacement costs.
K. Revenues:
(1) All revenues and moneys derived from the operation of the water
system shall be deposited in the water account of the water fund.
All such revenues and moneys shall be held by the City of
Bloomington treasurer separate and apart from his private funds
and separate and apart from all other funds of the City of
Bloomington treasurer not more than 10 days after receipt of the
same, or at such more frequent intervals as may from time to time
be directed by the Mayor and Council.
(2) The City of Bloomington Treasurer shall receive all such revenues
from the water system and all other funds and moneys incident to
the operation of such system as the same may be delivered to him
and deposit the same in the account of the fund designated as the
"City of Bloomington Water Maintenance and Operation Fund."
Said treasurer shall administer such fund in every respect in the
manner provided by the Constitution of the State of Illinois and the
Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/1-1-1 et seq.
L. Accounts:
(1) The City of Bloomington treasurer shall establish a proper system
of accounts and shall keep proper books, records, and accounts in
which complete and correct entries shall be made of all
transactions relative to the water system, and at regular annual
intervals he shall cause to be made an audit by an independent
auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and
disbursements of the water system.
(2) In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual audit
report shall reflect the revenues and operating expenses of the
water facilities, including replacement cost. The financial
information to be shown in the audit report shall include the
following:
(a) Flow data showing total gallons received at the water plant for
the current fiscal year.
(b) Billing data to show total number of gallons billed per fiscal
year.
(c) Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year.
(d) Number of users connected to the system.
(e) Number of non-metered users.
M. Appeals. The method for computation of rates and service charges
established for user charges shall be made available to a user within 10
§ 27-501 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 27-501
1:886
§ 27-502. [Ch. 27, Sec. 28] Fire protection charges.
days of receipt of a written request for such, submitted to the Director
of Public Works. Any questions of fact or law regarding possible
overcharges shall be settled by reference to the "Tax Rights and
Responsibility Ordinance," found in Article XV of Chapter 39 of the City
Code. For the purposes of such Article XV, payments for water shall be
deemed to be a tax. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
N. Access to record. The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency or its
authorized representative shall have access to any books, documents,
papers and records of the City of Bloomington which are applicable to
the City of Bloomington system of user charges for the purpose of
making audit, examination, excerpts and transcripts thereof to insure
compliance with the terms of an IEPA Loan Agreement. [Ord. No.
2002-49]
O. Irrigation systems. Irrigation systems shall only be charged the monthly
service charge (fixed charge) and the applicable water rates as
calculated from the monthly service charge and water rates in effect at
the time. Monthly service charges (fixed charges or non-volumetric
based charges) for irrigation meters will not be suspended during nonirrigating
months. [Ord. No. 2007-30]
P. All water customers within the boundaries of the Parkway Project
Planned Unit Development, as such boundaries were established
pursuant to the legal description approved by the City Council in its
September 8, 2008 approval of the Preliminary Plan for said planned
unit development, shall pay "Outside City" rates in accordance with the
rates in effect at the time of water usage by such customers. [Ord. No.
2010-39]
A. Effective January 1, 2009, the monthly rate for private fire protection, in
the form of a fire booster pump, sprinkler system, private fire hydrants
or any other fire suppression equipment connected to the City's water
system shall be charged the rate of $6.80 per inch, or fraction thereof
rounded to the next highest inch, of fire service connection. Fire
suppression systems that utilize a combined domestic and fire service
line shall be calculated using the size of the combined line connection at
the water main for determining the proper charge.
B. Effective January 1, 2010, the monthly rate for private fire protection, in
the form of a fire booster pump, sprinkler system, private fire hydrants
or any other fire suppression equipment connected to the City's water
system shall be charged the rate of $13.60 per inch, or fraction thereof
rounded to the next highest inch, of fire service connection. Fire
suppression systems that utilize a combined domestic and fire service
line shall be calculated using the size of the combined line connection at
the water main for determining the proper charge.
§ 27-501 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-502
1:887
§ 27-503. [Ch. 27, Sec. 29] Reading of meters - notice. [Ord. No.
1994-43]
All water meters shall be read and billed monthly. Bills shall be sent to the
property on which the meter is located, unless other directions are given by
the customer Said bill shall state the amount of payment due, the date the
meter is read, the reading on that date, the previous reading, and the cubic
feet consumed. All bills shall be paid by the due date, and if unpaid on said
due date, said bill shall be delinquent. All bills shall be rendered at the rates
hereinabove fixed. Every delinquent bill shall accrue an additional charge
or penalty of 10% for each additional month or fraction thereof that the bill
remains due and unpaid. Failure to receive the monthly bill shall not be an
excuse for nonpayment of the bill. Any overpayment of water charges less
than $25 will not be refunded, but shall be applied as a credit on future bills
on that water account except for final bills. Final bills with a credit of less
than $5 will not be refunded.
§ 27-504. [Ch. 27, Sec. 30] Estimated bills. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
At times when an actual reading cannot be made or is not made, for
whatever reason, the water bill shall be estimated based on records of past
usage in the Public Works Department. If an actual reading cannot be made
for four consecutive months the meter shall be considered inaccessible and
may be replaced as provided in § 27-302.
§ 27-505. [Ch. 27, Sec. 31] No obligation to furnish when
delinquent - cut off notice.
C. Effective January 1, 2011, the monthly rate for private fire protection, in
the form of a fire booster pump, sprinkler system, private fire hydrants
or any other fire suppression equipment connected to the City's water
system shall be charged the rate of $20.40 per inch, or fraction thereof
rounded to the next highest inch, of fire service connection. Fire
suppression systems that utilize a combined domestic and fire service
line shall be calculated using the size of the combined line connection at
the water main for determining the proper charge.
D. Effective January 1, 2012, the monthly rate for private fire protection, in
the form of a fire booster pump, sprinkler system, private fire hydrants
or any other fire suppression equipment connected to the City's water
system shall be charged the rate of $27.20 per inch, or fraction thereof
rounded to the next highest inch, of fire service connection. Fire
suppression systems that utilize a combined domestic and fire service
line shall be calculated using the size of the combined line connection at
the water main for determining the proper charge. [Ord. No. 2008-24]
A. The City shall be under no obligation to furnish water to any premises
for which a delinquent City Services bill remains unpaid. If any water
charges, meter repair or any other charges for any building or premises
are not paid within 30 days of the due date of the City Services bill, the
§ 27-502 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 27-505
1:888
§ 27-506. [Ch. 27, Sec. 32] Liability for charges - cut off by owner.
water service may be disconnected at once by whatever means
necessary. The water service shall not be restored for said premises
until all charges and penalties are paid or a written payment agreement
has been entered into for payment of those charges and penalties, and
in addition thereto a $50 delinquency fee to be assessed as of the shut
off day. If the service is restored outside of regular service restoration
hours, the customer shall pay the City in advance, for the actual cost of
the restoration of water service, plus the delinquency fee. If a written
payment agreement is not fulfilled, the customer shall be disconnected
at any time following the failure to fulfill the agreement. The fee for
the initiation of a Payment Agreement (either verbal or written) shall be
$10 and will be added to the City Services bill for the account that the
Payment Agreement was created for. Governmental agencies of every
kind, including subordinate agencies of the Federal, the State of Illinois,
the County of McLean, and municipal corporations shall be exempt
from the penalty provisions of this Ordinance. [Ord. No. 2007-98]
B. For accounts that are delinquent at the time of a final water meter
reading, the water service may be terminated at the time of the final
water meter reading and service may not be restored until the account
has been made current or a written payment agreement has been
entered into for payment of the delinquent charges and penalties. [Ord.
No. 2006-110]
C. Requests for a change of billing recipient for accounts that are
delinquent at the time of the request may be refused until such time as
the account is made current or a written payment agreement has been
entered into for payment of the charges and penalties. [Ord. No.
2006-110]
D. The balance of unpaid charges and taxes for a delinquent City Services
bill for a given premises or real estate ("first premises") may, at the
discretion of the Director of Water or his/her designees, be transferred
to the City of Bloomington City Services account of another premises or
real estate ("second premises") if the second premises is either owned
by the same person as the first premises at the time of the transfer or
the City Services account at the second premises is established in the
same name as the first premises. [Ord. No. 2006-110]
E. In the event a City Services account has been established by a person
other than the owner of the property and has been disconnected due to
delinquency, the Director of Water or his/her designees may require
that said account be transferred into the name of the owner of the
property as a condition of continued service. [Ord. No. 2006-110]
A. The owner of any lot, building or premises and the occupant thereof and
the customer of the water service of said system shall be jointly and
severally liable to pay for such water service on said premises; and the
water services shall be furnished to the premises by the City only upon
§ 27-505 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-506
1:889
§ 27-507. [Ch. 27, Sec. 33] Delinquent charges - liens. [Ord. No.
1994-43]
Charges for water and/or related services and/or equipment that are not
paid within 30 days of the due date shall be considered delinquent. Such
delinquent charges, all subsequent charges incurred for water and related
services and equipment while the delinquent charges remain unpaid and all
costs of filing any lien notice(s) and of releasing any lien(s) shall constitute
a lien upon the real estate for which such water and related services
and equipment were supplied. The Director of Finance or his authorized
representative is hereby authorized to file sworn statements showing such
delinquencies in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of McLean County,
Illinois. This statement shall contain the legal description of the premises
serviced, the amount of the unpaid bill and additional charges and
expenses, and a notice that the City claims a lien for the total amount. The
filing of such statements shall be deemed notice for the payment of such
charges of water and related services, equipment and taxes.
§ 27-508. [Ch. 27, Sec. 34] Foreclosure of lien.
the condition that the owner of the premises, occupant and customer
of the water service are jointly and severally liable therefor to the City.
The owner or owners of any real estate may at any time, whether a
water bill is current or delinquent, notify the City in writing on the
forms provided by the Public Works Department that they request
to have the water service to the premises disconnected and
acknowledging that a subsequent reconnection of the water service
shall require the reconnection charge specified in § 27-505 of this
chapter. Upon receipt of such request, the Public Works Department
within three days thereafter shall cause the water service to be
disconnected.
B. This section shall not be construed to allow the owner of any property to
procure the disconnection of water service on said property against the
will of any occupants thereof. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
A. That the lien for water charges and taxes established by law against the
premises and real estate upon or for which water furnished by the City
is used or supplied may be enforced and foreclosed by a suit in
Chancery in the Circuit Court of McLean County, Illinois according to
the rules and practice of said Court. Said lien also may be enforced and
foreclosed by intervention in any suit already commenced in said Court
or any other Court whatever said intention is proper under the law.
Whenever the City is made a defendant in any suit on account of any
lien it may have for the furnishing of water, it shall have full power to
enforce its said lien in said proceedings.
B. The Corporation Counsel is hereby authorized and directed to institute
such proceedings or intervene as the case may be in the name of the
City, in any Court having jurisdiction over such matters against any
§ 27-506 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 27-508
1:890
§ 27-509. [Ch. 27, Sec. 35] Alternative remedies.
§ 27-510. [Ch. 27, Sec. 36] Water emergency response ordinance.
property of which a water bill has remained unpaid 30 days after the
due date. [Ord. No. 1994-43]
A. The method herein provided for enforcing and foreclosing the lien for
water charges and taxes shall not be considered as excluding any other
remedy or any other method of collecting said water charges and taxes,
but shall be concurrent with all other remedies and methods. [Ord. No.
1994-43]
B. The Director of Finance and/or the Director of Public Works shall be
authorized to compromise or waive the financial requirements of this
chapter if he finds that the situation for which the person is to be
charged was due entirely or in part to the fault of the City or any agent
thereof. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
A. Declaration of policy, purpose, and intent.
(1) Purpose. To achieve the greatest public benefit from domestic
water use, sanitation, fire protection and to provide water for other
purposes in an equitable manner and to preserve water quality, the
City of Bloomington adopts the following regulations and
restrictions on the delivery and consumption of water.
(2) This Ordinance is hereby declared necessary for the preservation
of public health, safety, welfare and enhances water supply
operational flexibility and shall take effect upon its adoption by the
City of Bloomington.
(3) Whenever, in the judgment of the City Council of the City of
Bloomington, it becomes necessary to conserve water in the service
area, due to drought, water treatment capacity or other conditions,
the City of Bloomington City Manager, in consultation with the
Public Works Department Director is authorized to issue a
Proclamation that existing drought or other conditions prevail over
fulfillment of the usual water-use demands. The Proclamation is an
attempt to prevent depleting the water supply to the extent that
water-use for human consumption, sanitation, fire protection and
other essential needs become endangered.
(4) Immediately upon the issuance of such a Proclamation, regulations
and restrictions set forth under this Ordinance shall become more
effective and remain in effect until the water shortage is terminated
and the Proclamation rescinded.
(5) Water uses, regulated or prohibited under the Ordinance, are
considered to be nonessential and continuation of such uses during
time of water shortage is deemed to constitute a waste of water,
subjecting the offender(s) to penalties.
§ 27-508 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-510
1:891
(6) The provisions of the Ordinance shall apply to customers within the
jurisdiction of the City of Bloomington Public Works Department.
[Ord. No. 2018-93]
B. Definitions. For the purposes of this Ordinance, the following
definitions shall apply:
AESTHETIC WATER USE — Water use for ornamental or decorative
purposes such as fountains, reflecting pools, and waterfalls.
COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL USE — Water use integral to the
production of goods and/or services by any establishment having
financial profit as their primary aim.
CRITICAL MONTH (the months of May, June, and July) DROUGHT
ALERT PHASE —
CUSTOMER — Any person, company, or organization using water
supplied by the City of Bloomington Public Works Department.[Ord.
No. 2018-93]
DOMESTIC WATER USE — Water use for personal needs or for
household purposes such as drinking, bathing, heating, cooking,
sanitation, or for cleaning a residence, business, industry, or institution.
ESSENTIAL WATER USES — Water used specifically for firefighting,
and to satisfy federal, state, or local public health and safety
requirements.
EVEN NUMBERED ADDRESS — Street addresses, box numbers or
rural route numbers ending in 0, 2, 4, 6, 8 or letters A-M; and locations
without addresses.
INSTITUTIONAL WATER USE — Water use by government, public
and private educational institutions, public medians and right-of-way,
churches and places of worship, water utilities, and other lands,
buildings and organizations within the public domain.
LANDSCAPE WATER USE — Water used to maintain gardens, trees,
lawns, shrubs, flowers, athletic fields, rights-of-way and medians.
MODERATE DROUGHT — Combined reservoir water-levels
reduced below spillway level by two feet or a proclamation that a
moderate water emergency exists.
(1)
SEVERE DROUGHT — Combined reservoir water-levels reduced
below spillway level by four feet or a proclamation that a severe
water emergency exists.
(2)
EXTREME DROUGHT — Combined reservoir water-levels reduced
below spillway level by greater than six feet and stream flow in
Mackinaw River less than 20 cubic feet per second or a
proclamation that an extreme water emergency exists. [Ord. No.
2013-04]
(3)
§ 27-510 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 27-510
1:892
NON-CRITICAL MONTH (the months of August, September, October,
November, December, January, February, March and April) DROUGHT
ALERT PHASE —
ODD NUMBERED ADDRESS — Street addresses, box numbers or rural
numbers or rural route numbers ending in 1, 3, 5, 7, 9 or letters N-Z.
WATER HAULING — Water sold by the City of Bloomington at bulk
dispensing facility for use at a location other than the location where it
was purchased.
WATER SHORTAGE — Lack of adequate available water to meet normal
demands due to lower than normal precipitation, reduced stream flows
or soil moisture, and/or deterioration of water quality which causes
water supplies to be less than usual.
WHOLESALE CUSTOMER — A public body that purchases water in
bulk and redistributes it to its own customers.[Ord. No. 2012-51]
MODERATE DROUGHT — Combined reservoir water-levels
reduced below spillway level by eight feet or a proclamation that a
moderate water emergency exists.
(1)
SEVERE DROUGHT — Combined reservoir water-levels reduced
below spillway level by 10 feet or a proclamation that a severe
water emergency exists.
(2)
EXTREME DROUGHT — Combined reservoir water-levels reduced
below spillway level by greater than 12 feet and stream flow in
Mackinaw River less than 20 cubic feet per second or a
proclamation that an extreme water emergency exists. [Ord. No.
2013-04]
(3)
C. Non-essential water use. All water use categories, other than essential
water use, may be curtailed during severe or extreme drought. Some
examples of non-essential water uses follow:
(1) Residential and institutional:
(a) Washing down sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots,
tennis courts, or other hard surface areas.
(b) Washing down buildings or structures for purposes other than
immediate fire protection.
(c) Flushing gutters or permitting water to run or accumulate in
any gutter or street.
(d) Washing any motor bike, motor vehicle, boat, trailer, airplane
or other vehicle in public or private garages or elsewhere.
(e) Maintaining fountains, reflection ponds, and decorative water
bodies for aesthetic or scenic purposes.
(f) Filling or maintaining public or private swimming pools.
§ 27-510 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-510
1:893
(g) Sprinkling lawns, plants, trees, and other flora on private or
public property, except as otherwise provided under the
Ordinance.
(2) Commercial and industrial:
(a) Serving water routinely in restaurants.
(b) Increasing water levels in scenic and recreational ponds and
lakes.
(c) Irrigating golf courses and any portion of its grounds, except
greens or as otherwise provided under this Ordinance.
(d) Obtaining water from hydrants for any purpose other than
firefighting.
(e) Serving customers who have been given a ten-day notice to
repair one or more leaks and has failed to comply.
(f) Expanding commercial nursery facilities, placing new sod on
commercial and/or residential sod after the drought
proclamation, or planting or landscaping when required by site
design review process. [Ord. No. 2012-51]
D. Responses to moderate, extreme, and severe drought alert phases in
critical or non-critical months. Levels of drought are set forth in this
ordinance as moderate, severe, and extreme. Proclamations issued by
the City of Bloomington City Manager, in consultation with the Public
Works Department Director shall coordinate to the month of the year
and an appropriate response to the level of drought which exists.
Proclamations setting forth responses to the various drought alert
phases shall be made by the City of Bloomington City Manager, in
consultation with the Public Works Department Director and are to be
based upon local and/or regional monitoring data. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
(1) Moderate drought alert phase. If conditions indicate that a
moderate drought condition is present and is expected to persist,
the City of Bloomington City Manager in consultation with the
Public Works Department Director shall notify municipal and
county governments and issue press releases concerning the
drought conditions to the news media. Large or key water users
will be contacted directly by the Public Works Department. [Ord.
No. 2018-93]
(a) Goal:
[1] Public awareness and education of drought procedures
and water saving.
[2] A 5% voluntary water use reduction for residential,
commercial, industrial, institutional, wholesale and
§ 27-510 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 27-510
1:894
electric power generation purposes in order to extend the
water supply for duration of the drought.
(b) General responses:
[1] Issue a Public Notice of Drought Conditions on water
supply and demand in a newspaper of general circulation
within the affected community and region. This statement
shall include a list of non-essential water uses (Subsection
C).
[2] Institute an increased water supply system maintenance
effort to identify and correct water leaks by initiating a
complete leak detection survey. Leaks greater than 100
gallons per minute under the control of the Public Works
Department will be corrected within 72 hours of the
Department becoming aware of the leak.
[3] Encourage customers of the City of Bloomington Public
Works Department to comply with the listed voluntary
water-use restrictions in all categories while moderate
drought conditions exist. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
(c) Water-use restrictions:
[1] Residential. Reduce domestic, landscaping, and waterbased
recreational activities such as swimming pools,
water slides, and other related water activities.
[2] Commercial, industrial, and institutional. Reduce
aesthetic, domestic, landscaping, and water-based
recreational activities such as swimming pools, water
slides, and other related water activities. Water sold for
transport elsewhere ("water hauling") shall have the rate
doubled.
[3] Agricultural, irrigation and livestock. Implement
conservation techniques, explore different water saving
methods, and use alternative sources.
[4] Electric power generation. Implement conservation
techniques, explore different water saving methods, and
use alternative sources.
[5] Lake Bloomington. Prohibit direct water withdrawals from
Lake Bloomington.
[6] Wholesale customers. Water use reductions of 5%.
(d) Public works department operational procedures:
§ 27-510 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-510
1:895
[1] Eliminate hydrant flushing, except that flushing necessary
to maintain the water quality in the water distribution
system.
(2) Severe drought alert phase. A drought of this severity requires
official declaration and implementation of mandatory water use
restrictions by the City of Bloomington City Manager, in
consultation with the Public Works Department Director. In such
cases, the City Manager, in consultation with the Public Works
Department Director will notify municipal and county governments
in the affected drought areas. The Utility will also issue press
releases concerning the drought conditions to the news media.
[Ord. No. 2018-93]
(a) Goal:
[1] Generate a public response that helps alleviate drought
stress through mandatory water use restrictions.
[2] A 10% water use reduction for residential, agricultural,
commercial, industrial, institutional, wholesale and
electric power generation purposes.
(b) General responses:
[1] Issue a Public Notice of Drought Conditions on water
supply and demand in a newspaper or general circulation
within the affected community and region. This statement
shall include a list of water-use curtailment measures.
[2] Require customers of the City of Bloomington Public
Works Department to comply with the listed water-use
restrictions in all categories while severe drought
conditions exist. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
(c) Water-use restrictions:
[1] Residential:
[a] Use low-volume hand-held applicators only and
prohibit sprinklers, other remote broadcast devices,
and water runoff in landscape design maintenance.
[b] Restrict landscape watering to Tuesday and Saturday
for odd-numbered addresses, and Thursday and
Sunday for even-numbered addresses.
[2] Commercial, Industrial, and Institutional:
[a] Prohibit aesthetic water use.
[b] Reduce domestic water use to minimum levels
necessary for maintaining health and safety.
§ 27-510 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 27-510
1:896
[c] Prohibit water-based recreational activities except
facilities, such as swimming pools and other related
water activities that require filtration and/or water
recycling.
[d] Use low-volume hand-held applicators only and
prohibit sprinklers, other remote broadcast devices,
and water runoff in landscape design maintenance.
[e] Restrict landscape watering on Tuesday and Saturday
for odd-numbered addresses, and Thursday and
Sunday for even-numbered addresses.
[f] Water sold for transport elsewhere ("water hauling")
shall have the rate tripled and shall only be sold on
Monday, Wednesday and Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
[3] Agriculture, irrigation and livestock:
[a] Implement conservation techniques, explore different
water saving methods, and use alternative sources.
[b] Restrict irrigation use from 7:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
[4] Electric power generation:
[a] Implement conservation techniques, explore different
water saving methods, and use alternative sources.
[5] Lake Bloomington:
[a] Prohibit direct water withdrawals from Lake
Bloomington.
[6] Wholesale customers:
[a] Water use reductions of 10%.
(d) Public works department/City operational procedures.
[1] Prohibit the use of water-based recreational activities that
rely on single use water supply, such as municipal water
parks.
[2] Enact a twenty-four-hour, service-area wide, monitoring
system to evaluate the community's response and
cooperation to drought procedures. Reduce the water
supply hydraulic grade-line (levels in water towers) by five
feet. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
(3) Extreme drought alert phase. The City of Bloomington City
Manager, in consultation with the Public Works Department
Director will notify municipal and county governments in the
affected drought areas, and issue press releases concerning the
§ 27-510 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-510
1:897
drought conditions to the news media. Water-use restrictions
imposed during extreme drought conditions are mandatory. [Ord.
No. 2018-93]
(a) Goal:
[1] A 15% water use reduction for residential, institutional,
agricultural, commercial, industrial, and electric power
generation purposes.
(b) General responses:
[1] Issue a Public Notice of Drought Conditions on water
supply and demand in a newspaper of general circulation
within the affected community and region. This statement
shall include a list of water-use curtailment measures.
[2] Require customers of the City of Bloomington Public
Works Department to comply with the listed water-use
restrictions in all categories while extreme drought
conditions exist. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
(c) Water-use restrictions:
[1] Residential:
[a] Reduce domestic water use to minimum levels
necessary to maintain health and safety.
[b] Prohibit water-based recreational activities except
facilities, such as swimming pools and other related
water activities that employ filtration and/or water
recycling.
[c] Use low-volume hand-held applications only and
prohibit sprinklers, other remote broadcast devices,
and water runoff in landscape design maintenance.
[d] Restrict landscape watering on Tuesday and Saturday
for odd-numbered addresses, and Thursday and
Sunday for even-numbered addresses.
[2] Commercial, industrial, and institutional:
[a] Prohibit aesthetic water use.
[b] Reduce domestic water use to minimum levels
necessary for maintaining health and safety.
[c] Prohibit water-based recreational activities except
facilities, such as swimming pools and other related
water activities that employ filtration and/or water
recycling.
§ 27-510 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 27-510
1:898
[d] Use low-volume hand-held applications only and
prohibit sprinklers, other remote broadcast devices,
and water runoff in landscape design maintenance.
[e] Restrict landscape watering on Tuesday and Saturday
for odd-numbered addresses, and Thursday and
Sunday for even-numbered addresses.
[f] Cease selling water for transport elsewhere ("water
hauling").
[3] Agriculture, irrigation and livestock:
[a] Implement conservation techniques, explore different
water saving methods, and use alternative sources.
[b] Restrict irrigation use from 12:00 a.m. to 4:00 a.m.
[4] Electric power generation:
[a] Implement conservation techniques, explore different
water saving methods, and use alternative sources.
[5] Lake Bloomington:
[a] Prohibit direct water withdrawals from Lake
Bloomington.
[6] Wholesale customers:
[a] Water use reductions of 15%.
(d) Public works department/City operational procedures.
[1] Prohibit water-based recreational activities except
facilities, such as swimming pools and other related water
activities that require filtration and/or water recycling.
[2] Prohibit the use of water-based recreational activities that
rely on single use water supply, such as municipal water
parks.
[3] Prohibit water-based street cleaning.
[4] Enact a twenty-four-hour Public Works Department
monitoring system to evaluate the community's response
and cooperation to drought procedures.
[5] Reduce the water supply hydraulic grade-line (levels in
water towers) by 10 feet.
[6] Eliminate golf course irrigation, except for greens. [Ord.
No. 2018-93]
E. New water service connections.
§ 27-510 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-510
1:899
(1) Correspondence regarding water availability, pipeline extension
agreements, and applications requesting service, received and
dated after the date of this Ordinance shall include conditions
relating to water shortages.
(2) No applications for new, additional, further expanded, or an
increase in size of water service connections, meters, service lines,
pipeline extensions, approved or installed unless such action is in
compliance with provisions of this Ordinance. [Ord. No. 2012-51]
F. Water rates. In the event of an extreme drought related water shortage,
the City of Bloomington City Manager in conjunction with the Public
Works Department Director is hereby authorized to monitor water use.
Under extreme drought conditions the Public Works Department's
drought water rates will be enacted through the duration of the drought
for all water users except as otherwise noted in this Ordinance. These
water rates are defined as the water rates in effect at the time of the
extreme drought declaration multiplied by 1.50. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
G. Rationing. In the event that a drought or other condition(s) threaten(s)
the preservation of public health and safety, the City of Bloomington
City Manager, in consultation with the Public Works Department
Director is hereby authorized to ration water. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
H. Fines and penalties. Except as otherwise stated herein, violators of any
provision of this Ordinance shall be penalized.
(1) Violation classification penalty.
(a) First offense infraction in severe drought: Courtesy reminder
to implement procedures.
(b) First offense infraction in extreme drought: $50.
(c) Second offense infraction within the same drought period:
$100.
(d) Third and subsequent offense within the same drought period:
$250.
(2) The aforementioned fines and penalties may be in lieu of, or in
addition to, any other penalty provided by law. [Ord. No. 2012-51]
I. Enforcement. Employees of the City of Bloomington Public Works
Department, City of Bloomington police officers, firefighters, and
Plumbing Inspectors have the duty, and are hereby authorized to
enforce the provisions of this Ordinance and shall have the power and
authority to issue written notices to appear when violations of this
Ordinance occur during any declared severe or extreme drought or
water shortage. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
J. Variances.
§ 27-510 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 27-510
1:900
(1) Persons not capable of immediate water use reduction, or
curtailment, because of equipment damage or other extreme
circumstances, shall commence gradual reduction of water use
within 24 hours of the declaration of water use curtailment/
reduction and shall apply for a variance from curtailment.
(2) Persons requesting exemption from the provisions of this
Ordinance shall file a petition for variance with the City of
Bloomington City Manager within 10 days after such curtailment
becomes effective. [Ord. No. 2013-04]
(3) When the Drought Ordinance has been invoked by the City of
Bloomington City Manager, in consultation with the Public Works
Department Director, all petitions for variances shall be reviewed
by the City of Bloomington City Manager in consultation with the
Public Works Department Director. Petitions shall contain the
following: [Ord. No. 2018-93]
(a) Name and address of the petitioner(s).
(b) Purpose of water use.
(c) Specific provisions from which the petitioner is requesting
relief.
(d) Detailed statement as to how the curtailment declaration
adversely affects the petitioner.
(e) Description of the relief desired.
(f) Period of time for which the variance is sought.
(g) Economic value of the water use.
(h) Damage or harm to the petitioner or others if petitioner
complies with Ordinance.
(i) Restrictions with which the petitioner is expected to comply
and the compliance date.
(j) Steps the petitioner is taking to meet the restrictions from
which variance is sought and the expected date of compliance.
(k) Other pertinent information.
(4) In order for a variance to be granted, petitioner must show one of
more of the following conditions:
(a) Compliance with the Ordinance cannot be technically
accomplished during the duration of the water shortage.
(b) Alternate methods can be implemented which will achieve the
same level of reduction in water use.
§ 27-510 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-510
1:901
§ 27-511. [Ch. 27, Sec. 37] Billing adjustments. [Ord. No. 2018-110]
Effective May 1, 2019, any and all requests for adjustments to City services
utility bills shall be processed in accordance with and subject to the
conditions and limitations of the "City of Bloomington Water Leak
(5) The City of Bloomington Public Works Department Director may, in
writing, grant temporary variances for existing water uses
otherwise prohibited under the Ordinance if it is determined that
failure to grant such variances would cause an emergency
condition adversely affecting health, sanitation, or fire protection
for the public or the petitioner and if one or more aforementioned
conditions is met. The City of Bloomington Public Works
Department Director shall approve or deny any such variance. Any
such variance so ratified may be revoked by later action of the City
of Bloomington Public Works Department Director. Any such
variance denied by the City of Bloomington Public Works
Department Director can be appealed to the City of Bloomington
City Manager. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
(6) No such variance shall be retroactive or otherwise justify any
violation of this Ordinance occurring prior to the issuance of the
variance.
(7) Variances granted by the City of Bloomington City Manager shall
be subject to the following conditions, unless waived or modified by
the City of Bloomington City Manager. [Ord. No. 2013-04]
(a) Variances granted shall include a timetable for compliance.
(b) Variances granted shall expire when the water shortage no
longer exists, unless the petitioner has filed to meet specified
requirements.
K. Drought improvement or cessation. The City of Bloomington Public
Works Department Director, in consultation with the City Manager,
shall determine when a drought condition has improved or ceased
based upon the critical or non-critical month drought condition
definitions contained within this Ordinance. However, in order for a
lower drought level condition or overall drought cessation to be
declared, the reservoir levels must be maintained at the defined level,
or better, for seven consecutive days before restrictions are reduced
and a lower drought condition is declared. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
L. Status of the ordinance. In the event that any portion of this Ordinance
is held to be unconstitutional for any reason, the remaining portions of
the Ordinance shall not be affected. The provisions of this Ordinance
shall prevail and control in the event of any inconsistency between this
Ordinance and other rules and regulations of the City of Bloomington
and/or State of Illinois. [Ord. No. 2013-04]
§ 27-510 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 27-511
1:902
Adjustment Policy" as the same may from time to time be amended by the
City Council.
§ 27-511 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-511
1:903
Chapter 28
MISDEMEANORS
§ 28-101. [Ch. 28, Sec. 1] Assault and battery - penalty.
§ 28-102. [Ch. 28, Sec. 2] Unlawful assemblage - penalty.
Any two or more persons who shall assemble in said City for any unlawful
purpose, or who, being assembled, shall act in concert to do an unlawful act
with force and violence against the property of the City, or the person or
property of another, or against the peace or to the terror of the citizens or
other persons in said City, or who shall make any movement or preparation
therefor, shall be severally subject to a fine of not less than $3 nor more
than $50 and to a further fine of not less than $5 nor more than $50 upon
refusal to disperse after being requested to do so by any police officer or
other conservator of the peace.
§ 28-103. [Ch. 28, Sec. 3] Aiding in breach of the peace -
assembling for unlawful purpose.
Any person who shall make, aid, countenance or assist in making any
improper noise, riot, disturbance, breach of the peace or diversion tending
to a breach of the peace, and all persons who shall collect in bodies or
crowds for unlawful purposes or for any purpose to the annoyance or
disturbance of citizens or travelers shall be severally subject to a fine of not
less than $3 nor more than $100.
§ 28-104. [Ch. 28, Sec. 4] Burglar's tools - possession of - penalty.
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession any nippers of
the description known as burglar's nippers or any pick lock, skeleton key,
key to be used with a bit or bits, jimmy or any other burglar's instruments
or tool of whatsoever kind or description, unless it be shown that such
A. A person commits an assault when, without lawful authority, he
engages in conduct which places another in reasonable apprehension of
receiving a battery.
B. A person commits battery if he intentionally or knowingly without legal
justification and by any means:
(1) Causes bodily harm to an individual; or
(2) Makes physical contact of an insulting or provoking nature with an
individual.
C. Whoever shall commit an assault or battery upon the person of another
within the limits of the City of Bloomington shall be fined not less than
$25 nor more than $500. [Ord. No. 1975-56]
§ 27-511 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 28-104
1:904
possession is innocent or for a lawful purpose, under a penalty of not less
that $25 and not more than $200.
§ 28-105. [Ch. 28, Sec. 5] Disorderly conduct - disturbing the peace
- penalty.
§ 28-106. [Ch. 28, Sec. 6] Challenge to fight - offensive language -
penalty. [Ord. No. 1988-5]
It shall be illegal for any person to challenge another person to fight or
threaten or traduce another or indulge in any conduct toward another
pretending to provoke a disturbance or breach of the peace.
§ 28-107. [Ch. 28, Sec. 7] Impersonating a City officer - penalty.
Whoever shall falsely represent himself to be an officer of this City or
without being duly authorized by the City shall exercise or attempt to
exercise any of the duties, functions or powers of a City officer shall be fined
not less than $5 nor more than $100 for each offense.
A. A person commits disorderly conduct when he knowingly:
(1) Does any act in such unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb
another and to provoke a breach of the peace; or
(2) With intent to annoy another, makes a telephone call, whether or
not conversation thereby ensues; or
(3) Transmits in any manner to the Fire Department of any City, town,
village or fire protection district a false alarm of fire, knowing at
the time of such transmission that there is no reasonable ground
for believing that such fire exists; or
(4) Transmits in any manner to another a false alarm to the effect that
a bomb or other explosive of any nature is concealed in such place
that its explosion would endanger human life, knowing at the time
of such transmission that there is no reasonable ground for
believing that such bomb or explosive is concealed in such place;
or
(5) Transmits in any manner to any peace officer, public officer or
public employee a report to the effect that an offense has been
committed, knowing at the time of such transmission that there is
no reasonable ground for believing that such an offense has been
committed; or
(6) Enters upon the property of another and for a lewd or unlawful
purpose deliberately looks into a dwelling on the property through
any window or other opening in it.
B. A person convicted of a violation of Subsection A above shall be fined
not to exceed $500.
§ 28-104 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-108
1:905
§ 28-108. [Ch. 28, Sec. 8] Permitting unlawful assemblage of
premises - penalty.
Whoever shall knowingly suffer or permit any assemblage for the purpose of
committing any unlawful act or breach of the peace or any riotous, offensive
or disorderly conduct in or upon premises owned or occupied by him, or
under his control within said City shall on conviction be fined not less than
$5 nor more than $50.
§ 28-109. [Ch. 28, Sec. 9] Disturbing religious worship - penalty.
Whoever shall within the limits of the City disquiet or disturb any
congregation or assembly met for any lawful purpose, religious or
otherwise, by making a noise or by any rude, indecent behavior or profane
discourse of disorderly conduct, within their place of meeting, or so near the
same as to disturb the order or solemnity of the meeting, shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in any
sum not less than $3 nor more than $100.
§ 28-110. [Ch. 28, Sec. 10] Disturbing lawful assemblage - election
poll - penalty.
Whoever shall in said City disturb or disquiet any lawful assemblage or
association of people, by any rude or indecent behavior, or by any disorderly
conduct, or who shall create any disturbance or be guilty of any disorderly
conduct at any election poll shall on conviction be fined not less than $5 nor
more than $100 for each offense.
§ 28-111. [Ch. 28, Sec. 11] Disturbing funeral procession - penalty.
Whoever shall interrupt or disturb any funeral assemblage or shall break
into or drive any vehicle through any funeral procession shall be fined not
less than $3 nor more than $50.
§ 28-112. [Ch. 28, Sec. 12] Congregating in stairways and on street
corners - penalty.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons in said City to loiter or
congregate about or upon any stairway, doorway, window or in front of any
business or dwelling house, theater, lecture room, church, street corner or
elsewhere, and by so doing obstruct or interfere with the free passage of
persons entering or occupying such building or premises or by language,
conversation or conduct, annoy, insult or disturb persons passing along the
streets or alleys or occupying, residing or doing business in any of said
houses or places. Every person violating this section shall be deemed guilty
of a misdemeanor and on conviction shall forfeit and pay not less than $3
nor more than $100 for each offense; and it shall be the duty of every
policeman to arrest and prosecute all persons offending under this section.
§ 28-108 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 28-113
1:906
§ 28-113. [Ch. 28, Sec. 14] Molesting vehicles - penalty.
No person shall climb upon or into any automobile or other vehicle while the
same may be in motion, under a penalty of not less than $1 nor exceeding
$5 in each case.
§ 28-114. [Ch. 28, Sec. 15] Intoxicated person - appearance in
public prohibited - penalty.
It shall be unlawful for any person who is in a state of intoxication or
drunkenness to be or appear under any circumstances in any street or
public place, or in any place or premises open to public view, within the
City; and it shall be unlawful for any such person to be or appear in any
private house or place to the annoyance of any person. Any person violating
this section shall forfeit and pay a fine to the City of not more than $300.
§ 28-115. [Ch. 28, Sec. 16] Solicitation for immoral purposes -
penalty.
It shall be unlawful for any woman to approach or solicit any male or offer
herself to any male for immoral purposes upon any public street or alley or
in any other public place in the City under a penalty of not less than $3 nor
more than $25 for each offense.
§ 28-116. [Ch. 28, Sec. 17] Persons under 17 years of age prohibited
on streets between certain hours.
A. It is unlawful for a person less than 17 years of age to be present at or
upon any public assembly, building, place, street or highway at the
following times:
(1) Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., Saturday;
(2) Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., Sunday;
(3) Between 11:00 p.m. on Sunday to Thursday, inclusive, and 6:00
a.m. on the following day. [Ord. No. 2004-64]
B. It is a defense to a violation under this chapter that the child engaged in
this prohibited conduct while:
(1) Accompanied by the child's parent, legal guardian, custodian,
sibling, stepbrother or stepsister at least 18 years of age.
(2) Accompanied by an adult at least 21 years of age approved of by
the child's parent, guardian, or custodian.
(3) Participating in, going to, or returning home from:
(a) Employment which the laws of this state authorize a person
less than 17 rears of age to perform;
(b) A school recreational activity;
§ 28-113 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-116
1:907
§ 28-117. [Ch. 28, Sec. 18.1 through Ch. 28, Sec. 18.5] Videotapes.
(c) A religious event;
(d) An emergency involving the protection of a person or property
from an imminent threat of serious bodily injury or substantial
damage;
(e) An activity involving the exercise of the child's rights protected
under the First Amendment to the United States Constitution
or Article 1, Sections 3, 4, and 5 of the Constitution of the State
of Illinois or both;
(f) An activity conducted by a nonprofit or governmental entity
that provides recreation, education, training, or other care
under the supervision of one or more adults.
C. A citation for violation of Subsection A of this section may be issued by a
Police Officer only if he reasonably believes that a violation has
occurred and none of the defenses enumerated in Subsection B apply.
[Ord. No. 2004-64]
D. It is unlawful for a parent, legal guardian, custodian or other person to
knowingly permit a person in his or her custody or control to violate
Subsection A of this section. [Ord. No. 2004-64]
E. A person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be
fined not less than $50 nor more than $250. [Ord. No. 2004-64]
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings stated in this section:
COUNTER AREA — That space in which video tapes are sold or checked
out and returned and where rental fees are accepted.
DOOR — An opaque structure which covers an entrance and provides
access to an area. A door must cover the area between a height of seven
feet and 15 inches from the floor.
TAPE CONTAINING HARMFUL MATERIAL — A video tape containing
harmful material as defined in Section 11-21 of the Illinois Criminal
Code. A video tape containing a motion picture rated "X" by the Motion
Picture Association of America is presumed to contain harmful material,
but the presumption may be rebutted.[Ord. No. 1989-39]
B. Separate storage of tape displays.
(1) Any person in the business of renting or selling video tapes shall, if
he or she offers for sale or rental tapes containing harmful
material, establish a separate and distinct "adult display area,"
which minors are prohibited from entering wherein such tapes
must be displayed, which meets the following requirements:
(a) An enclosed area with:
§ 28-116 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 28-117
1:908
§ 28-118. [Ch. 28, Sec. 19] Truancy prohibited.
[1] A door which must be kept closed at all times, regardless
of whether persons are in the adult display area; or
[2] A partition placed within the adult display area, covering
the opening to the remainder of the establishment, in such
manner that persons outside the adult display area cannot
view the adult display area.
(b) Tapes, packaging, and promotional material within the adult
display areas must not be visible from outside the adult display
area.
(2) The separation requirements of this section need not be met in any
establishment which refuses to admit persons under 18 years of
age to the premises. [Ord. No. 1989-39]
C. Rental. Any person in the business of renting or selling video tapes shall
not rent or sell tapes containing harmful material except:
(1) At a counter area separate from the general rental/sales counter
area. Such separate counter may be created by the use of a
partition extending at least two feet above the counter and at least
as deep as the counter surface that splits the general counter into
two counters; or
(2) At a single counter area if:
(a) The video tape(s) or display materials which contain "harmful
material" are not removed from the separate storage area, and
(b) the employee of the business handling the transaction is at
least 18 years of age. [Ord. No. 1989-46]
D. Age limits. No person under 18 years of age may rent, purchase or
handle tapes containing harmful material. No person under 18 years of
age shall enter or be permitted by any person in the business or renting
or selling video tapes to enter the adult display area. [Ord. No.
1989-39]
E. Penalty. Violation of any of the provisions of Subsections B through D of
this section shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $100 nor more
than $500. A separate and distinct offense is deemed committed each
day such violation continues. [Ord. No. 1989-39]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years enrolled in
a public, private, or parochial school within the corporate limits of the
City of Bloomington, Illinois, to absent himself or herself from
attendance at school, during such period when school is in session,
without parental permission or valid excuse. [Ord. No. 1991-72]
B. A valid cause for absence from school shall include illness, death in the
immediate family, other family emergency, or other causes beyond the
§ 28-117 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-118
1:909
§ 28-119. [Ch. 28, Sec. 20] Improper use of undeveloped land.
control of the person so absenting himself or herself from school,
provided that parental permission for absence due to such cause is
obtained, in writing, from the parent and is submitted to the proper
school authorities within 24 hours after such absence, not counting
weekends. [Ord. No. 1991-72]
C. Parental permission, as required by this section, shall refer to and
include permission obtained from a parent, legal guardian, other adult
person standing in loco parentis and having custody and control over
such person under the age of 18 years. [Ord. No. 1991-72]
D. Each day that such person under 18 years of age absents himself or
herself from school attendance shall constitute a separate offense, and
shall be punishable as such. [Ord. No. 1991-72]
E. Persons violating this section shall be fined not less than $5 nor more
than $100 for each offense. [Ord. No. 1991-72]
A. No person shall perform any of the following acts on undeveloped
private or public property in the City of Bloomington:
(1) Drive, ride, park or occupy any motor vehicle, motorcycle, motor
driven cycle or bicycle as defined in the Illinois Vehicle Code,
except motor vehicles, motorcycles, motor driven cycles or bicycles
owned or used by persons lawfully working on the property during
the time of such work; or
(2) Dump or deposit garbage, refuse or debris as defined in
Bloomington City Code Chapter 21; or
(3) Possess in open containers or consume any alcoholic beverage; or
(4) Start or maintain any fires; or
(5) Pollute or dump any substance or swim in any body of water
thereon, except as authorized by law or by Ordinance. [Ord. No.
1985-104]
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meaning assigned to them therein:
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, corporation, trust, estate,
association or entity of any kind or description.[Ord. No. 1985-104]
UNDEVELOPED PRIVATE OR PUBLIC PROPERTY — Any property in
the City of Bloomington which is owned by any person or public body
which:
Contains no buildings or structures, including such areas in or near
creeks, drainage ways or detention basins, unless the property is
used as a park or golf course; or
(1)
§ 28-118 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 28-119
1:910
§ 28-120. [Ch. 28, Sec. 21.1 through Ch. 28, Sec. 21.10] Late-night
retail establishments.
Contains buildings or structures, over 50% of which are abandoned
or uncompleted; or
(2)
(3) Is devoted to no use other than agriculture.
C. Affirmative defense. It shall be an affirmative defense to a charge of
improper use of undeveloped property that:
(1) The person charged is the owner of the property or is a member of
the immediate family of the owner; or
(2) The person charged has the prior written consent of the owner of
such property to commit the actions complained of. [Ord. No.
1985-104]
D. Penalty. Any person convicted of improper use of undeveloped property
shall be fined not less than $10 nor more than $100 for the first offense;
not less than $25 nor more than $500 for subsequent offenses. [Ord.
No. 1985-104]
A. Definitions. The following definitions shall apply to this section of this
chapter:
CONVENIENCE STORES — Retail establishments, excluding
restaurants, selling any combination of food, beverages, sundries,
vehicle supplies, gasoline, ethanol and diesel fuels, in which payment
for such sales is made in a building of an area not exceeding 4,800
square feet.
DROP SAFE — A locked receptacle made of iron, steel, or other
material strong enough to prohibit access by force, of a design which
permits deposits of coin or currency into such receptacle but prohibits
removal of coin or currency from such receptacle except through the
use of two separate key patterns.
GAS STATIONS — Any business establishment which sells gasoline,
ethanol or diesel fuels at retail to the public, in which payment for such
sales is made in a building of an area not exceeding 4,800 square feet.
MONEY MACHINE — A machine made of iron, steel, or other material
strong enough to prohibit access by force in which United States coin
or currency is contained, of a design which permits disbursement of
coin or currency from the machine in designated maximum amounts
and which will not dispense any additional amounts until the expiration
of a designated length of time.
PACKAGE LIQUOR STORES — Any establishment holding a Class PA or
PB liquor license issued by the City of Bloomington, but excluding all
establishments which, in addition to a PA or PB license, are licensed
by the City of Bloomington to sell alcoholic liquor of any type for
consumption on the premises, and further excluding all establishments
§ 28-119 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-120
1:911
which have a PA or PB license from the City of Bloomington when the
business holding such license is contained in business premises of an
area greater than 4,800 square feet.
RESTAURANT — Any business establishment serving food to customers
for consumption on the premises in which the seating area available to
customers is greater than 3,000 square feet.[Ord. No. 1992-49]
B. Compliance with security requirements for certain late-night retail
establishments. It shall be unlawful for the owner or owners of any
convenient store, gas station, or package liquor store which is open to
the public at any time between the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. to
fail to comply with this section. [Ord. No. 1992-49]
C. Sign required - safe on premises. Businesses listed in Subsection B of
this section shall have a sign posted in a conspicuous place visible to
persons entering the premises stating that there is a safe on the
premises and that the on-duty employees do not have access to it. [Ord.
No. 1992-49]
D. Sign required - contents of cash register. Establishments listed in
Subsection B of this section shall have a sign posted in a conspicuous
place visible to persons entering the premises stating that the cash
register has less than $50 in it. [Ord. No. 1992-49]
E. Signs or displays in windows prohibited. Establishments listed in
Subsection B of this section shall not have signs or displays placed on or
around a window in such a manner as to obstruct the view from the
street and/or parking lot of the area of the store in which the cash
registers and clerks operating the cash registers are located. [Ord. No.
1992-49]
F. Lighting requirements for parking lots and public entrances/exits.
Parking lots and public entrances and exits of establishments listed in
Subsection B of this section shall be illuminated to insure safety of
employees and late night customers. A parking lot which is illuminated
to a minimum of one footcandle as measured at the surface of the
parking lot shall be deemed to comply with this section. Public
entrances and exits which are illuminated to a minimum of five
footcandles within 10 feet of such entrances and exits shall be deemed
to comply with this section. [Ord. No. 1992-49]
G. Drop safe or money machine required. Establishments listed in
Subsection B of this section shall have a drop safe or money machine on
the premises. If a drop safe is used, the safe must be secured to the
floor, installed in the floor, or weigh at least 500 pounds. [Ord. No.
1992-49]
H. Alarm system required. All establishments listed in Subsection B of this
section shall install an alarm system of a design which shall be
monitored by an alarm company which will notify the Bloomington
§ 28-120 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 28-120
1:912
§ 28-121. [Ch. 28, Sec. 22] Duty of operators of establishments.
It shall be unlawful for any operator of an establishment or his agents or
employees knowingly to permit any person under the age of 18 to remain
upon the premises of said establishment between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 6:00 a.m. of the following day, official City time, except that on Fridays
and Saturdays the hours shall be from 12:00 midnight to 6:00 a.m.
§ 28-122. [Ch. 28, Sec. 23] Profane or obscene language - penalty.
Whoever shall use any profane or obscene language in any place in said
City loud enough to be overheard by other persons or shall be guilty of any
disorderly conduct or behavior shall be subject in either case to a fine of not
less than $3 nor more than $50.
§ 28-123. [Ch. 28, Sec. 24] Indecent writing, etc. - penalty.
Whoever shall in any public place or place open to public view within said
City write, draw, cut, make or exhibit any lewd or indecent word, sentence,
design or figure shall be subject to a fine of not less than $5 nor more than
$50.
§ 28-124. [Ch. 28, Sec. 25] Indecent article - penalty.
Whoever shall keep or have in his possession within the said City any of the
obscene or indecent articles or things mentioned in the preceding section,
Police Department that a situation exists at the establishment which
requires immediate police assistance. [Ord. No. 1992-49]
I. Electronic surveillance required. All establishments listed in Subsection
B of this section shall install an electronic surveillance system
consisting of either a closed circuit television camera or a camera
which takes a series of still pictures whenever the cash register drawer
is opened, which shall be kept in working order at all times and which
shall record the activities taking place within an area sufficient to show
each cash register, the employee working such cash register, and
persons on the customer side of each cash register. [Ord. No.
1992-49]
J. Exceptions. Establishments listed in Subsection B of this section shall
be exempt from the requirements of Subsections H and I of this section
if such establishments require employees to work inside a secured
bulletproof enclosure which renders the employee inaccessible to
persons outside the enclosure. [Ord. No. 1992-49]
K. Penalties. This section is regulatory in nature and does not require
proof of an intent on the part of the owner to violate said section.
Persons violating this section shall be fined $100 per day for each day
the violation of such section continues. Violation of each section shall
constitute a separate offense. [Ord. No. 1992-49]
§ 28-120 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-124
1:913
with or without intent to sell or dispose of the same, shall be fined not less
than $5 nor more than $50.
§ 28-125. [Ch. 28, Sec. 26] Indecent exhibition of animal - penalty.
No person in said City shall indecently exhibit any horse, jack or other male
animal or let any horse or jack to any mare or jenny or bull to any cow unless
in some enclosed place and entirely out of the public view; and any person
violating this section shall forfeit any pay not less than $10 nor more than
$100.
§ 28-126. [Ch. 28, Sec. 27] Immoral publications - penalty.
Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into said City for
the purpose of sale or exhibition or shall keep, sell, offer or expose for
sale any obscene, immoral or indecent publication, book, pamphlet, paper,
print, picture, illustration, model, cast, instrument or article of indecent or
immoral use, or shall advertise the same for sale or exhibition shall be fined
not less than $10 nor more than $200 for each offense.
§ 28-127. [Ch. 28, Sec. 28] Sleeping in public place - penalty.
Whoever shall be found sleeping in or upon any street, avenue, alley or
other public place in said City, or in or upon any private lot or premises
without the consent of the owner or occupant of such lot or premises shall
be fined not less than $3 nor more than $25 for each offense.
§ 28-128. [Ch. 28, Sec. 29] Indecent exposure - penalty.
Whoever shall make any indecent exposure of his or her person or shall
appear in any public place or in any place exposed to public view in a dress
not belonging to his or her sex or in an indecent or lewd dress or in a state
of nudity or shall be guilty of any other immoral, indecent or lewd act shall
be fined not less than $100 nor more than $500 for each offense.
§ 28-129. [Ch. 28, Sec. 30] Indecent play - penalty.
Whoever shall exhibit or perform, or assist in exhibiting or performing in
said City any obscene, indecent or lewd play or misrepresentation or shall
knowingly permit the same to be exhibited or performed in any building or
hall owned or controlled by him shall in each case be subject to a fine of not
less than $10 nor more than $200.
§ 28-130. [Ch. 28, Sec. 31] Dog fight, etc. - penalty.
Any person who shall within said City keep or use or be in any way
connected with the management, either as an employee or in any other
capacity, of any place kept or used for the fighting or baiting of any dog,
cock or other animal, or who shall permit such place to be kept or used on
premises owned, rented or controlled by him or who shall frequent or be
§ 28-124 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 28-130
1:914
found therein for the purpose of witnessing such fighting or baiting shall be
fined not less than $10 nor more than $100.
§ 28-131. [Ch. 28, Sec. 32] Cruelty to animals - penalty.
Whoever shall be guilty of cruelty to any animal in any of the ways
mentioned in this section shall be fined not less than $3 nor more than $100
for each offense.
§ 28-132. [Ch. 28, Sec. 33] Urination and defecation prohibited in
certain locations - penalty.
It is illegal for any person to urinate or defecate on any public property
including but not limited to any public park, street, parkway, sidewalk, the
floor of any public building or on the floor of any building where the public
gathers or has access or in any other place where such act can be observed
by any member of the public, except in those rest rooms and into those rest
room fixtures that are intended to be used for these purposes.
§ 28-133. [Ch. 28, Sec. 34] Inducing to bet - penalty.
It shall be unlawful for any person in said City to perform or play any
tricks or sleight of hand, or anything of like nature with cards, dice, balls,
thimbles, figures, numbers, characters, or with any instrument, apparatus
or thing, where persons are induced to bet, loan, deposit or stake money
or other property upon the result of such tricks, or the turning or placing
of any such instrument or apparatus or of any figures, letter, number or
character attached to or played upon any such instrument or apparatus or
by any person; and any person convicted under this section shall forfeit and
pay not only less than $5 nor more than $100 for each offense.
§ 28-134. [Ch. 28, Sec. 35] Purchase - chance included - penalty.
Each and every sale or purchase wherein any part of the articles or things
received or to be received, either as to quantity or value, shall in any
manner depend upon any chance or hazard, whether by means of checks,
cards, envelopes, numbers, dice or by any means whatever, is hereby
declared to be gambling within the meaning of the provisions hereof, and
as such to be unlawful. Any person so selling or disposing of any article or
thing of value within said City shall be liable to a fine of not less than $5 nor
more than $100 for each offense.
A. First. By carefully beating, torturing, tormenting, mutilating or cruelly
killing any animal or causing or knowingly allowing the same to be
done.
B. Second. By failing to provide any animal in his charge or custody as
owner or otherwise with proper and necessary food, drink or shelter.
C. Third. By abandoning or turning out to die any old, maimed, infirm, sick
or disabled animal.
§ 28-130 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-135
1:915
§ 28-135. [Ch. 28, Sec. 36] Keeping house of ill-fame - penalty.
Whoever shall keep or maintain directly or indirectly any bawdy or
disorderly house, house of ill-fame or of assignation or place for the practice
of fornication or adultery shall be fined not less than $100 for each offense
and be subject to a like further fine for each day after the first conviction
that such house shall be continued or maintained.
§ 28-136. [Ch. 28, Sec. 37] Leasing premises for immoral purposes -
penalty.
Whoever within said City shall lease, let or permit any building or premises
owned by him or under his control to be used in whole or in part as a house
of ill-fame or house of assignation or place for the practice of fornication
or adultery or whoever shall lease any building or premises for a lawful
purpose that may afterwards with his knowledge be converted in whole or
in part into the immoral uses and purposes above set forth in this section
and who shall not cause the same to be immediately vacated upon gaining
knowledge thereof shall on conviction be subject to a fine of not less than
$25 nor more than $200 for each offense, and to a further like fine for each
day after the first conviction that he shall continue to violate this section.
§ 28-137. [Ch. 28, Sec. 38] Inmate of house of ill-fame - penalty.
Whoever shall be an inmate or occupant of, or shall frequent or be found in
any bawdy house; house of ill-fame, or of assignation or place used for the
practice of fornication or adultery, within said City, shall be fined not more
than $100 for each offense.
§ 28-138. [Ch. 28, Sec. 39] Enticing to enter house of ill-fame -
penalty.
Whoever shall within said City entice, influence or persuade any person
to enter or frequent any bawdy house, house of ill-fame or of assignation
or place used for the practice of fornication or adultery, or whoever shall
induce or persuade any minor to enter or frequent or shall allow or permit
any minor to enter or remain in any such house or place shall be subject to
a fine of not more than $100 for each offense.
§ 28-139. [Ch. 28, Sec. 40] Same - directing and transporting
persons to.
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly direct, take, transport, or
offer to direct, take or transport any person for immoral purposes to any
other person or to assist any person by any means to seek or to find any
prostitute or other person engaged in immoral practices or any brothel,
bawdy house or any other place of ill-fame.
§ 28-135 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 28-140
1:916
§ 28-140. [Ch. 28, Sec. 41] Same - declared a nuisance.
Every house of ill-fame or house of assignation where men and women
resort for the purpose of fornication or prostitution is hereby declared to be
a nuisance.
§ 28-141. [Ch. 28, Sec. 42] Evidence - general reputation
admissible.
In any action or suit arising under either of the last four preceding Sections
of this article, evidence of the general reputation of such place, or the
inmates thereof and of those resorting thereto shall be admissible for the
purpose of proving said place to be a house of ill-fame, of assignation, or
that it is used for the purpose of fornication or adultery, and such evidence
of the general reputation thereof shall be sufficient to make out a prima
facie case.
§ 28-142. [Ch. 28, Sec. 43] Deformed, etc., person - exposure of -
penalty.
Any person who is diseased, maimed, mutilated, or in any way deformed so
as to be unsightly or disgusting object or an improper person to be allowed
in or upon the streets, highways, thoroughfares or public places in this City
shall not therein or thereon expose himself to public view for gain under a
penalty of $1 for each offense.
§ 28-143. [Ch. 28, Sec. 45] Spitting - prohibited on sidewalks, etc. -
penalty.
§ 28-144. [Ch. 28, Sec. 46] Opium smoking - place for prohibited -
penalty.
No person shall keep or maintain or frequent or become an inmate of, or in
any way contribute to the support of any place, house or room where opium
A. No person shall spit or expectorate upon the floor of, nor upon or
against the floor of any public building or any approach or entrance
thereto; nor upon, against, or in any bus, cab or other vehicle when in
use for the carrying of passengers; nor upon or against any public walk
or public way or private walk or private way or against any public walk
or public way or private walk or private way for foot passengers; nor
upon or against the floor of any other part of any church, school house,
passenger depot, public hall, court house or court room; nor upon or
against the floor or other part of any store, shop, office, dwelling,
tenement, or other private room or dwelling or building against the
consent of the owner, agent, or occupant thereof; nor in or about the
doorway, stairway or approach to any public or private place.
B. Any person found guilty of violating any of the terms of this section shall
be fined not less than $1 and not more than $2 for the first offense, and
not less than $3 nor more than $200 for each succeeding offense.
§ 28-140 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-144
1:917
is smoked or where persons assemble for the purpose of smoking opium or
inhaling the fumes thereof, under a penalty of not less than $5 nor more
than $50 for each offense.
§ 28-145. [Ch. 28, Sec. 48] Turning hose on persons or property -
penalty.
Whoever shall willfully turn a stream of water from any hose or hydrant
upon any person or upon any private premises, not being the occupant
thereof, shall be liable to a fine of not less than $3 nor more than $20.
§ 28-146. [Ch. 28, Sec. 50] Prowling.
§ 28-147. [Ch. 28, Sec. 51] Dangerous animal in street - penalty.
No person shall permit any bear or other dangerous animal to run at large
or shall lead any such animal with chain, rope or other appliance, whether
such animal be muzzled or unmuzzled, in any street, avenue, lane, highway
or public place under a penalty of not less than $10 for each offense.
§ 28-148. [Ch. 28, Sec. 52] Air gun, etc. - discharge of - penalty.
No person shall fire, discharge, set off, or use within the limits of the City
any air gun, "bean shooter" or any other instrument or machine from which
a missile is discharged or hurled, under a penalty of not less than $5 for
each offense. Provided, however, that the above section shall not apply to
supervised target ranges or shooting galleries located on either public or
private grounds or premises under circumstances when such instruments
A. For purposes in this section, prowling means:
(1) Engaging in any conduct in a stealthy or furtive manner, or
(2) Wandering or strolling about from place to place without apparent
lawful purpose or aim.
B. It is unlawful and an offense against the City for any person to prowl in
a place, at a time or in a manner not usual for law abiding individuals
under circumstances which would cause an ordinary, reasonable person
to have an immediate concern for the safety of persons or the security
of property in the vicinity and where such person, upon request by a
police officer, refuses to identify himself and the state the reason for his
presence.
C. It is unlawful and an offense for a person who is prowling in the manner
described in Subsection B hereof to refuse to leave the vicinity after
being requested to do so by a police officer where, although such
person has identified himself and stated the reason for his presence as
required in Subsection B hereof, an ordinary, reasonable person would
continue to have an immediate concern for the safety of person or the
security of property in the vicinity, if such person were allowed to
continue prowling in such vicinity. [Ord. No. 1973-2]
§ 28-144 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 28-148
1:918
can be fired, discharged or operated in such a manner as not to endanger
persons or property, and also, in such manner as to prevent the projectile
from traversing any grounds or space outside the limits of such gallery,
grounds or residence.
§ 28-149. [Ch. 28, Sec. 53] Injury to property - penalty.
Whoever shall willfully, maliciously, or negligently break, deface, injure or
destroy any property of the State, County or City, or any private property
shall be subject to a fine of not less than $5 nor exceeding $100.
§ 28-150. [Ch. 28, Sec. 54] Trespass - injury to tree - penalty.
Any person who shall within said City cut, injure, remove, or destroy any
fruit, ornamental or shade tree, or the boxing around the same or any fence,
railing, gate, post, or sign upon any public ground, sidewalk or private
premises; or who shall enter any private premises against the consent of the
owner or occupant thereof; or shall trespass upon any private premises or
public grounds or injure, take away or destroy any tree, shrub, fruit, flower,
plant, vegetable or other thing which may be therein for ornament or utility
shall be fined not less than $5 not more than $25 for each offense.
§ 28-151. [Ch. 28, Sec. 55] Casting of missiles - injuring or defacing
property - penalty.
No person shall purposely or heedlessly cast or throw any stone, brick, or
other missile from or into any street or other public place or at, against, or
into any building, shade tree, or other property or shall climb upon or walk
upon the top or capping of any fence or railing, or climb into any shade or
ornamental tree upon any sidewalk or elsewhere without the consent of the
owner or occupant thereof or shall in any wise injure or deface any building,
fence, gate, or shade tree or shall meddle with or injure any well, cistern,
hydrant, or pump, under a penalty in each case of not less than $2 nor more
than $10.
§ 28-152. [Ch. 28, Sec. 57] Injury to street lamp, telegraph,
telephone and electric light apparatus, etc. - penalty.
Any person who shall willfully, maliciously, or negligently break, deface,
injure, or destroy any lamp, telegraph, telephone, electric light, globes,
insulator or other appliance or fixture connected therewith, within the City,
shall be subject to a penalty of not less than $5 nor more than $50 for each
offense and shall also be liable for the costs and expenses of repairing the
injuries committed.
§ 28-153. [Ch. 28, Sec. 58] Service lid or cup - injury to - penalty.
Whoever shall willfully or maliciously break, deface, injure or carry away
any cup or service lid placed upon any of the service boxes of any gas or
light company or by the Utilities Department within the City shall forfeit and
pay a fine of not less than $3 nor more than $10.
§ 28-148 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-154
1:919
§ 28-154. [Ch. 28, Sec. 59] Meters - tampering with - penalty.
Whoever shall unlawfully tamper with, alter or change any public or private
gas pipe, water pipe, gas meter, electric meter, water meter, or other meter,
or register thereof shall be subject to a penalty of not less than $10 nor
more than $100 for each offense.
§ 28-155. [Ch. 28, Sec. 60] Sod - digging of - penalty.
No person shall dig, cut or remove any sod or earth from any premises not
his own without the consent of the owner or person in control thereof, under
a penalty of not less than $5 nor more than $50 for each offense.
§ 28-156. [Ch. 28, Sec. 61] Grass plot - trespassing upon - penalty.
Whoever shall willfully, negligently or heedlessly walk upon or across or
drive any vehicle upon or across any lawn, grass plot or flower bed in or
upon any of the streets, avenues, parks or public places of the City; or who
shall walk upon or across or drive any vehicle upon or across any private
lawn, grass plot or flower bed without the consent of the owner or occupant
thereof shall be subject to a fine of not less than $5 nor more than $50.
§ 28-157. [Ch. 28, Sec. 62] Vagabonds.
All persons who are idle and dissolute or who go about begging; all persons
who use any shell game, sleight of hand or juggling trick or other unlawful
game to cheat, defraud or unlawfully obtain money or other valuable thing;
pilferers; confidence men; common drunkards; common nightwalkers;
persons lewd, wanton or lascivious in speech or behavior; common
brawlers; persons who are habitually neglectful of their employment or
their calling and not to lawfully provide for themselves or for the support
of their families; all persons who are idle or dissolute and who neglect
all lawful business and who habitually misspend their time by frequenting
houses of ill-fame gaming houses or tippling shops; all persons lodging in or
found in the night time in sheds, barns or unoccupied buildings or lodging
in the open air and not giving a good account of themselves; all persons
who are known to be thieves, burglars or pickpockets, whether by their own
confession or otherwise or by having been convicted of larceny, burglary, or
other crime against the laws of the State, punishable by imprisonment in
the State prison, or in a house of correction of any City and having no lawful
means of support or habitually found prowling around any railroad depot,
banking institution, broker's office, place of public amusement, auction
room, store, shop or crowded public way or at any public gathering or
assembly or lounging about any courtroom, private dwelling houses or
outhouses or are found in any house of ill-fame, gambling house or tavern
shall be deemed to be and they are declared to be vagabonds.
§ 28-154 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 28-158
1:920
§ 28-158. [Ch. 28, Sec. 63] Bringing or causing pauper to be
brought into City - penalty.
Whoever shall knowingly send, bring or leave any pauper in the City not
belonging thereto, or shall aid or abet the same, or shall supply with means
or assist any such pauper or person likely to become a pauper to come into
or remain in the City, in order that he or she may become a charge upon the
public, shall be subject to a fine of not less than $10 nor more than $100 in
each case.
§ 28-159. [Ch. 28, Sec. 64] Trespassing upon garden property or
orchards.
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter an enclosed or unenclosed
vegetable garden or any orchard without the consent of the owner, tenant,
or his or her agent and there cut down, injure, damage, destroy, eat or
carry away any portion of said garden, including any growing thing, crop,
tree, timber, seed, grass, soil, fertilizer, water supply, tool, implement, fence
or other protective device or any other thing useful for the development,
cultivation, maintenance or use of the aforesaid gardens or orchards.
§ 28-160. [Ch. 28, Sec. 65] Disorderly houses - generally.
No person owning or in possession, charge or control of any building or
premises shall use the same or permit the use of the same or rent the same
to be used for any business or employment or for any purpose of pleasure
or recreation if such use shall, from its boisterous nature, disturb or destroy
the peace of the neighborhood in which such building or premises are
situated, or be dangerous or detrimental to health.
§ 28-161. [Ch. 28, Sec. 66] Same - declared a nuisance.
Every common, ill-governed or disorderly house, room or other premises,
kept for the encouragement of idleness, gaming, drinking, fornication, or
other misbehavior is hereby declared to be a public nuisance; and the
keeper and all persons connected with the maintenance thereof and all
persons patronizing or frequenting the same shall be punished as provided
in this Code.
§ 28-162. [Ch. 28, Sec. 67] Fortune telling.
That whoever shall obtain money or property from another by holding
himself out as skilled in fortune telling or by means of card reading,
palmistry, clairvoyance, astrology, seer ship, spirit medium ship or any
crafty science or by any other devices or practices whereby money is
obtained from the general public on the pretense of the exercise of occult or
psychic powers or shall obtain money or property from another by holding
himself out as skilled in the practice of phrenology shall for each offense
be fined in a sum not exceeding $200; provided that the provisions of
this section shall not be construed to include, prohibit or interfere with
the exercise of the spiritual functions of offices of any priest, minister
§ 28-158 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-162
1:921
or accredited representative of any religion and provided further the
provisions of this section shall not be construed to include or refer to
the practice of the belief known as spiritualism or any attempted
communication with the spirit world by or through so-called mediums.
§ 28-163. [Ch. 28, Sec. 68] Advertising fortune telling.
That whoever knowingly prints, publishes, distributes or circulates, or
knowingly causes to be printed, published, circulated or advertised in any
newspaper, periodical, magazine or other publication or publications or by
display signs, circulars, hand bills or any other means any advertisement
of any person's ability, skill or power in telling fortunes or revealing the
future or offering advice of any kind or nature by means of occult or psychic
powers, faculties or forces or of any person's ability, skill or power in the
practice of phrenology shall for each offense be fined in a sum not exceeding
$200.
§ 28-164. [Ch. 28, Sec. 69] Minors - selling, etc., weapons to
prohibited.
No person shall sell, give, loan, hire, barter, furnish or offer to sell, give,
loan, hire, barter or furnish to any minor within the City any gun, pistol,
revolver, fowling piece or toy firearm in which any explosive substance can
be used or any Bowie knife, dirk, dagger, switch blade knife or other deadly
weapon of a like character.
§ 28-165. [Ch. 28, Sec. 70] Contributing to the sexual delinquency
of a child.
A. Any person of the age of 14 years and upwards who performs or
submits to any of the following acts with any person under the age of 18
contributes to the sexual delinquency of a child:
(1) Any act of sexual intercourse; or
(2) Any act of deviate sexual conduct; or
(3) Any lewd fondling or touching of either the child or the person done
or submitted to with the intent to arouse or to satisfy the sexual
desires of either the child or the person or both; or
(4) Any lewd act done in the presence of the child with the intent to
arouse or to satisfy the sexual desires of either the person or the
child or both.
B. It shall not be a defense to contributing to the sexual delinquency of a
child that the accused reasonably believed the child to be of the age of
18 or upwards.
C. Penalty. A person convicted of contributing to the sexual delinquency of
a child shall be fined not to exceed $1,000.
§ 28-162 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 28-166
1:922
§ 28-166. [Ch. 28, Sec. 71] Indecent solicitation of a child.
§ 28-167. [Ch. 28, Sec. 72] Telephones.
§ 28-168. [Ch. 28, Sec. 73] Venereal diseases, etc. - selling or
distributing advertising matter for.
No person shall sell or offer to sell, give away or offer to give away,
distribute or have in his possession with intent to give away, sell, distribute
or post in or upon any street, sidewalk, park or public property of the City
any book, pamphlet, circular, handbill, advertisement or notice of any kind
purporting the treatment of, or treating of diseases known as, describing
or explaining genital organs, giving or purporting to give the nature and
remedies of diseases peculiar to females, uterine diseases or the nature of
causes of nervous debility, impotency, sterility or barrenness, gonorrhea,
gleet, stricture, syphilis, infection of the prostate gland or the remedies
therefor, or the cause or remedies for abortion or miscarriage or articles
or means of preventing conception or to give information from whom or to
whom such information or medicine may be obtained.
A. Any person of the age of 17 years and upwards who solicits a child
under the age of 13 to do any act, which if done would be an indecent
liberty with a child or an act of contributing to the sexual delinquency of
a child commits indecent solicitation of a child.
B. It shall not be a defense to indecent solicitation of a child that the
accused reasonably believed the child to be of the age of 13 years and
upwards.
C. Penalty. A person convicted of indecent solicitation of a child shall be
fined not to exceed $500.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to insert or attempt to assert into the
coin box or money receptacle of any telephone any slug, button or other
substance with the intention of obtaining telephone service without
paying therefor.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to manipulate or operate or to
attempt to manipulate or operate, in any manner whatsoever, any
telephone instrument or any mechanism or device commonly used
therewith, with the intention of obtaining telephone service without
paying therefor.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to insert or to attempt to insert into
the coin box or money receptacle or any telephone any slug, button,
wire, hook or other implements or substance with the intent to obtain
from any such coin or money receptacle a legal tender coin of the
United States.
§ 28-166 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-169
1:923
§ 28-169. [Ch. 28, Sec. 74] Concealing identity by hood, mask, etc.
Whoever with an evil or wicked purpose appears in any public place hooded,
robed or masked so as to conceal his identity shall be punished as provided
in this article.
§ 28-170. [Ch. 28, Sec. 75] Radio interference - operation of
equipment, etc., interfering with frequencies prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated in the
City any equipment, appliances, devices or apparatus which causes or may
cause interference on the radio or television frequencies now assigned by
the Federal Communications Commission or any person acting in its stead
or on its behalf or which may be assigned by the Federal Communication
Commission necessary in the performance of police work.
§ 28-171. [Ch. 28, Sec. 76] Same - same - exceptions.
X-ray pictures, examinations or treatments and diathermy treatments may
be made if the machine or apparatus used therefor is equipped to avoid any
unnecessary or reasonably preventable interference with assigned radio or
television frequencies necessary in the performance of police work and is
not negligently operated.
§ 28-172. [Ch. 28, Sec. 77] Weeds, definitions, heights - nuisance.
§ 28-173. [Ch. 28, Sec. 78] Discarded refrigerators, etc.
Whoever abandons or discards in any place accessible to children any
refrigerator, icebox or ice chest of a capacity of 1 1/2 cubic feet or more,
which has an attached lid or door which may be opened or fastened shut
A. That any owner, lessee, occupant or any agent, servant, representative
or employee of any such owner, lessee or occupant having control of any
lot of ground or any part of any lot, who shall allow or maintain on any
such lot any growth of weeds to a height of over one foot, shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor, and the allowance or maintenance of any such weeds
hereby is prohibited.
B. The words "weeds" as used herein shall be held to include all rank
vegetable growth which exhales unpleasant and noxious odors and also
high and rank vegetable growth that may conceal filthy deposits.
C. Whoever shall suffer or permit cockleburs, thistles, burdock, wild
lettuce or other noxious weeds or plant to grow or be in or upon any
premises in the City of Bloomington owned or controlled by him or her
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
D. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
section shall be fined in a sum of not less than $5 nor more than $200.
Each day that any provision of this Ordinance is violated shall constitute
a separate and distinct offense.
§ 28-169 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 28-173
1:924
by means of an attached latch or who, being the owner, lessee or manager
of such place, knowingly permit such abandoned or discarded refrigerator,
icebox or ice chest to remain there in such condition shall be fined not more
than $50 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both.
§ 28-174. [Ch. 28, Sec. 79] Failure to pay for services - admission.
It shall be unlawful for any person to accept service in a restaurant or
public eating place or service from a taxicab or other public vehicle, without
paying therefor, or to enter or attempt to enter any place of public
amusement for admission to which an entrance fee is charged without
paying such fee.
§ 28-175. [Ch. 28, Sec. 80] Penalty.
Every violation of any section or provision of this article for which no
penalty is provided herein shall be punished by a fine of not less than $5
and not more than $200.
§ 28-176. [Ch. 28, Sec. 90] Sexual activity for compensation.
§ 28-177. [Ch. 28, Sec. 91] Accountability of business.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person in exchange for money or other
valuable consideration to perform or offer or agree to perform any of
the following:
(1) Permit the touching of his or her genitals, pubic region, buttock or
breast; or
(2) Masturbate himself or herself or another person. [Ord. No.
1984-41]
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to pay or offer to pay another person
money or other valuable consideration to:
(1) Submit to the touching of his or her genitals, pubic region, buttock
or breast; or
(2) Masturbate himself or herself or another person. [Ord. No.
1984-41]
C. Penalty. Any person convicted of violating this section shall be fined not
less than $100 nor more than $500 for the first offense; and not less
than $500 nor more than $1,000 for each subsequent offense. [Ord.
No. 1984-41]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, corporation,
association or entity of any kind (hereafter referred to as the "entity") to
permit or suffer any agent of or any person employed by the entity or
any lessee of the entity or the operator of any business of the entity or
any other type of contracting person or organization, including any
§ 28-173 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-177
1:925
independent contractor, with the entity or any employee or agent of
the lessee, operator or contracting person or organization to engage
in any activity described in and prohibited by Chapter 28, § 28-176 of
the Bloomington City Code and/or Chapter 38 (Illinois Criminal Code),
Sections 11-14, 11-15.1, 11-16, 11-17, 11-19, 11-19.1 or 11-19.2 of
the Illinois Revised Statutes,58 as hereafter amended, on the entity's
premises or on premises managed or in any manner controlled by
the entity and/or by any lessee, operator or contracting person or
organization with the entity (all of said premises to be referred to
hereafter as the "subject premises"). After an entity has been notified
that an agent, employee, lessee, the operator of any type of business or
any other type of contracting person or organization or any employee
or agent of the lessee, operator or contracting person or organization
has engaged in any conduct on the subject premises prohibited by
this subsection (a), the entity shall be absolutely liable for any such
subsequent activity or any other type of activity which violates any of
the above indicated Sections on the subject premises by the same or
any other employee or agent of the entity or by the lessee, operator of
any business or any other type of contracting person or organization,
including an independent contractor, or the same or any other
employee or agent of the lessee, operator or contracting person or
organization.
It shall be unlawful for any lessee of any entity or the operator of
any business of any entity or any other type of contracting person
or organization, including an independent contractor, with any entity
or suffer or permit any employee or agent of the lessee, operator or
contracting person or organization to engage in any activity described
in and prohibited by Chapter 28, § 28-176, of the Bloomington City
Code and/or Chapter 38 (Illinois Criminal Code), Sections 11-14, 11-15,
11-15.1, 11-16, 11-17, 11-19, 11-19.1 or 11-19.2 of the Illinois Revised
Statutes on the subject premises. After a lessee, the operator of any
type of business or any other type of contracting person or organization
has been notified that any employee or agent of the lessee, contractor
or contracting person or organization has engaged in any conduct
on the subject premises prohibited by this Subsection A, the lessee,
operator or contracting person or organization shall be absolutely liable
for any such subsequent activity or any other type of activity which
violates any of the above indicated Sections on the subject premises
by the same or any other employee or agent of the lessee, operator of
any business or any other type of contracting person or organization,
including any independent contractor, any of whom may be a person,
firm, partnership, corporation, association or entity of any kind.
Any such act shall be deemed committed on the subject premises if:
(1) It was actually performed on the subject premises; or
58.Editor's Note: See now the Illinois Criminal Code of 2012, 720 ILCS 5/11-14 et seq.
§ 28-177 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 28-177
1:926
§ 28-178. [Ch. 28, Sec. 92] Adoption of Smoke Free Illinois Act.
[Ord. No. 2016-80]
The Smoke Free Illinois Act,59 as amended from time to time, is hereby
adopted by reference to be applied within the corporate limits of the City
of Bloomington. All references to a state employee or official within the Act
may be to a corresponding City employee or official where such reference
is applicable or necessary. Any provision of the Act may be cited by placing
"§ 28-178" before the applicable Smoke Free Illinois Act.
§ 28-179. [Ch. 28, Sec. 93] Prohibition on smoking and e-cigarettes
within City buildings. [Ord. No. 2019-24]
In addition to the prohibitions within the Smoke Free Illinois Act which
prohibits smoking in public buildings, smoking is prohibited in any building
owned or operated by the City of Bloomington, as well as at Miller Park
Zoo and any and all swimming pool facilities operated by the City. For
purposes of this section, the definitions of "smoking" and "smoke" within the
Smoke Free Illinois Act shall be expanded to include inhaling or exhaling
from, turning on, powering, ingesting or utilizing in any form any device
intended for the atomization, charring, burning, piezoelectronic ignition of
(2) It was agreed to on management premises or on the subject
premises; or
(3) Arrangements were made on the subject premises for any person
identified in this ordinance to meet a person at another location
and such acts were agreed to and/or performed at such other
location. [Ord. No. 1985-18]
B. For the purposes of this section a person shall be deemed to be an
employee or agent if he or she performs any work or activity on the
subject premises with the active or passive permission of the owner,
lessee, operator of any business on the premises, or of any other type of
contracting person or organization, including an independent
contractor, and receives directly or indirectly from any person or
organization whatsoever compensation therefor in any form or in any
manner whatsoever. [Ord. No. 1985-18]
C. Penalty. Any person, corporation or entity of any kind convicted of
violating this section shall be fined not less than $500 nor more than
$1,000 for the first offense; and $1,000 up to the maximum permitted
by law for each subsequent offense. [Ord. No. 1985-18]
D. The provisions of this Ordinance are declared to be severable, and if
any part, provision, sentence, clause or other portion of this Ordinance
shall be held to be unconstitutional for any other reason by any court of
competent jurisdiction, said judgment shall not affect the validity or
enforceability of the remainder thereof. [Ord. No. 1985-18]
59.Editor's Note: See 410 ILCS 82/1 et seq.
§ 28-177 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-179
1:927
or ingestion of tobacco products or nicotine in any gaseous, smoke, aerosol,
vaporous or other similar form, including but not limited to the use of any
e-cigarette, personal vaporizer used with nicotine or tobacco derivatives,
electronic nicotine delivery system, e-puffer, cartomizer or other similar
device. This prohibition includes electronic cigarettes (e-cigs or ecigarettes),
personal vaporizers (PV) or electronic nicotine delivery systems
(ENDS) or any other device that simulates tobacco smoking by producing
an aerosol that resembles smoke.
§ 28-180. [Ch. 28, Sec. 94] Enforcement of smoking bans. [Ord. No.
2016-80]
The Police Department and City's Code Enforcement Officials are
empowered to adopt procedures for the issuance of citations and the
collection of civil penalties and costs for any violation of § 28-178 or 28-179.
§ 28-181. [Ch. 28, Sec. 95] Fines. [Ord. No. 2016-80]
For each violation of § 28-178 or 28-179, the fine shall be $100 for a first
offense and $250 for each subsequent offense, plus court costs and/or
administrative fees if applicable.
§ 28-182. through § 28-185. (Reserved) [Ord. No. 2016-80]
§ 28-186. [Ch. 28, Sec. 100] Graffiti; definition. [Ord. No. 1992-84]
Graffiti shall mean any drawing, inscription, writing, figure or mark made
upon a wall or other exposed surface, including but not limited to any house,
garage, rock, bridge, fence, gate, tree, monument, motor vehicle, sidewalk,
street, lamp post, street sign, underpass or retaining wall, whether publicly
or privately owned, with paint, chalk, dye, ink, pencil, wax or other similar
substance or by etching, scratching, cutting, burning or carving without the
express consent of the owner of said wall or other exposed surface.
§ 28-187. [Ch. 28, Sec. 101] Graffiti prohibited. [Ord. No. 1992-84]
It shall be unlawful for any person to place graffiti, as defined herein, upon
any publicly or privately owned wall or other exposed surface within the
City of Bloomington. There exists a rebuttal presumption that graffiti is
done without the express consent of the owner, if it is placed upon any wall
or exposed surface by someone other than the owner of said wall or surface.
§ 28-188. [Ch. 28, Sec. 102] Graffiti; violation penalty. [Ord. No.
1992-84]
Any person who is convicted of violating § 28-187 of this chapter shall be
punished by a fine of $500. Each wall or exposed surface marked by graffiti
shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 28-189. [Ch. 28, Sec. 103] Possession of cannabis prohibited.
§ 28-179 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 28-189
1:928
§ 28-190. [Ch. 28, Sec 103.1] Possession of drug paraphernalia
prohibited.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess 2.5 grams or less of any
substance containing cannabis. [Ord. No. 1994-3]
B. "Cannabis" includes marijuana, hashish and other substances which are
identified as including any parts of the plant Cannabis Sativa, whether
growing or not; the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of
such plant; and any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture,
or preparation of such plant, its seeds, or resin, including
tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other cannabinol derivatives,
including its naturally occurring or synthetically produced ingredients,
whether produced directly or indirectly by extraction, or independently
by means of chemical synthesis or by a combination of extraction and
chemical synthesis; but shall not include the mature stalks of such
plant, fiber produced from such stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds
of such plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative,
mixture, or preparation of such mature stalks (except the resin
extracted therefrom), fiber, oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of such
plant which is incapable of germination. [Ord. No. 1994-3]
C. Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be fined $250 for
each offense. [Ord. No. 1994-3]
A. No person shall knowingly possess any item of drug paraphernalia with
the intent to use it for the purpose of unlawfully ingesting inhaling or
otherwise introducing cannabis or a controlled substance into the
human body. [Ord. No. 2000-165]
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall include
and have the following meanings:
(1) Cannabis shall mean and include any substance defined as
cannabis in § 27-189B of Bloomington City Code Chapter 28.
(2) Controlled Substance shall mean and include any substance
defined as a controlled substance in the Illinois Controlled
Substances Act, 720 ILCS 570/201, et seq.
(3) Drug Paraphernalia shall mean and include any item defined as
drug paraphernalia in the Drug Paraphernalia Control Act, 720
ILCS 600/2(d). [Ord. No. 2000-165]
C. Intent. In determining intent under Subsection A, the trier of fact may
take into consideration the proximity of the cannabis or controlled
substance to drug paraphernalia or the presence of cannabis or a
controlled substance on the drug paraphernalia. [Ord. No. 2000-165]
D. Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be fined not less
than $250 for each offense. [Ord. No. 2000-165]
§ 28-189 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-190
1:929
§ 28-191. [Ch. 28, Sec. 104] Sanitation - dogs and cats.
§ 28-192. [Ch. 28, Sec. 105] Possession of tobacco by minors.
§ 28-193. [Ch. 28, Sec. 106] Narcotics-related loitering.
E. Forfeiture. Drug paraphernalia as defined herein, seized by police
pursuant to issuance of an ordinance violation citation of this section,
shall be forfeited to the City upon a conviction for violation of this
section, or upon payment of a minimum fine of $250 in settlement of
said violation without further order of the Court. [Ord. No. 2000-165]
A. It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in control of any dog or cat
to permit such animal to deposit dung on any public street, alley,
parkway or other public place, or on any premises other than those of
the owner or person in control of such animal, unless the owner or
person in control of such animal immediately collects and properly
disposes of the dung deposited by the animal. [Ord. No. 1995-5]
B. It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in control of any dog or cat
to deposit dung collected from such animal on any premises other than
those of the owner or person in control of such animal. [Ord. No.
1995-5]
C. Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be fined not less
than $25 for the first offense and not less than $50 for any subsequent
offense. [Ord. No. 1995-5]
A. No person under 18 years of age shall have in his or her possession any
cigar or cigarette or tobacco in any of its forms. The incidental and
temporary possession of tobacco by retail sales clerks or stock clerks in
the performance of their duties shall not be a violation of this section.
[Ord. No. 1997-101]
B. Any person who violates this section shall be fined not more than $50
for a first offense, and for a second or subsequent offense shall be fined
not to exceed $100. [Ord. No. 1997-101]
A. Whenever a police officer observes one or more persons engaged in
narcotics-related loitering in any public place designated for the
enforcement of this section under Subsection B, the police officer shall:
(1) Inform all such persons that they are engaged in loitering within an
area in which such loitering is prohibited;
(2) Order all such persons to disperse and remove themselves from
within sight and hearing of the place at which the order was issued;
and
(3) Inform those persons that they will be subject to arrest if they fail
to obey the order promptly or engage in further narcotics-related
§ 28-190 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 28-193
1:930
§ 28-194. [Ch. 28, Sec. 107] Noise.
loitering within sight or hearing of the place at which the order was
issued during the next three hours.
B. The Chief of Police shall by written directive designate areas of the City
in which enforcement of this section is necessary because the areas are
frequently associated with narcotics-related loitering. Prior to making a
determination under this subsection, the chief shall consult as he or she
deems appropriate with persons who are knowledgeable about the
effects of narcotics-related activity in areas in which the ordinance may
be enforced. Such persons may include, but need not be limited to,
members of the department of police with special training or
experience related to narcotics-related activity; other personnel of that
department with particular knowledge of narcotics-related activities in
the proposed designated area; elected and appointed officials of the
area; and community-based organizations which are familiar with the
area. The chief shall develop and implement procedures for the periodic
review and update of designations made under this subsection.
C. As used in this section:
(1) Narcotics-related loitering means remaining in any one place under
circumstances that would warrant a reasonable person to believe
that the purpose or effect of that behavior is to facilitate the
distribution of substances in violation of the Cannabis Control Act
or the Illinois Controlled Substances Act.
(2) Public place means the public way and any other location open to
the public, whether publicly or privately owned.
D. Any person who fails to obey promptly an order issued under
Subsection A, or who engages in further narcotics-related loitering
within sight or hearing of the place at which such an order was issued
during the three-hour period following the time the order was issued, is
subject to a fine of not less than $100 and not more than $500 for each
offense, or imprisonment for not more than six months for each offense,
or both. A second or subsequent offense shall be punishable by a
mandatory minimum sentence of not less than five days imprisonment.
[Ord. No. 2003-96]
A. Purpose. This section is enacted to protect, preserve, and promote the
health, safety, welfare, peace, and quiet of the residents of the City
through the reduction, control, and prevention of loud and raucous
sounds, or any noise that unreasonably disturbs, injures, or endangers
the comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of reasonable persons of
ordinary sensitivity. Nothing in this section shall be construed as
preventing the lawful exercise of the right to free speech protected by
the Constitutions of the United States and the State of Illinois. [Ord.
No. 2013-39]
§ 28-193 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-194
1:931
B. Definitions.
LOUD AND RAUCOUS NOISE — Any sound which because of its
volume level, duration and character, annoys, disturbs, injures or
endangers the comfort, health, peace or safety of reasonable persons
of ordinary sensibilities within the limits of the City. The term includes,
but is not limited to, the kinds of loud and raucous noise generated by
the activities enumerated in Subsection D, but not including activities
enumerated in Subsection F of this section.[Ord. No. 2013-39]
C. General prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to make,
continue, or cause to be made or continued or to allow to be made on
premises under the person's ownership or control any loud and raucous
noise. Prohibited acts may be established both or either by the
testimony of persons who have heard the noises and by recorded
decibel levels. [Ord. No. 2013-39]
D. Specific acts prohibited. The following acts, as illustrations, among
others, are declared to be loud and raucous in violation of this section.
This enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive. Specific acts
include:
(1) Sound reproducing devices, loudspeakers, amplifiers. The using,
operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any musical
instrument, machine or electronic device, radio receiving set,
phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other objects for the
producing or reproducing of sound in such a manner as to disturb
the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or any
time with louder volume than is necessary for the convenient
hearing of the person or persons who are in the room, chamber,
vehicle or outdoor area in which such machine or device is
operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto.
(2) Loading, unloading, opening boxes. The creation of loud and
raucous noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle
or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and
containers.
(3) Construction or repairing of buildings and public improvement.
The creation (including excavation), demolition, alteration or repair
of any structure or public improvement other than between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. until dark, Monday through Sunday, except in
cases of necessity in the interest of public health and/or safety, and
then only with a permit from the Public Works Director or his or her
designee, which permit shall be granted for a period not to exceed
three days or less while the necessity continues and which permit
may be renewed for periods of three days or less while the
necessity continues.
(4) Schools, courts, churches and hospitals. The creation of any loud
and raucous noise on any street adjacent to or across a real
property boundary of any school, institution of learning, church,
§ 28-194 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 28-194
1:932
court or hospital while the same is in use, which unreasonably
interferes with the workings of such institution, provided
conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating that the
same is a school, hospital, court or church.
(5) Blowers. The operation of any noise-creating blower, power fan, or
any internal combustion engine, other than between the hours of
7:00 a.m. until dark, the operation of which causes noise due to the
explosion of operating gases, fuels, or fluids, provided that the
noise is loud and raucous and can be heard across the property line
of the property from which it emanates. This subparagraph shall
not apply to snow blowers and other snow removal machinery nor
to landscaping operations conducted on golf courses.
(6) Yelling, shouting. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing,
so as to create loud and raucous noise, which as a result annoys or
disturbs the peace, quiet, comfort or repose of persons in the
surrounding area. [Ord. No. 2013-39]
E. Decibel levels. No person shall make, continue, or cause to be made or
continued or to allow to be made on premises under the person's
ownership or control any continuous, predictable or recurring source of
sound in such a manner as to create a sound pressure level, measured
on a sound level meter using the A-weighting network, at or within the
property limits of the receiving property which exceeds (70)dB(A). Any
person providing testimony on electronic measurements shall use
procedures for the measurement of sound that conform to the
standards and recommended practices established by the American
National Standards Institute. [Ord. No. 2013-39]
F. Exemptions. Sounds caused by the following are exempt from the
prohibitions set forth in this section:
(1) Repairs of utility structures, which are damaged, in disrepair, or
out of service and such condition pose a clear and immediate
danger to life, health, or significant loss of property.
(2) Sirens, whistles, or bells lawfully used by emergency vehicles, or
other alarm systems used in case of fire, collision, civil defense,
police activity, or imminent danger, and all sounds associated with
City responses to emergency events.
(3) Reasonable activities conducted on public playgrounds and public
or private school/university grounds, which are conducted in
accordance with the manner in which such spaces are generally
used, including, but not limited to, school/university athletic and
school/university entertainment events.
(4) Outdoor gatherings, public dances, shows, parades, festivals, and
other similar outdoor events, provided that a permit has been
obtained from the appropriate permitting authority.
§ 28-194 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-194
1:933
Chapter 29
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
(5) Any event that is sponsored by and directly controlled by the City
or its designee.
(6) Chiming of bells or other similar sounds produced by a religious
institution, school, or clock or bell tower.
(7) Sounds measured within any manufacturing district; excluding
sounds generated within any manufacturing district that are
measured outside the boundary of the manufacturing district.
[Ord. No. 2013-39]
G. Penalty. Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this
section shall be fined not less than $100 for the first offense and not less
than $250 for any subsequent offense. A separate and distinct offense is
deemed committed each day such violation continues. [Ord. No.
2013-39]
§ 28-194 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 28-194
1:934
ARTICLE I
Words And Phrases Defined
§ 29-101. [Ch. 29, Sec. 1] Definition of words and phrases.
The following words and phrases when used in this Ordinance shall for the
purpose of this chapter have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in
this article.
§ 29-102. [Ch. 29, Sec. 2] Vehicles, traffic, etc., defined.
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE — Vehicles of the Fire Department,
police vehicles and such ambulances and emergency vehicles of any
governmental department or public service corporation as are designated
or authorized by the Chief of Police.
BICYCLE — Every device propelled by human power upon which any person
may ride, having two or more tandem wheels either of which is over 20
inches in diameter.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — Every second division vehicle, designed,
equipped and used for carrying freight, goods, wares or merchandise and
registered as such.[Ord. No. 1986-157]
INOPERABLE VEHICLE — Any vehicle that is not in working order.
"Working order" shall mean the vehicle is equipped and contains those
parts in proper condition and adjustment necessary for its mechanical
operation such that it will start without assistance, can be driven forward
and backward and stop immediately upon applying the brakes and which
is also is equipped and contains such lamps, brakes, mirrors, windshields
and other equipment in proper conditions and adjustment as required by
Chapter 12 of the Illinois Vehicle Code et seq. as now or hereafter
amended.[Ord. No. 2008-77]
MOTOR VEHICLE — Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle
which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires
but not operated upon rails.
MOTORCYCLE — Every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the
rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact
with the ground, including motor scooters and motor bicycles but excluding
tractors.
OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD — Whenever certain hours are named herein,
they shall mean standard time or daylight savings time as may be in current
use in this City.
PARK — When prohibited means the standing of a vehicle, whether
occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while
actually engaged in loading or unloading.
RAILROAD — A carrier of persons or property upon cars, other than
streetcars, operated upon stationary rails.
§ 29-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-102
1:935
RAILROAD TRAIN — A steam engine, electric or other motor, with or
without cars couples thereto, operated upon rails, except street cars.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway.
STOP — When required means complete cessation of movement.
STOP, STOPPING or STANDING — When prohibited means any stopping or
standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a
police officer or traffic control sign or signal.
TRAFFIC — Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other
conveyances either singly or together while using any street for the
purposes of travel.
TRANSPORTATION NETWORK VEHICLE, or TNC VEHICLE — A vehicle
lawfully operating pursuant to Chapter 40, Article XII of this Code providing
transportation network company services as defined under Section 5 of the
Transportation Network Providers Act, 625 ILCS 57/1, et seq.[Ord. No.
2017-87]
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by
human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
§ 29-103. [Ch. 29, Sec. 3] Persons, etc., defined.
DRIVER — Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.
PEDESTRIAN — Any person afoot.
PERSON — Every natural person, firm copartnership, association or
corporation.
POLICE OFFICER — Every officer of the municipal Police Department or
any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrest for
violations of traffic regulations.
TRAFFIC DIVISION — The Traffic Division of the Police Department of this
City, or in the event a Traffic Division is not functioning, then said term
whenever used herein shall be deemed to refer to the Police Department of
this City.
§ 29-104. [Ch. 29, Sec. 4] Streets, etc., defined.
ALLEY — Those public or private thoroughfares less than 20 feet in width
and used primarily as the service access to abutting properties.
CONTROLLED - ACCESS HIGHWAY — Every highway, street or roadway,
otherwise known as freeways, in respect to which owners or occupants of
abutting property or lands and other persons have no legal right of access to
or from the same, except at such points only and in such manner as may be
determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over such highway,
street or roadway.
§ 29-102 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-104
1:936
CROSSWALK —
DISTRICTS OF THE CITY —
FREIGHT CURB LOADING ZONE — A space adjacent to a curb for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight or
passengers.
INTERSECTION —
That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the
highway measured from the curbs, or in the absence of curbs, from the
edges of the traversable roadway.
A.
Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly
indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the
surface.
B.
CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT — All streets and portions of streets
within the area described as follows: commencing at the southeast
corner of the intersection of Olive Street and Gridley Street; thence
north along the east line of Gridley Street to the north line of Douglas
Street; thence west on the north line of Douglas Street to the east line
of Prairie Street; thence north along the east line of Prairie Street to the
north line of Locust Street; thence west along the north line of Locust
Street to the west line of Roosevelt Avenue; thence south along the west
line of Roosevelt Avenue to the south line of Olive Street; thence east
along the south line of Olive Street to the point of beginning.
A.
OUTLYING BUSINESS DISTRICTS — The following areas are hereby
declared to be outlying business districts:
On West Washington Street from Howard Street to the GMO
Railroad.
(1)
(2) On East Oakland Avenue from McClun Street to Denver Street.
B.
RESIDENCE DISTRICT — All that portion of the City not included as
part of the central business district or outlying business districts.
C.
The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral
curblines or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways
of the two highways which join one another at or approximately at
right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different
highways joining at any other angle may come in conflict.
A.
Where a highway includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then
every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an
intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection. In
the event such intersecting highway also includes two roadways 30 feet
or more apart, then every crossing of two roadways of such highways
shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
B.
§ 29-104 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-104
1:937
LANED ROADWAY — A roadway which is divided into two or more clearly
marked lanes for vehicular traffic.
PARKWAY or PARKING — That portion of a street between the curblines or
lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property line; or in the event
that the lanes of any street fare divided by a strip of grass, asphalt or
other material not ordinarily intended for vehicular use, such area shall be
designated as the parkway.
PASSENGER CURB LOADING ZONE — A place adjacent to a curb reserved
for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of
passengers.
PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY — Every way or place in private ownership
and used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or
implied permission from the owner but not other persons.
ROADWAY — That portion of a street or highway improved, designed or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In
the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways, the term
"roadway" as used herein shall refer to any such roadway separately but not
to all such roadways collectively.
SAFETY ZONE — The area or space adjacent to a curb reserved for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers.
SIDEWALK — That portion of a street between the curblines, or the lateral
lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of
pedestrians.
STREET or HIGHWAY — The entire width between the boundary lines of
every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of
the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
THROUGH HIGHWAY — Every street or highway or portion thereof at the
entrances to which vehicular traffic from intersecting streets or highways is
required by law to stop and yield right-of-way to approaching traffic before
entering or crossing the same and when stop signs are erected as provided
in this act.
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES — All signs, signals, markings, and devices
placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction
for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic.
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL — Any device, whether manually, electrically
or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and
to proceed and placed or erected by authority of a public body or official
having jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic.
§ 29-104 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-104
1:938
ARTICLE II
Traffic Administration
§ 29-201. [Ch. 29, Sec. 5] Police administration.
There is hereby established in the Police Department of this City a Traffic
Division to be under the control of a duly appointed officer of police and
directly responsible to the Chief of Police.
§ 29-202. [Ch. 29, Sec. 6] Duty of Traffic Division.
It shall be the duty of the Traffic Division with such as may be rendered
by other members of the Police Department to enforce the street traffic
regulations of this City and all of the State vehicle laws applicable to
street traffic in this City, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate
accidents and alleged traffic violations, and to cooperate with the City
Traffic Engineer and other officers of the City in the administration of the
traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions
to carry out those duties specially imposed upon said Division by said Code.
§ 29-203. [Ch. 29, Sec. 7] City Traffic Engineer.
§ 29-204. [Ch. 29, Sec. 8] Emergency and experimental regulations.
A. The office of City Traffic Engineer is hereby established. The Director of
Public Works shall serve as City Traffic Engineer in addition to his other
functions and shall exercise the powers and duties with respect to
traffic as provided in this Ordinance. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
B. It shall be the general duty of the City Traffic Engineer to administer
the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic control
devices, to conduct engineering analyses of traffic accidents, and to
devise remedial measures, to conduct engineering investigation of
traffic conditions, to plan the operation of traffic on the streets and
highways of this City, and to cooperate with other City officials in the
development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions and to
carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by Ordinances of
this City. [Ord. No. 1989-54]
A. The City Traffic Engineer or Chief of Police is hereby empowered to
make regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of the
traffic ordinances of this City and to make and enforce temporary or
experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions.
No such temporary or experimental regulations shall remain in effect
for more than 180 days. [Ord. No. 1984-122]
B. The City Traffic Engineer may test traffic control devices under actual
conditions of traffic.
§ 29-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-204
1:939

ARTICLE III
Enforcement And Obedience To Traffic Regulations
§ 29-301. [Ch. 29, Sec. 9] Authority of Police and Fire Department
officials.
§ 29-302. [Ch. 29, Sec. 10] Required obedience to traffic ordinance.
It is a misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform
any act required in this Ordinance.
§ 29-303. [Ch. 29, Sec. 11] Obedience to Police and Fire
Department officials.
No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of a police officer or Fire Department official.
§ 29-304. [Ch. 29, Sec. 12] Persons riding bicycles, propelling push
carts or riding animals to obey traffic regulations.
Every person riding bicycles, propelling push carts or riding an animal
upon a roadway and every person driving any animal drawn vehicle shall
be subject to the provisions of this Ordinance applicable to the driver of
any vehicle, except those provisions of this Ordinance which by their very
nature can have no application.
§ 29-305. [Ch. 29, Sec. 13] Use of coasters, roller skates and similar
devices restricted.
A. It shall be the duty of the officers of the Police Department to enforce all
street traffic laws of the City and all of the vehicle laws applicable to
street traffic in the City, including all areas contained in certain
property known as the Oakwoods Development as shown on the final
plat thereof which is recorded with the McLean County Recorder of
Deeds as Document No. 75-11998. [Ord. No. 1979-121]
B. Officers of the Police Department are hereby authorized to direct all
traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws,
provided that, in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite
traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the Police Department
may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the
provisions of the traffic laws.
C. Officers of the Fire Department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct
or assist the Police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate
vicinity and when so doing, officers of the Fire Department have the
same duties and responsibilities as police officers.
A. No person upon roller skates or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy
vehicle or similar device, subject to all of the duties applicable to
§ 29-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-305
1:941
§ 29-306. [Ch. 29, Sec. 14] Public employees to obey traffic
regulations.
The provisions of this Ordinance shall apply to the driver of any vehicle
owned by or used in the service of the United States Government, this State,
County or City, and it shall be unlawful for any said driver to violate any of
the provisions of this Ordinance, except as otherwise permitted in this Code
or by State or Federal statutes.
§ 29-307. [Ch. 29, Sec. 15] Authorized emergency vehicles.
pedestrians. This section shall not apply upon any street being set aside
as a play street or play area.
B. The City Traffic Engineer shall have the authority to declare any street,
or part thereof, adjacent to a school or public playground, a play street.
He shall have authority to establish special play areas such as coasting
areas, etc. Any such playground or play areas established as aforesaid
shall be marked by appropriate signs or devices and shall be supervised
by the Police Department.
C. Whenever authorized signs are erected designating any street, or part
thereof, as a play street or play area, no person shall drive a vehicle
upon said street, or portion thereof, except drivers of vehicles having
business or who residences are within such designated area, and then
any such driver shall exercise the greatest care in driving upon any
such street, or portion thereof.
A. The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an
emergency call, but not upon returning therefrom, or when in the
pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law may exercise the
privileges set forth in this section:
(1) Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this Ordinance;
(2) Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;
(3) Exceed the prima facie speed limits so long as he does not
endanger life or property;
(4) Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning
in specified directions.
B. The exemptions herein granted to an authorized emergency vehicle
shall apply only when the driver of any said vehicle while in motion
sounds audible signal by bell, siren or exhaust whistle as may be
reasonably necessary, and when the vehicle is equipped with at least
one lighted lamp displaying a red light visible under normal
atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such
vehicle, except that an authorized emergency vehicle operated as a
§ 29-305 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-307
1:942
§ 29-308. [Ch. 29, Sec. 16] Operation of vehicle on approach of
authorized emergency vehicle.
Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle equipped
with at least one lighted lamp exhibiting red light visible under normal
atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such
vehicle other than a police vehicle when operated as an authorized
emergency vehicle, and when the driver is giving audible signal by siren,
exhaust whistle, or bell; the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the
right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as
close as possible to, the right hand edge or curb of the roadway clear of any
intersection and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized
emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police
officer.
§ 29-309. [Ch. 29, Sec. 17] Immediate notice of accident. [Ord. No.
1992-108]
The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death
of any person or property damage to an apparent extent of $500 or more
to any one person's property, shall immediately by the quickest means of
communication give notice of such accident to the Police Department if such
accident occurs within this City.
§ 29-310. [Ch. 29, Sec. 18] Written reports of accidents. [Ord. No.
1976-17]
The driver of a vehicle which is in any manner involved in an accident in the
City of Bloomington resulting in injury to or death of any person or apparent
property damage to any person's property shall immediately report such
accident to the Police Department. In the event the driver is incapable of
making such report because of injuries received in the accident, such driver
shall make a report as soon thereafter as he or she is capable of making
such report. A report required by this section may be made in person orally
to any Bloomington Peace Officer, or by telephoning the Bloomington Police
Department.
§ 29-311. [Ch. 29, Sec. 19] When driver unable to report.
police vehicle need not be equipped with or display a red light visible
from in front of the vehicle.
C. The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety
of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the
consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others.
A. Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of giving
immediate notice of an accident as required in § 29-309 and there was
another occupant in the vehicle at the time of the accident capable of
§ 29-307 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-311
1:943
doing so, such occupant shall give, or cause to be given, the notice not
given by the driver.
B. Whenever the driver is physically incapable of making a written report
of an accident as required in § 29-310 and such driver is not the owner
of the vehicle involved in such accident, then the owner of the vehicle
involved in such accident shall within five days after learning of the
accident make such report not made by the driver. This provision does
not relieve the driver from filing such report as soon as he is physically
able.
§ 29-311 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-311
1:944
ARTICLE IV
Traffic Control Devices
§ 29-401. [Ch. 29, Sec. 20] Authority to install traffic control
devices.
The City Traffic Engineer shall place and maintain traffic control signs,
signals and devices when and as required under the traffic ordinances of
this City to make effective provisions of said ordinances and may place and
maintain such additional traffic control devices as he may deem necessary
to regulate traffic under the traffic ordinances of this City or under State
law or to guide or warn traffic.
§ 29-402. [Ch. 29, Sec. 21] Manual and specifications for traffic
control devices.
All traffic control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the manual and
specifications approved by the Department of Public Works and Buildings,
Division of Highways, State of Illinois. All signs and signals required
hereunder for a particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as
to type and location throughout the City.
§ 29-403. [Ch. 29, Sec. 22] Obedience to official traffic control
devices.
The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic
control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the traffic
ordinances of this City, unless otherwise directed by a Police Officer, subject
to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in
this Ordinance.
§ 29-404. [Ch. 29, Sec. 23] When traffic devices required for
enforcement purposes.
No provision of this Ordinance for which signs are required shall be
enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the alleged
violating an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to
be seen by an ordinarily observant person whenever a particular section
does not state that signs are required, such section shall be effective even
though no signs are erected or in place.
§ 29-405. [Ch. 29, Sec. 24] Traffic control signal legend.
Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control signals exhibiting different
colored lights successively one at a time or with arrows, the following colors
only shall be used and said lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of
vehicles and pedestrians as follows:
A. Green alone.
§ 29-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-405
1:945
(1) Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight through or
turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits either such
turn. But vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to other
vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection at the
time such signal is exhibited.
(2) Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway
within any marked or unmarked crosswalk.
B. Yellow alone.
(1) Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the
nearest crosswalk at the intersection, but if such stop cannot be
made in safety, a vehicle must be driven cautiously through the
intersection.
(2) Pedestrians facing such signal are thereby advised that there is
insufficient time to cross the roadway, and any pedestrian then
starting to cross shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles.
C. Red alone.
(1) Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the
nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at such other point as may
be indicated by a clearly visible line and shall remain standing until
green is shown alone, except that where warranted, the State of
Illinois or the City on highways under their respective jurisdiction
and control may permit vehicles to make a right turn under rules
and regulations to be established by the State of Illinois or the City
as the case may be.
(2) No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway unless he
can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic.
D. Red with green arrow.
(1) Vehicular traffic facing such signal may cautiously enter the
intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow
but shall not interfere with other traffic or endanger pedestrians
lawfully within a crosswalk.
(2) No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway unless he
can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic.
E. In the event an official traffic control signal is erected and maintained
at a place other than intersection, the provisions of this section shall be
applicable except as to provisions which by their nature can have no
application. Any stop required shall be at a sign or marking on the
pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence
of any such sign or marking the stop shall be made at the signal.
§ 29-405 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-406
1:946
§ 29-406. [Ch. 29, Sec. 25] Pedestrian walk or don't walk signals.
Whenever special pedestrian control signals exhibiting the words "Walk" or
"Don't Walk" are in place, such signals shall indicate as follows.
§ 29-407. [Ch. 29, Sec. 26] Flashing signals.
§ 29-408. [Ch. 29, Sec. 27] Display of unauthorized signs, signals or
markings.
A. Walk. Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the roadway
in the direction of the signal and shall be given the right-of-way by the
drivers of all vehicles.
B. Don't walk. No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in the
direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially completed
his crossing on the walk signal shall proceed to a sidewalk while the
"Don't Walk" signal is showing.
A. Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in a traffic
sign or signal, it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows:
(1) Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated with rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering
the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when
marked, or, if none, then before entering the intersection, and the
right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after
making a stop at a stop sign.
(2) Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated
with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed
through the intersection or past such signal only with caution.
B. This provision shall not apply at a railroad grade crossing. Conduct of
drivers of vehicles approaching railroad grade crossings shall be
governed by the rules as set forth in § 29-808 of this Ordinance.
A. No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any
highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which
purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic
control device or railroad sign or signal or which attempts to direct the
movement of traffic or which hides from view or interferes with the
effectiveness of any official traffic control device or any railroad sign or
signal.
B. This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private
property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional
information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs.
C. Every such prohibited sign, signal or other marking is hereby declared
to be a public nuisance and the authority having jurisdiction over the
§ 29-406 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-408
1:947
§ 29-409. [Ch. 29, Sec. 28] Interference with official traffic control
devices or railroad signs or signals.
No person shall without lawful authority attempt to or in fact alter, deface,
injure, knock down or remove any official traffic control device or any
railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield or insignia thereon, or any
other part thereof.
§ 29-410. [Ch. 29, Sec. 29] City Traffic Engineer to designate
crosswalks and establish safety zones.
The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized:
§ 29-411. [Ch. 29, Sec. 30] Traffic lanes.
§ 29-412. [Ch. 29, Sec. 31] All signs, signals, devices and marking
installed.
All signs, signals, devices and marking installed or placed upon any street
by direction of the Chief of Police or any officer of the State having authority
to do so shall be taken and deemed to be notice to all persons using such
streets of the regulations applicable thereto and failure to conform to such
regulation shall be deemed to be a violation of this chapter.
highway is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be
removed without notice.
A. To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon
the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where there is
particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway and at such
other places as may be deemed necessary.
B. To establish safety zones for such kind and character and at such places
as he may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians.
A. The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to mark traffic lanes
upon the roadway of any street or highway where a regular alignment
of traffic is necessary.
B. Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it shall be unlawful for the
operator of any such vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within
the boundaries of any such lane except when lawfully passing another
vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning movement.
§ 29-408 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-412
1:948
ARTICLE V
Speed Regulations
§ 29-501. [Ch. 29, Sec. 32] Speed regulations.
A. It shall be illegal for any person to drive a motor vehicle at a speed
greater than 30 m.p.h. on any public street within the City of
Bloomington, except as a greater or lesser speed limit may be posted as
established by law or ordinance. [Ord. No. 1983-85]
B. It shall be illegal for any person to drive a motor vehicle at a speed
greater than 15 m.p.h. in any alley within the City of Bloomington.
[Ord. No. 1990-97]
C. On the basis of an engineering or traffic investigation conducted by the
Department of Public Works of the City of Bloomington, it has been
determined that on various portions of City streets the speed permitted
by state law is greater or lesser than is reasonable or safe under the
conditions found to exist on such streets. The maximum speed limit on
such streets or parts of streets enumerated in § 29-1820 (Schedule
XVII) of this chapter shall be as therein stated, which speeds declared
shall be effective when signs are erected giving notice thereof. It shall
be illegal for any person to drive a motor vehicle in excess of the speed
therein stated. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
D. Pursuant to Section 11-605 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, school speed
zones within which the maximum speed is 20 m.p.h. are hereby
established in § 29-1821 (Schedule XVIII) of this chapter. It shall be
illegal for any person to drive a motor vehicle therein at a speed in
excess of 20 m.p.h. on school days when children are present when
signs are erected giving notice of such speed zones. [Ord. No.
1983-85]
§ 29-501 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-501
1:949

ARTICLE VI
Turning Movements
§ 29-601. [Ch. 29, Sec. 33] Required position and method of turning
at intersection.
The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do as
follows:
§ 29-602. [Ch. 29, Sec. 34] Signals for turning.
A. Right turns. Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be
made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the
roadway.
B. Left turns on two-way roadways. At any intersection where traffic is
permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the
intersection, an approach for a left turn shall be made in that position of
the right half of the roadway nearest the center line thereof and by
passing to the right of such center line where it enters the intersection
and after entering the intersection, to the right of the center line of the
roadway being entered. Whenever practicable, the left turn shall be
made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the
intersection.
C. Left turns on other than two-way roadways. At any intersection where
traffic is restricted to one direction on one or more of the roadways, the
driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any such intersection shall
approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully
available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle and
after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave
the intersection, as nearly as practicable, in the left-hand lane lawfully
available to traffic moving in such direction upon the roadway being
entered.
D. The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to the
left shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the
opposite direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as
to constitute an immediate hazard, but such driver, having so yielded
and having given a signal when and as required by this chapter, may
make such left turn and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the
intersection from the opposite direction shall yield the right-of-way to
the vehicle making the left turn.
A. No person shall turn a vehicle from a direct course upon a street unless
and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety and then
only after giving a clearly audible signal by sounding the horn if any
pedestrian may be affected by such movement or after giving an
appropriate signal in the manner hereinafter provided in the event any
other vehicle may be affected by such movement.
§ 29-601 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-602
1:951
§ 29-603. [Ch. 29, Sec. 35] Authority to place and obedience to
turning markers.
§ 29-604. [Ch. 29, Sec. 36] Turning movements at certain
intersections.
Turning movements at certain intersections are hereby restricted as
described in Schedule I attached and made a part of this Ordinance. The
City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to erect signs at those
intersections as designated by the City Council at which drivers of vehicles
shall not make a right, left or U-turn, and shall place proper signs at such
intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain
hours of any day and permitted at other hours in which event the same shall
be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns
are permitted.
B. A signal of intention to turn right or left shall be given during not less
than the last 100 feet traveled by the vehicle before turning.
C. No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle
without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein
to the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is
opportunity to give such signal.
D. The signals required by section herein shall be given either by means of
the hand and arm or by a signal lamp or signal device, but when a
vehicle is so constructed or loaded that a hand and arm signal would
not be visible both to the front and rear of such vehicle then such
signals must be given by such a lamp or device.
E. All signals required by section herein given by hand and arm shall be
given from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner and such
signals shall indicate as follows:
(1) Left turn. Hand and arm extended horizontally.
(2) Right turn. Hand and arm extended upward.
(3) Stop or decrease of speed. Hand and arm extended downward.
A. The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to place markers, buttons or
signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be
traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections and such course to be
traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed
by law or ordinance.
B. When authorized markers, buttons or other indications are placed
within an intersection, indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles
turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of
such indications.
§ 29-602 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-605
1:952
§ 29-605. [Ch. 29, Sec. 37] Obedience to no-turn signs.
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or Uturn
is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any
such sign.
§ 29-606. [Ch. 29, Sec. 38] Limitations on turning around.
The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the
opposite direction upon any street in a business district and shall not upon
any other street so turn a vehicle unless such movement can be made in
safety or without interfering with other traffic.
§ 29-605 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-606
1:953

ARTICLE VII
One-Way Streets And Alleys
§ 29-701. [Ch. 29, Sec. 39] Authority to post one-way streets. [Ord.
No. 2015-25]
Whenever an ordinance of this City designates any one-way street, the
City Traffic Engineer shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof,
and no such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are in place.
Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at
every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is
prohibited.
§ 29-702. [Ch. 29, Sec. 40] One-way streets. [Ord. No. 2015-25]
Upon those streets and parts of streets described in Chapter 29, § 29-1802,
attached hereto and made a part hereof, vehicular traffic shall move only
in the indicated direction when signs indicating the direction of traffic
are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the
opposite direction is prohibited.
§ 29-703. [Ch. 29, Sec. 41] Alleys.
All alleys running north and south shall be entered only from the north.
All alleys running east and west shall be entered only from the east. These
provisions shall not apply to dead-end alleys or alleys listed below:
A. East-west alley bounded by Grove, Denver, Olive and McLean; two-way
at east end, one-way eastbound at west end.
B. East-west alley bounded by Washington, Clinton, Front and Clayton;
one-way eastbound. [Ord. No. 1988-126]
C. East-west alley on the north side of Bent School one way eastbound.
[Ord. No. 2005-111]
§ 29-701 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-703
1:955

ARTICLE VIII
Special Stops Required
§ 29-801. [Ch. 29, Sec. 42] Through streets designated.
Those streets and parts of street described in Schedule III attached hereto
and made a part hereof are hereby declared to be through streets for the
purpose of this section.
§ 29-802. [Ch. 29, Sec. 43] Authority to erect stop signs and yield
signs.
Whenever any ordinance of this City designates and describes a through
street, it shall be the duty of the City Traffic Engineer to place and maintain
a stop sign or yield sign on each and every street intersecting that portion
thereof described and designated as such by any ordinance of this City
unless traffic at any such intersection is controlled at all times by traffic
control signals, as described in Schedule IV, attached to and made a part of
this chapter, provided however, that at the intersection of two such through
streets stop signs or yield signs shall be erected at the approaches of either
or both of said streets as may be determined by the City Council upon the
basis of an engineering and traffic study and established, as described in
Schedule V-A, B, C and F attached to and made a part of this Ordinance.
§ 29-803. [Ch. 29, Sec. 44] Hazardous intersections.
It is hereby declared that at all intersections described in Schedule V-D, E
and F attached to and made a part of this Ordinance, a particular hazard
exists upon other than through streets and that stop signs or yield rightof-
way signs shall be erected at one or more entrances to such designated
intersections.
§ 29-804. [Ch. 29, Sec. 45] Signs to bear the word "stop" or "yield."
Every sign erected pursuant to this article shall bear the words "Stop" or
"Yield" as established by the Department of Public Works and Buildings,
Division of Highways, State of Illinois.
§ 29-805. [Ch. 29, Sec. 46] Vehicles to stop at stop signs; yield
right-of-way at yield signs.
A. When stop signs are erected as herein authorized at or near the
entrance to any intersection, every driver of a vehicle approaching a
stop sign shall stop and yield the right-of-way to approaching traffic as
may be necessary before entering the crosswalk or the near side of the
intersection or in the event there is no crosswalk, shall stop at a clearly
marked stop line, but, if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting
roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the
intersecting roadway before entering the intersection except when
directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic control signal.
§ 29-801 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-805
1:957
§ 29-806. [Ch. 29, Sec. 47] Emerging from alley, driveway or
building.
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall
stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the
sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, yielding the right-of-way to
any pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid collision, and upon entering
the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on said
road.
§ 29-807. [Ch. 29, Sec. 48] Stop when traffic obstructed.
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there
is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage
of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal
indication to proceed.
§ 29-808. [Ch. 29, Sec. 49] Obedience to signal indicating approach
of railroad train.
B. The City Council may, when traffic conditions warrant such action, give
preference to traffic through any intersection on any highway and
designate specified entrances to said intersection as described in
Schedule V-E, as yield right-of-way entrances by erecting yield signs in
lieu of stop signs as required in this section or § 29-802, 29-803 or
29-804 of this chapter.
(1) The driver of a vehicle in obedience to a yield sign shall reduce the
speed of his vehicle to not more than 20 miles per hour and shall
yield the right-of-way to other vehicles which have entered the
intersecting highway either from the right or left or which are
approaching so closely on said intersecting highway as to
constitute an immediate hazard but said driver having so yielded
may proceed such time as a safe interval occurs.
(2) If a driver is involved in a collision at an intersection or interferes
with the movement of other vehicles after driving past a yield sign,
such collision or interference shall be deemed prima facie evidence
of the driver's failure to yield right-of-way.
A. Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade
crossing under any of the circumstances stated in this section, the
driver of such vehicle shall stop within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet
from the nearest rail of such railroad and shall not proceed until he can
do so safely. The foregoing requirements shall apply when:
(1) A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives warning
of the immediate approach of a railroad train;
§ 29-805 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-808
1:958
(2) A crossing gate is lowered or when a human flag man gives or
continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad
train;
(3) A railroad train approaching within approximately 1,500 feet of the
highway crossing emits a signal audible from such distance and
such railroad train, by reason of its speed or nearness to such
crossing, is an immediate hazard;
(4) An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in hazardous
proximity to such crossing.
B. No person shall drive any vehicle through, around, or under any
crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing while such gate or
barrier is lowered or is being raised or lowered.
§ 29-808 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-808
1:959

ARTICLE IX
Miscellaneous Driving Rules
§ 29-901. [Ch. 29, Sec. 50] Following fire apparatus prohibited.
The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not follow
any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than 500 feet
or drive into or park such vehicle within the block where fire apparatus has
stopped in answer to a fire alarm.
§ 29-902. [Ch. 29, Sec. 51] Crossing fire hose.
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of a fire department
when laid down on any street, private driveway or to be used at any fire
or alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire department official in
command.
§ 29-903. [Ch. 29, Sec. 52] Driving through funeral or other
procession.
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral
or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such
vehicles are conspicuously designated as required in this chapter.
§ 29-904. [Ch. 29, Sec. 53] Drivers in a procession.
Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall as near to the right-hand
edge of the roadway as practical and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close
as is practical and safe.
§ 29-905. [Ch. 29, Sec. 54] Funeral processions to be identified.
A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as such
by the display upon the outside of each vehicle of a pennant approved by
the Traffic Division and by the display of lighted headlights on each such
vehicle.
§ 29-906. [Ch. 29, Sec. 55] When permits required for parades and
processions.
No procession or parade excepting funerals, the armed forces of the United
States, the military forces of this State, and the forces of the Police and
Fire Departments shall occupy, march or proceed along any street except
in accordance with a permit issued by the Chief of Police and such other
regulations as are set forth herein which may apply.
§ 29-907. [Ch. 29, Sec. 56] Overloading vehicles.
No vehicle shall be driven upon a street when it is so loaded, or when there
are in front seat of such vehicle such number of persons as to obstruct the
§ 29-901 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-907
1:961
view of the driver to the front or sides or to interfere with the operator's
control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
§ 29-908. [Ch. 29, Sec. 57] Throwing glass or tacks on street.
§ 29-909. [Ch. 29, Sec. 58] Vehicles shall not be driven on a
sidewalk.
The driver of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area except at a
permanent or temporary driveway.
§ 29-910. [Ch. 29, Sec. 59] Entering or alighting from vehicles.
No person shall board, enter or alight from any bus or other vehicle while
the same is moving. Persons shall board, enter or alight from buses and
other vehicles from the right side thereof.
§ 29-911. [Ch. 29, Sec. 60] Right-of-way.
§ 29-912. [Ch. 29, Sec. 61] Limitations on backing.
The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such movement can
be made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit upon any street
or alley any glass bottle, glass, nails, tacks, wires, cans, or any other
substance likely to injure any person, animal or vehicle upon such
street or alley.
B. Any person who drops or permits to be dropped or thrown upon any
street or alley any destructive or injurious material shall immediately
remove the same or cause it to be removed.
C. Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a street or
alley shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon
the street or alley from such vehicle.
A. A vehicle which has stopped as required by law at the entrance to a
through street shall yield to other vehicles within the intersection or
approaching so closely on the through street as to constitute an
immediate hazard and having so yielded may then proceed and other
vehicles approaching the intersection on the through street shall yield
to the vehicle so proceeding, into or across the through street.
B. Except as hereinafter provided, motor vehicles traveling upon public
streets shall give the right-of-way to vehicles approaching along
intersection streets from the right and shall have the right-of-way over
those approaching from the left.
§ 29-907 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-913
1:962
§ 29-913. [Ch. 29, Sec. 62] Riding on motorcycles.
A person operating a motorcycle shall ride only upon the permanent and
regular seat attached thereto, and such operator shall not carry any other
person nor shall any other person ride on a motorcycle unless such
motorcycle is designed to carry more than one person, in which event a
passenger may ride upon the permanent and regular seat if designed for
two persons, or upon another seat firmly attached to the rear side of the
operator, or within a sidecar.
§ 29-914. [Ch. 29, Sec. 63] Underage drivers.
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 15 years to drive any
motor vehicle upon any public street. It shall be unlawful for any person to
permit any motor vehicle to be driven upon any public street by any person
under the age of 15 years.
§ 29-915. [Ch. 29, Sec. 64] Clinging to vehicles.
§ 29-916. [Ch. 29, Sec. 66] Quiet zone - school zone created.
A. No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled, or toy
vehicle shall attach the same or himself to any vehicle upon a roadway.
B. No person driving or in charge of any vehicle upon any street, alley or
other public place in said City shall knowingly allow any person using
any sled, wagon, coaster, skates, bicycle or other similar devices to
attach himself either by direct hold or by means of any connecting rope
or other material to said vehicle, or any part thereof, or attachment
thereto, for the purpose of being pulled, pushed or drawn by said
vehicle.
C. No operator of a bicycle when upon a street of the City shall carry any
other person upon the handle bar, frame or tank of any such vehicle and
no other person shall so ride upon any such vehicle.
A. There hereby is created and established a "Zone of Quiet" in all
territory embraced within a distance of 250 feet from the premises and
grounds of each hospital in said City. The City Traffic Engineer shall
place within such radius a sign or marker containing appropriate
words, and no person or vehicle shall make any loud or unusual noise,
sound, or music within or upon any of the streets, alleys or public places
within such "Quiet Zone" and the making of same hereby is declared to
be a nuisance.
B. There hereby is created and established a "Caution or School Zone" in
all territory embraced within a distance of 250 feet from the premises
and grounds of each public and parochial school in said City. The City
Traffic Engineer shall cause appropriate signs to be placed within such
radius and said signs may be permanent signs or ones which are placed
§ 29-913 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-916
1:963
§ 29-917. [Ch. 29, Sec. 69] Unlawful riding.
No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designed
or intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to an
employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty or to persons riding
within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise.
§ 29-918. [Ch. 29, Sec. 70] Railroad trains not to block streets.
It shall be unlawful for the directing officer or the operator of any railroad
train to direct the operation of or to operate the same in such a manner as
to prevent the use of any street for purposes of travel for a period of time
longer than five minutes. This provision shall not apply to trains or cars in
motion than those engaged in switching.
§ 29-919. [Ch. 29, Sec. 71] Driving through safety zones prohibited.
No vehicle shall at any time be driven through within a safety zone.
§ 29-920. [Ch. 29, Sec. 71A] Compression and engine braking
prohibited in certain areas. [Ord. No. 2006-7]
Where prohibited by signs, no person shall employ the use of an engine
braking system which uses engine exhaust (commonly referred to as
compression braking or engine braking) to slow the vehicle, except in the
case of an emergency, at the following locations:
Location
Brock Drive - from Market Street to south end
I-55/I-74 Ramps onto Market Street
Trucker's Lane - from Market Street to north end
§ 29-921. [Ch. 29, Sec. 71.5] Motor vehicles prohibited on
abandoned right-of-way.
temporarily during the hours when school children are using the
thoroughfares.
A. No person shall operate a motor vehicle on the abandoned Illinois
Central Gulf Right-of-Way owned by the City of Bloomington. This
abandoned right-of-way consists of five tracts:
(1) From the center line of Lafayette Street north to a point 200 feet
north of Lincoln Street;
(2) From the center line of Jefferson Street north to the center line of
Chestnut Street;
(3) From the north line of Division Street south 1,210 feet to a point
approximately 380 feet south of the north line of Emerson Street;
§ 29-916 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-921
1:964
(4) From a point approximately 1,353 feet east of the east right-of-way
line of Veterans Parkway, thence east to a point on the east section
line of Section 36, Township 24 North, Range 2 East of the Third
Principal Meridian;
(5) All overpasses over Oakland Avenue, Washington Street and
Emerson Street. [Ord. No. 1986-175]
B. This prohibition shall not apply to persons operating emergency
vehicles and to employees of the City of Bloomington who are using
motor vehicles to perform routine maintenance on the property. [Ord.
No. 1986-175]
C. Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be fined not less
than $50. [Ord. No. 1986-175]
§ 29-921 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-921
1:965

ARTICLE X
Pedestrian's Rights And Duties
§ 29-1001. [Ch. 29, Sec. 72] Pedestrians subject to traffic control
signals.
Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic control signals as heretofore declared
in §§ 29-405 and 29-406 of this Ordinance, but all other placed pedestrians
shall be granted those rights and be subject to the restrictions stated in this
article.
§ 29-1002. [Ch. 29, Sec. 73] Pedestrian's right-of-way in crosswalk.
§ 29-1003. [Ch. 29, Sec. 74] Right-of-way of blind persons.
Any blind person who is carrying in a raised or extended position a cane
or walking stick which is white in color or white tipped with red or who is
being guided by a dog, shall have the right-of-way in crossing any street
or highway, whether or not traffic on such street or highway is controlled
by traffic signals; anything in this article to the contrary notwithstanding.
The driver of every vehicle approaching the place where a blind person so
carrying such cane or walking stick or being so guided, is crossing a street
or highway, shall bring his vehicle to a full stop, and before proceeding
shall take such precautions as may be necessary to avoid injury to the blind
person. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a blind person who
is not carrying a cane or walking stick or who is not guided by a dog,
but the other provisions of this article relating to pedestrians shall then be
applicable to such person. However, the failure of a blind person to so use
or carry such a cane or walking stick or to be guided by a guide dog when
walking on streets, highways or sidewalks, shall not be considered evidence
or contributory evidence.
A. When traffic control signals are not in place or not in operation, the
driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping
if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a
crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon
which the vehicle is traveling or when the pedestrian is approaching so
closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger, but no
pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk
or run into the path of a vehicle, which is so close that it is impossible
for the driver to yield.
B. Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross
the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear
shall not overtake and pass such stopped vehicle.
§ 29-1001 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1004
1:967
§ 29-1004. [Ch. 29, Sec. 75] Pedestrians to use right half of
crosswalk.
Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of
crosswalks.
§ 29-1005. [Ch. 29, Sec. 76] Crossing at right angles.
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at
right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb except
in a crosswalk.
§ 29-1006. [Ch. 29, Sec. 77] Prohibited crossing.
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a marked crosswalk or an
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection except where a tunnel or overhead
pedestrian crossing is provided.
§ 29-1007. [Ch. 29, Sec. 78] Obedience of pedestrians to railroad
signals.
No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over or under any crossing gate
or barrier at a railroad grade crossing while such gate or barrier is lowered
or is being lowered or raised.
§ 29-1008. [Ch. 29, Sec. 79] Pedestrians walking along roadways.
§ 29-1009. [Ch. 29, Sec. 80] Pedestrians soliciting rides or business.
§ 29-1010. [Ch. 29, Sec. 81] Drivers to exercise due care.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this article, every driver of
a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian
upon any roadway and shall give warning by sounding the horn when
necessary and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or
any confused or incapacitated person upon a roadway.
A. Where sidewalks are provided, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to
walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
B. Where sidewalks are not provided any pedestrian walking along and
upon a highway shall, when practicable, walk only on the left side of the
roadway or its shoulder facing traffic which may approach from the
opposite direction.
A. No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride,
employment or business from the occupant of any vehicle.
B. No person shall stand on or in proximity to a street or highway for the
purpose of soliciting the watching or guarding of any vehicle while
parked or about to be parked on a street or highway.
§ 29-1004 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1010
1:968
ARTICLE XI
Condition Of Vehicles
§ 29-1101. [Ch. 29, Sec. 82] Clear vision.
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle which is so loaded or in such a
condition that the operator does not have a clear vision either directly or by
use of mirrors of all parts of the roadway essential to the safe operation of
the vehicle.
§ 29-1102. [Ch. 29, Sec. 83] Unnecessary noise.
§ 29-1103. [Ch. 29, Sec. 84] Horn and warning device.
Every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a good and sufficient audible
signaling device in efficient working condition.
§ 29-1104. [Ch. 29, Sec. 85] Unlawful to equip motor vehicle with
siren, gong, etc.
No motor vehicle, bicycle, motor scooter or motor bicycle other than an
emergency vehicle shall be equipped with a siren, gong or whistle.
§ 29-1105. [Ch. 29, Sec. 86] Nuisance vehicles.
It shall be unlawful to operate or park a nuisance vehicle on any street
or other property owned by the City of Bloomington. A nuisance vehicle is
defined as follows:
A. It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle which makes unusually loud or
unnecessary noise. No motor vehicle shall be operated on any street
unless such vehicle is provided with a muffler in efficient actual
working condition, and the use of a cutout is prohibited. [Ord. No.
2004-4]
B. No driver of any motor vehicle within this State shall operate or permit
operation of any sound amplification system which can be heard outside
the vehicle from 75 or more feet when the vehicle is being operated
upon a highway, unless such system is being operated to request
assistance or warn of a hazardous situation.
C. This section does not apply to authorized emergency vehicles. [Ord.
No. 2004-4]
A. Any vehicle which emits dense smoke or such an amount of smoke or
fumes as to endanger the safety of health of other persons or create a
traffic hazard for other drivers, passengers, or pedestrians; or [Ord.
No. 2001-112]
B. Any vehicle which, by its general state of deterioration, poses an
immediate threat to the public's health, safety and welfare, including
§ 29-1101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1105
1:969
§ 29-1106. [Ch. 29, Sec. 87] Size, weight and load.
No Motor vehicle, unladen, or with load, shall exceed the limitations
prescribed by Article XV of the Illinois Vehicle Code60without an Overweight
Permit issued by the City of Bloomington Public Works Department. Below
is a listing of designated truck routes:
Class II Truck Route [Ord. No. 2018-93]
Beich - Fox Creek to South Corporate Limits
Bell - Hannah to McClun
Bettis - Wylie to JC Parkway
Bloomington Heights Road - Market to Washington
Brown - Market to Truck Stop South Entrance
Caroline - Market to Washington
Chestnut - Morris to Roundhouse
East - MacArthur to Jackson
Euclid - Washington to Oakland
Evans - Lincoln to Stewart
Fox Creek - Veterans to Beich
Hamilton - Morrissey to Hershey
Ireland Grove - Veterans to Towanda Barnes
but not limited to any vehicle which in its current state of disrepair
causes any harmful materials, or substances to be deposited upon a
City street such as glass, oil transmission fluid, brake fluid, or is on
blocks, jacks, or otherwise poses an immediate threat to the public.
[Ord. No. 2001-112]
C. Any vehicle that contains garbage, rubbish or ashes that are required to
be transported by a vehicle licensed pursuant to Article III of Chapter
21 (Refuse) of this Code but is unlicensed under Article III of Chapter
21; or [Ord. No. 2001-112]
D. Any vehicle which is covered by a tarpaulin or other covering which
obscures reflective devices. [Ord. No. 2001-112]
E. Any vehicle having received a written notice of an impending tow under
§ 29-2205, 29-2206 or 29-2207 of this Chapter 29, three or more times
within 12 months. [Ord. No. 2008-77]
F. Any vehicle parked over a curb stop after being noticed 24 hours in
advance of the Water Department's need to access the curb stop. [Ord.
No. 2005-31]
60.Editor's Note: See 625 ILCS 5/15-101 et seq.
§ 29-1105 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1106
1:970
Class II Truck Route [Ord. No. 2018-93]
JC Parkway - Market to Valley View
Lafayette - Center to Morrissey
Lincoln - Center to Clayton
MacArthur - Center to Gridley
McClun - Oakland to Taylor
Morris - Locust to Chestnut
Oakland - Clinton to Center
Oakland - Euclid to Landfill Entrance
Olive - Euclid to Erickson
Roundhouse - Lumber to North End
Truckers - Market to North End
Valley View - JC Parkway to West End
Washington - Euclid to West Corporate Limits
Wylie - Market to North Corporate Limits
No Class I, II, III Truck Access [Ord. No. 2004-110]
Brown - Truck Stop South Entrance to Washington
Hinshaw - North of Locust
Maple Hill - 1,800 feet east of Wylie to Enterprise
Stillwell - Market to Washington
Western - North of Locust
§ 29-1107. [Ch. 29, Sec. 88] Projecting loads.
A. No passenger vehicle shall be operated on any street of this City with
any load carried thereon or equipment attached thereto extending
beyond the line of the fenders on the left side of such vehicle nor
extending more than six inches beyond the line of the fenders on the
right side thereof.
B. Any vehicle having a load projecting more than four feet beyond the
rear of the body of such vehicle during the period from sunrise to sunset
must have firmly attached to the end of the projecting load, in such a
way as to be seen by persons approaching from either side at the rear of
said vehicle a red cloth not less than 16 inches square, and during the
period from sunset to sunrise must have a lighted red lamp or lantern
plainly visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the side and rear
firmly attached to the rear end of such projecting load. Such lighted red
lamp or lantern shall be in addition to any other light required to be
carried by vehicles under any law of the State of Illinois or any
ordinance of the City in regard to vehicles.
§ 29-1106 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1108
1:971
§ 29-1108. [Ch. 29, Sec. 89] Spilling loads.
No vehicle shall be so loaded that any part of its load spills or drops on any
street or alley in the municipality.
§ 29-1109. [Ch. 29, Sec. 90] Brakes.
It shall be unlawful to drive any motor vehicle upon any street unless
such vehicle is equipped with good and sufficient brakes in good working
condition, as required by Article XV of the Uniform Act Regulating Traffic
on Highways of the State of Illinois,61 or to operate any vehicle which is
so loaded that the operator does not have ready access to the mechanism
operating the brakes of such vehicle.
§ 29-1110. [Ch. 29, Sec. 91] Lights.
§ 29-1111. [Ch. 29, Sec. 92] Windshields.
A. It shall be unlawful to operate or park on any street any vehicle not
equipped with adequate lights conforming to the requirements of
Article XV of the Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways of the
State of Illinois.62
B. Whenever a vehicle is lawfully parked at nighttime upon any street
within the City, no lights need be displayed upon such parked vehicles.
C. Any lighted head lamps upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or
dimmed.
A. No person shall drive a motor vehicle with any sign, poster, window
application, reflective material, nonreflective material or tinted film
upon the front windshield, sidewings or side windows immediately
adjacent to each side of the driver. A nonreflective tinted film may be
used along the uppermost portion of the windshield if such material
does not extend more than six inches down from the top of the
windshield. Nothing in this section shall create a cause of action on
behalf of a buyer against a dealer or manufacturer who sells a motor
vehicle with a window which is in violation of this section.
B. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the use of nonreflective,
smoked or tinted glass, nonreflective film, perforated window screen or
other decorative window application on windows to the rear of the
driver's seat, except that any motor vehicle with a window to the rear of
the driver's seat treated in this manner shall be equipped with a side
mirror on each side of the motor vehicle which are in conformance with
Section 12-502 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/101 et seq.).
[Ord. No. 2004-4]
61.Editor's Note: See 625 ILCS 5/12-301 et seq.
62.Editor's Note: See 625 ILCS 5/12-201 et seq.
§ 29-1108 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1112
1:972
§ 29-1112. [Ch. 29, Sec. 93] Tires.
It shall be unlawful to operate on any street any motor vehicle which is
not equipped with tires conforming to the requirements of Article XV of the
Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways of the State of Illinois.63
§ 29-1113. [Ch. 29, Sec. 99] Bicycles.
A. Every bicycle when in use at night time shall be equipped with at least
one lighted lamp showing a white light or a light of a yellow or amber
tint visible at least 200 feet in the direction toward which such bicycle
is proceeding and with a reflector on the rear of a type which shall be
visible from all distances from 50 feet to 300 feet to the rear when
directly in front of lawful upper beams of head lamps on a motor
vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to
the rear may be used in lieu of the reflector.
B. Every bicycle shall be equipped with an adequate brake.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon any bicycle on any public
way within the City. A bicycle shall be deemed abandoned if it:
(1) Is in such a state of disrepair as to be incapable of being operated
in its present condition, or
(2) Has not been moved or used in more than seven days and bears
physical indicia of having been deserted.
D. Any bicycle deemed abandoned pursuant to Subsection C of this section
may have a notice affixed to it which informs the bicycle's owner that
the bicycle appears to be abandoned. The Chief of Police, or his or her
designees, is authorized to affix such notices upon bicycles. This notice
shall indicate:
(1) A telephone number for the owner to call to inform the City that the
bicycle is not abandoned; and
(2) The date after which the bicycle may be removed if it is not claimed
by its owner. A bicycle shall not be deemed abandoned if the owner
of the bicycle, within seven days of the affixing of a notice of
abandonment, notifies the City, via the telephone number on the
notice, that the bicycle is not abandoned.
E. If a bicycle is not relocated or claimed by its owner within seven days of
the affixing of the notice of abandonment, that bicycle may be removed,
by cutting any necessary chains or locks, and disposed of by the Chief of
Police or his or her designees. [Ord. No. 2017-110]
63.Editor's Note: See 625 ILCS 5/12-401 et seq.
§ 29-1112 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1113
1:973

ARTICLE XII
Driving On Right Side, Overtaking And Passing
§ 29-1201. [Ch. 29, Sec. 95] Driving on right, exceptions.
Upon all roadways of sufficient width a vehicle shall be driven upon the
right half of the roadway, except as follows:
§ 29-1202. [Ch. 29, Sec. 96] Passing opposite direction.
Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions, except as otherwise
provided shall pass each other to the right and upon roadways having width
for not more than one line of traffic in each direction, each driver shall
give to the other at least 1/2 of the main-traveled portion of the roadway as
nearly as possible.
§ 29-1203. [Ch. 29, Sec. 97] Overtaking and passing.
The following rules shall govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles
proceeding in the same direction, subject to those limitations, exceptions
and special rules hereinafter stated:
A. When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction under the rules governing such movement;
B. When the right half of a roadway is closed to traffic while under
construction or repair;
C. Upon a roadway divided into three marked lanes for traffic under the
rules applicable thereon; or
D. Upon a roadway designated and sign posted for one-way traffic;
E. Whenever there is a single track paved road on one side of the public
street and two vehicles meet thereon, the driver on whose right is the
wider shoulder shall give the right-of-way on such pavement to the
other vehicle.
A. The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall
not again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the
overtaken vehicle.
B. Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the
driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of
his vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
C. The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of another
vehicle which is making or about to make a left turn.
D. The driver of a vehicle may overtake and, allowing sufficient clearance,
pass another vehicle proceeding in the same direction either upon the
§ 29-1201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1203
1:975
§ 29-1204. [Ch. 29, Sec. 98] Passing on the left.
§ 29-1205. [Ch. 29, Sec. 99] Driving three or more lanes.
Whenever any roadway has been divided into three or more clearly marked
lanes for traffic, the following rules in addition to all other consistent
herewith shall apply:
left or upon the right on a roadway with unobstructed pavement of
sufficient width for four or more lines of moving traffic when such
movement can be made in safety. No person shall drive off the
pavement or upon the shoulder of the roadway in overtaking or passing
on the right.
A. No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the roadway in
overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming
traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and
passing to be completely made without interfering with the safe
operation of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction of any
vehicle overtaken. In every event the overtaking vehicle must return to
the right-hand side of the roadway before coming within 100 feet of any
vehicle approaching from the opposite direction.
B. No vehicle shall, in overtaking and passing another vehicle or at any
other time, be driven to the left side of the roadway under the following
conditions:
(1) When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the
street;
(2) When approaching within 100 feet of any bridge, viaduct or tunnel,
or when approaching within 100 feet of or traversing any
intersection or a railroad grade crossing;
(3) Where official signs are in place directing that traffic keep to the
right, or a distinctive center line is marked, which distinctive line
also directs traffic as declared in the sign manual adopted by the
State Department of Public Works and Buildings.
A. A vehicle shall be driven as neatly as practical entirely within a single
lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver has first
ascertained that such movement can be made with safety;
B. Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes, a vehicle shall not be
driven in the center lane except when overtaking and passing another
vehicle where the roadway is clearly visible and such center lane is
clear of traffic within a safe distance, or in preparation for a left turn or
where such center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic
moving in the direction the vehicle is proceeding and is sign posted to
give notice of such allocation;
§ 29-1203 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1205
1:976
C. Official signs may be erected directing slow-moving traffic to use a
designated lane or allocating specified lanes to traffic moving in the
same direction and drivers of vehicles shall obey the direction of every
such signal.
§ 29-1205 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1205
1:977

ARTICLE XIII
Method Of Parking
§ 29-1301. [Ch. 29, Sec. 100] Standing or parking close to curb.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than
parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful
traffic movement and with the right-hand or left-hand wheels of the vehicle
within 12 inches of the curb or edge of the roadway except as otherwise
provided in this article.
§ 29-1302. [Ch. 29, Sec. 101] Care in starting.
No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing or parked unless
and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety.
§ 29-1303. [Ch. 29, Sec. 102] Angle parking prohibited. [Ord. No.
1984-57]
Except for Main Street between Front and U.S. 51 northeast crossover,
angle parking on City streets is prohibited.
§ 29-1304. [Ch. 29, Sec. 103] Parking space boundaries. [Ord. No.
1987-66]
No person shall directly or indirectly park or allow to be parked any vehicle
owned by him in any parking space where any portion of said vehicle as
parked extends beyond any marked boundaries of said space, except for
commercial vehicles engaged in the act of loading or unloading and then for
a time not to exceed 30 minutes.
§ 29-1301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1304
1:979

ARTICLE XIV
Stopping, Standing Or Parking Prohibited In Specified Places
§ 29-1401. [Ch. 29, Sec. 104] Stopping, standing or parking
prohibited.
No signs required.
A. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the
directions of a police officer or traffic control device, in any of the
following places, many of which are defined at the beginning of the
Chapter.
(1) On a sidewalk;
(2) In front of a public or private driveway;
(3) Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;
(4) Within an intersection, including "Tee" intersection;
(5) On a crosswalk;
(6) Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
(7) Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign
or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway;
(8) Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone,
unless the City Traffic Engineer has indicated a different length by
signs or markings;
(9) Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
(10) Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
(11)Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on
the side of a street opposite the entrance to any station and on the
side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75
feet of said entrance when properly signed;
(12)On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge
or curb of a street, except as permitted by § 29-1410 of this
chapter;
(13) Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway tunnel;
(14) At any place where official signs prohibit stopping;
§ 29-1401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1401
1:981
§ 29-1402. [Ch. 29, Sec. 105] Parking not to obstruct traffic.
No person shall park any vehicle upon a street in such a manner or under
such conditions as to leave available less than 10 feet of the width of the
roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic.
§ 29-1403. [Ch. 29, Sec. 106] Parking in alleys.
No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under
such conditions as to leave available less than 10 feet of the width of the
roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall
stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such position as to block the
driveway entrance to any abutting property.
§ 29-1404. [Ch. 29, Sec. 107] Parking prohibited in parkways except
as provided.
§ 29-1405. [Ch. 29, Sec. 108] Parking for certain purposes
prohibited.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose
of:
§ 29-1406. [Ch. 29, Sec. 109] Parking adjacent to schools.
(15)Within three feet of a driveway on a residential street. [Ord. No.
1989-54]
B. No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any
such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful.
A. No person shall park any vehicle in the parkway except in areas
described in Article XVIII, Schedule XV (§§ 29-1816 and 29-1817). All
vehicles parking in these parkway areas shall park either parallel to the
curb in the direction of traffic flow in the adjacent traffic lane or on an
angle with the direction of traffic flow in the adjacent traffic lane or as
dictated by official signs or markings. No vehicle parked in any parkway
area shall block any part of a public sidewalk or adjacent traffic lane.
[Ord. No. 1983-39]
B. Parkway areas covered hereby shall be paved and the adjacent curb
shall either be a mountable type or the existing curb may be removed
and a new curb constructed at the sidewalk line, all with the prior
approval of the Department of Public Works.
C. All on-street parking areas adjacent to parkway parking areas shall be
"No Parking" areas. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
A. Displaying the vehicle for sale; or
B. Greasing or repairing such vehicle except repairs necessitated by an
emergency.
§ 29-1401 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1406
1:982
§ 29-1407. [Ch. 29, Sec. 110] Theaters; halls and other buildings.
When Vehicles are Not to Park in Front. No vehicle shall be parked for a
longer period of time than is necessary to take on or discharge passengers,
whether or not the said vehicle is occupied, in front of the entrance to any
building, hall, theater or motion picture house during the times that movies,
plays or other activities are in progress. It shall be unlawful to so park when
these areas are properly signed or indicated by curb markings.
§ 29-1408. [Ch. 29, Sec. 111] Standing or parking on one-way
streets.
The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to erect signs upon the left-hand or
right-hand side of any one-way street to prohibit the standing or parking of
vehicles as indicated by the Schedules attached to and made a part of this
Ordinance, and when such signs are in place, no person shall stand or park
a vehicle upon such side in violation of any such sign.
§ 29-1409. [Ch. 29, Sec. 112] Restricted parking hours.
A. The City Traffic Engineer is hereby directed to erect signs indicating no
parking upon either or both sides of any street adjacent to any school
property as described by schedules attached to and made a part of this
Ordinance when such parking interferes with traffic or creates a
hazardous situation.
B. When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon either side a
street adjacent to any school property as authorized herein, no person
shall park a vehicle in any such designated place.
A. The areas designated in Schedule VI attached to and made a part of this
chapter are hereby declared to be restricted parking zones. Such zones
shall be used only by the various vehicles of the named governmental
agency. [Ord. No. 1986-67]
B. The areas designed in Schedule VII attached hereto and made a part of
this chapter are hereby declared to be restricted zones for passenger
and freight loading from which parked vehicles may be towed under
Article XXII of this chapter. [Ord. No. 1980-45]
C. The parking lot areas designated in "Exhibit B" attached to and made a
part of this chapter are hereby declared to be restricted parking
spaces.64 Such parking spaces shall be used only by the various vehicles
of the City of Bloomington and its employees and visitors conducting
business with the City of Bloomington. All unauthorized vehicles may be
towed under Article XXII of this chapter. [Ord. No. 1988-126]
D. The City Manager is authorized to prohibit back-in parking in City
parking lots when appropriate signs are posted. The City Manager is
64.Editor's Note: Exhibit B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 29-1406 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1409
1:983
§ 29-1410. [Ch. 29, Sec. 113] Curb loading zones - commercial
vehicles only.
§ 29-1411. [Ch. 29, Sec. 114] Spaces for handicapped persons and
related parking provisions.
further authorized to exempt classes of vehicles or portions of City
parking lots from such prohibition. [Ord. No. 1998-35]
A. Curb loading zones are hereby authorized when appropriately
designated as such. The Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized and
directed to designate, place, and maintain official signs in such zones.
B. Curb parking zones shall permit commercial vehicles 30 minutes of full
lawful parking time. All regulations and provisions of this Ordinance
pertaining to parking shall also apply to curb loading zones.
C. No person shall directly or indirectly permit commercial vehicles owned
by him, except vehicles which are being loaded or unloaded, to occupy
curb loading zones. [Ord. No. 1986-157]
A. The City Traffic Engineer shall in his discretion designate certain onstreet
and off-street parking spaces in municipal parking lots as being
reserved for use only by handicapped persons by posting each such
parking space with an official sign which so reserves such parking
space pursuant to the laws, rules and regulations which apply thereto.
When these parking spaces are so signed, it shall be illegal for any
person to park a vehicle in a parking space reserved in this manner for
handicapped persons unless such vehicle has license plate(s) or decal
or card. When not with a handicapped person, it shall be illegal for any
person at any time to park any such licensed vehicle or any other
vehicle with such licenses in a space designated as being reserved for
handicapped persons or to use a handicapped person's decal or card to
park any vehicle at any time in such a reserved space. Most of the
designated parking spaced are identified in § 29-1813 of this chapter.
[Ord. No. 1986-104]
B. Parking spaces on private parking lots. Parking spaces on private
parking lots may be reserved for use only by handicapped persons.
Such spaces shall be marked for reserved use by handicapped persons
by posting such parking space with a sign showing the International
symbol of access for handicapped persons which so reserves each
parking space. When these parking spaces are so signed, then it shall
be illegal for any person to park a vehicle in a parking space reserved in
this manner for handicapped persons unless such vehicle has license
plate(s) indicating that the vehicle is registered to a handicapped
person or a disabled veteran or unless a legal decal or card is being
properly used indicating that such vehicle is then being used by a
handicapped person who is qualified to have such license plate(s) or
decal or card. It shall be illegal for any person to park any such licensed
vehicle in a space on a private parking lot which is designated as being
§ 29-1409 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1411
1:984
reserved for handicapped persons or to use a handicapped person's
decal or card to park in such a reserved space when not with the
handicapped person. [Ord. No. 1998-6]
C. The parking privileges granted by this section are strictly limited to the
person to whom the special license plate(s), special decal or card were
issued and to qualified drivers of motor vehicles who are acting under
his or her express direction while the handicapped person is present.
[Ord. No. 1986-104]
D. A motor vehicle bearing license plate(s) issued to a handicapped person
or to a disabled veteran or a special decal or card issued to a
handicapped person or a motor vehicle registered in another
jurisdiction upon which is displayed such license plate(s), a special
decal or card issued by the other jurisdiction designating that the
vehicle may be operated by or for a handicapped person shall be
exempt when the handicapped person is present from any statute or
ordinance imposing time limitations on parking, except time limitations
of 1/2 hour or less on any street or highway zone or any parking lot or
parking place which is owned, leased or owned and leased by a
municipality or a municipal parking utility. All drivers and owners of
such vehicles shall be subject to the laws which prohibit parking in
zones in front of or near fire hydrants, driveways, public building
entrances and exits, bus stops, loading areas and all other locations
where parking is prohibited whether only by law(s) which prohibit
parking at specified types of locations at all times, during certain hours
or times or for limited types of vehicles or also by sign(s) which prohibit
such parking. Each such vehicle is also prohibited from parking when
the motor vehicle constitutes a traffic hazard, and it shall be illegal for
any person not to promptly move such vehicle at the instruction and
request of a law enforcement officer to a legal location at the choice of
the driver or to a location designated by the officer. [Ord. No.
1986-104]
E. Any persons or local authority owning or operating any public or private
off-street parking facility in the City of Bloomington may, after notifying
the Bloomington Police Department, remove or cause to be removed by
towing to the nearest garage or other place of safety any vehicle parked
within a space reserved for the use by handicapped persons which does
not display handicapped registration plate(s) or the special decal or
card as required by this section. [Ord. No. 1986-104]
F. No person shall directly or indirectly permit any vehicle owned by such
person to be used in any manner so as to violate any of the provisions of
this section and for the convenience of the user of this section it is
indicated that § 29-2201 of this chapter is applicable to this section.
[Ord. No. 1986-104]
G. Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this section shall
be fined $250 in addition to any costs or charges connected with the
§ 29-1411 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1411
1:985
§ 29-1412. [Ch. 29, Sec. 115] Compact car parking zones.
removal, towing and/or storage of any motor vehicle authorized under
this section. [Ord. No. 2006-19]
A. The City Traffic Engineer shall, in his discretion, designate certain onstreet
parking spaces as being restricted for use by compact cars. He
shall cause such spaces to be identified by official signs and pavement
markings, and when posted and marked it shall be illegal for any person
to park a vehicle in a parking space restricted for use by compact cars,
unless such vehicle can be located in the designated space without
protruding beyond the pavement markings defining the limits of the
space. [Ord. No. 1984-34]
B. Definition. "Compact Car" shall mean any vehicle of a length which
would allow such vehicle to be parked in an on-street parking space
designated and identified as a compact car parking space without any
part of such vehicle extending beyond the pavement markings defining
the limits of such space. [Ord. No. 1984-34]
C. Designation of spaces. [Ord. No. 2015-25]
Location
Center on the east side from 109 feet to 127 feet north of the north
line of Jefferson
Center on the west side from 95 feet to 112 feet north of the north
line of Jefferson
Center on the east side from 50 feet to 67 feet north of the north line
of Mulberry
Front on the north side from 20 feet to 37 feet west of the west line of
Prairie
Front on the north side from 30 feet to 48 feet east of the east line of
Prairie
Front on the north side from 53 feet to 70 feet east of the east line of
Roosevelt
Lee on the east side from 20 feet to 36 feet south of the south line of
Mulberry
Lee on the west side from 20 feet to 36 feet south of the south line of
Mulberry
Lee on the west side from 20 feet to 36 feet north of the north line of
Mulberry
Lee on the east side from 38 feet to 54 feet north of the north line of
Mulberry
Main, west side, 20 feet to 38 feet north of the north line of Front
§ 29-1411 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1412
1:986
§ 29-1413. [Ch. 29, Sec. 116] Public carrier, shuttle bus stops,
taxicab/TNC vehicle stands. [Ord. No. 2017-87]
Public carrier, shuttle bus stops and taxicab/TNC vehicle stands are hereby
authorized, established, reaffirmed, located and described by § 29-1808,
Schedule VIII which is attached to and is made a part of this Ordinance.
Such additional stands and stops shall be created from time to time as may
be deemed to be necessary and shall be established on the basis of the most
desirable benefit and convenience to the public; and every bus and shuttle
bus stop, taxicab/TNC vehicle stand, or other stand shall be designated by
appropriate signs. It shall be illegal for any person to park or stop any
vehicle other than a shuttle bus in a place designated as a shuttle bus stop,
or park or stop any vehicle other than a taxicab/TNC vehicle in any place
designated as a taxicab/TNC vehicle stand.
§ 29-1414. [Ch. 29, Sec. 117] Stopping, standing or parking of
buses, taxicabs and TNC vehicles regulated.
Location
Main, on the west side from 20 feet to 60 feet south of the south line
of Chestnut
Main, west side, 20 feet to 38 feet north of the north line of Jefferson
Market, on the south side, from 81 feet to 97 feet east of the east line
of Center
Market, on the south side, from 30 feet to 46 feet west of the west
line of Main
Market, on the south side, from 69 feet to 87 feet west of the west
line of Main
Market, on the north side, from 150 feet to 168 feet east of the east
line of East
A. The operator of a bus shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any
street at any place other than a bus stand so designated as provided
herein.
B. The operator of a bus shall not stop such vehicle upon any street at any
place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or their
baggage other than at a bus stop, bus stand, or passenger loading zone
so designated as provided herein, except in case of an emergency.
C. The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop, bus stand, or passenger
loading zone or a public street in such a manner that the bus when
stopped to load or unload passengers or baggage shall be in a position
with the right front wheel of such vehicle not further than 12 inches
from the curb and the bus approximately parallel to the curb so as not
to unduly impede the movement of other vehicular traffic.
§ 29-1412 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1414
1:987
§ 29-1415. [Ch. 29, Sec. 118] Restricted use of bus, taxicab/TNC
vehicle stands. [Ord. No. 2017-87]
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop
or other than a taxicab or TNC vehicle in a taxicab/TNC vehicle stand when
any such stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately
signed, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily
stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or
unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any bus,
taxicab or TNC vehicle waiting to enter or about to enter such zone.
§ 29-1416. [Ch. 29, Sec. 119] Commercial vehicles - loading, double
parking, alleys, hazard.
Owners, operators and drivers of commercial vehicles must comply with the
following restrictions while loading and unloading in the Central Business
District.
D. The operator of a taxicab or TNC vehicle shall not stand or park such
vehicle in any time limited space upon any street at any place other
than in a taxicab/TNC vehicle stand so designated as provided herein.
This provision shall not prevent the operator of a taxicab or TNC vehicle
from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking
regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged
in the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers. [Ord. No.
2017-87]
A. All drivers of commercial vehicles may load or unload freight, goods,
wares or merchandise in any curb loading zone between the hours of
6:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on weekdays or in any legal parking zone
providing they comply with any or all posted parking regulations. [Ord.
No. 1986-157]
B. A driver may park a commercial vehicle on the street adjacent to a
parking lane to load or unload freight, goods, wares or merchandise,
weekdays between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. with the
following restrictions:
(1) That any curb loading zone in the area is already occupied or of
insufficient length;
(2) That the vehicle is not double parked longer than 30 minutes;
(3) That the driver of the vehicle is immediately available to move the
vehicle, if requested;
(4) That the vehicle be immediately moved should it restrict the free
movement of moving or parked vehicles.
(5) This subsection does not apply to any state highway or the
following sections of streets: [Ord. No. 2004-39]
§ 29-1414 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1416
1:988
§ 29-1417. [Ch. 29, Sec. 119.1 through Ch. 29, Sec. 119.13] Snow
emergencies.
Location
Market - East to Main
C. Special regulations to apply while engaged in loading and unloading.
The owners, operators and drivers of commercial vehicles when
actually engaged in the operation of such commercial vehicles shall
have the following privileges not applicable to noncommercial vehicles:
(1) To park such vehicle in an alley to load or unload merchandise or to
take or complete delivery thereof for the period actually required
for any such purposes and without limitation as to time and at any
hour of the day. [Ord. No. 1986-157]
D. At no time shall a commercial vehicle load or unload at any location as
to cause a hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic. [Ord. No.
1986-157]
A. Title. This section shall be known and may be cited as the Snow
Emergency Ordinance of the City of Bloomington. [Ord. No.
1987-132]
B. Definitions. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation
and enforcement of this Ordinance:
DIRECTOR — The Director of Public Works or, in his absence, his duly
designated and acting representative.[Ord. No. 2018-93]
STREET or HIGHWAY — The entire width between the boundary lines
of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the
use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
ROADWAY — That portion of a street or highway improved, designed,
or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or
shoulder.
SNOW ROUTES — Those streets marked as such in accordance with
the provisions of this Ordinance and designated as Snow Routes in
Schedule XIII.[Ord. No. 2007-91]
C. Parking on snow routes.
(1) Whenever the Director of Public Works or his or her appointed
representative finds, on the basis of natural disaster, falling snow,
ice or on the basis of a forecast by the U.S. Weather Service of an
accumulation of two inches or more of snow or 1/2 inch or more or
ice, that weather conditions will make it necessary that parking on
City streets be prohibited or restricted for snow plowing and other
purposes, the Director shall put into effect a parking prohibition on
parts of or all Snow Routes as necessary by declaring it in a manner
prescribed by this Ordinance. The Director may at that time
§ 29-1416 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1417
1:989
announce the starting time of enforcement procedures under
Subsections G and H which may be conditioned on the existence of
precipitation at such starting time. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
(2) Once in effect, a prohibition under this section shall remain in
effect until terminated by announcement of the Director in
accordance with this Ordinance. While the prohibition is in effect,
no person shall park or allow to remain parked any vehicle on any
Snow Route. However, nothing in this section shall be construed to
permit parking at any time or place where it is forbidden by any
other provision of law. [Ord. No. 1987-132]
D. Declarations of the Director.
(1) The Director shall cause each declaration made by him pursuant to
this Ordinance to be publicly announced by means of broadcasts or
telecasts from a radio station with a normal operating range
covering the City. Each announcement shall describe the action
taken by the Director, including the time it became or will become
effective, and shall specify the streets or areas affected. A parking
prohibition or advancement of quitting-time-traffic regulations
declared by the Director shall not go into effect until it has been
announced in accordance with this section. [Ord. No. 1987-132]
(2) The Director shall make or cause to be made a record of each time
and date when any declaration is announced to the public in
accordance with this section. [Ord. No. 1987-132]
E. Termination of parking prohibition by the Director. Whenever the
Director shall find that some or all of the conditions which give rise to a
parking prohibition in effect pursuant to this Ordinance no longer exist,
he may declare the prohibition terminated, in whole or in part, in a
manner prescribed by this Ordinance, effective immediately upon
announcement. [Ord. No. 1987-132]
F. Signs to mark snow routes. On each street designated by this
Ordinance as a Snow Route, the Director shall post special signs on
each block. In addition, signs on Snow Routes shall carry the words
"TOW AWAY ZONE." These signs shall be distinctive and uniform in
appearance and shall be plainly readable to persons traveling on the
street or highway. [Ord. No. 2007-91]
G. Removal, impounding or return of vehicles.
(1) Members of the Police Department are hereby authorized to
remove or have removed a vehicle from a street to a storage area
designated or maintained by the Police Department, or otherwise
maintained by this City, when:
(a) The vehicle is found parked on a Snow Route when a parking
prohibition is in effect; [Ord. No. 2007-91]
§ 29-1417 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1417
1:990
(b) The vehicle is stalled on a Snow Route and the person who was
operating such vehicle does not appear to be removing it in
accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. [Ord. No.
2007-91]
(2) Whenever an officer removes or has removed a vehicle from a
street under this section and does not know and is not able to
ascertain the name of the owner, or for any other reason is unable
to give notice to the owner and in the event the vehicle is not
returned to the owner within a period of five days, then and in that
event the officer shall immediately send or cause to be sent a
written report of such removal by mail to the Secretary of State,
and shall file a copy of such notice with the proprietor of any
storage area in which the vehicle may be stored. Such notice shall
include a complete description of the vehicle, the date, time and
place from which removed, the reasons for such removal, and name
of the place where the vehicle is stored. [Ord. No. 1987-132]
(3) No person shall recover any vehicle removed in accordance with
this section except as provided herein. Before the owner or person
in charge of such vehicle shall be allowed to recover it from the
place where it has been placed or impounded, he shall present to a
member of the Police Department evidence of his identity and right
to possession of the vehicle, shall sign a receipt for its return, shall
pay the cost of removal and shall pay any cost of storage accrued.
Until paid, these charges constitute a lien on the vehicle which may
be enforced in the same manner as a garage keeper's lien in
accordance with the provisions of Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 82, Sec. 40 et
seq.65 [Ord. No. 1987-132]
(4) It shall be the duty of the Police Department to keep a record of
each vehicle removed in accordance with this section. The record
shall include a description of the vehicle, its license number, the
date and time of its removal, where it was removed from, its
location, the name and address of its owner and last operator, if
known, its final disposition, and the parking violation involved.
[Ord. No. 1987-132]
(5) This section shall be supplemental to any other provisions of law
granting members of the Police Department authority to remove
vehicles. [Ord. No. 1987-132]
H. Citation on vehicle parked or left in violation of ordinance. Whenever
any motor vehicle without a driver is found parked or left in violation of
any provision of this Ordinance or Bloomington City Code Chapter 44,
Section 7.22, the officer finding such vehicle shall take its registration
number and any other information displayed on the vehicle which may
identify its user, and shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a traffic
citation. [Ord. No. 1987-132]
65.Editor's Note: See 770 ILCS 45/1.
§ 29-1417 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1417
1:991
I. Evidence with respect to vehicles parked or left in violation of
ordinance. In any prosecution with regard to a vehicle parked or left in
a place or in a condition in violation of any provision of this Ordinance,
proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked
or left in violation of a provision of this Ordinance, together with proof
that the Defendant named in the complaint was at the time the
registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute prima facie evidence
that the Defendant was the person who parked or left the vehicle in
violation of this Ordinance. [Ord. No. 1987-132]
J. Snow route designated. The streets or portions of streets within the
City contained in § 29-1814 of this chapter are hereby designated as
Snow Routes. [Ord. No. 1987-132]
K. Front yard parking permitted - limitations.
(1) Parking is allowed in a front yard during and for 24 hours after the
termination of a snow emergency under the Snow Emergency
Ordinance of the City of Bloomington with respect to any property
abutting streets designated as Primary or Secondary Snow Routes
under said Ordinance if, but only if, the following conditions are
met:
(a) But for the snow emergency, parking would be allowed on the
street in front of said property; and
(b) No private driveway accessible from the street is located on
said property.
(2) Vehicles parked in violation of the limitations of this section may be
ticketed and towed in the same manner as provided in Bloomington
City Code Chapter 29, § 29-1417. [Ord. No. 1987-132]
L. Penalties. Every person convicted of a violation of this section of this
chapter, shall be punished by a fine of $20 if paid within seven days; $25
if paid after seven days but within 30 days; and $30 if paid after 30
days. Section 29-1819 is hereby amended accordingly. Every person
convicted of a violation of any other parking provision of Subsections A
through J of this section shall be punished by a fine of $50. [Ord. No.
2003-115]
M. Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or
portion of this Ordinance is for any reason held invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion
shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and
such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions
hereof. [Ord. No. 1987-132]
§ 29-1417 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1417
1:992
ARTICLE XV
Prohibitions While Parked On Streets
§ 29-1501. [Ch. 29, Sec. 120] Sale display. [Ord. No. 1987-132]
It shall be unlawful for any person to park upon a street or alley any vehicle
displayed for sale.
§ 29-1502. [Ch. 29, Sec. 121] Repair on street.
No person shall adjust or repair any automobile or motorcycle or race the
motor of same while standing on the public streets or alleys of the City,
except in case of breakdown or other emergency requiring same, and no
person or employee connected with the garage or repair shop shall use
streets or alleys in the vicinity of such garage or shop for the purpose of
working on or upon automobiles or motor drawn vehicles of any description.
§ 29-1503. [Ch. 29, Sec. 122] Parked on grade, motor running.
No vehicle shall be stopped, parked or permitted to stand with the engine
running on any street unattended, and when any vehicle is stopped, parked
or permitted to stand unattended with motor off upon a street having a
perceptible grade, the brakes shall be set and the front wheels of such
vehicle shall be turned into the right side of the street.
§ 29-1501 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1503
1:993

ARTICLE XVI
Stopping, Standing Or Parking Restricted Or Prohibited On Certain
Streets
§ 29-1601. [Ch. 29, Sec. 123] Application of article.
The provisions of this article prohibiting the standing or parking of a vehicle
shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified or as indicated
on official signs except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police
officer or official traffic control device. For the purposes of this chapter,
the following days only shall be considered legal holidays: January 1, May
30, July 4, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, December 25 and all Sundays.
Where any of the above holidays fall on a Sunday and the following day is,
therefore, declared by the Illinois State Legislature to be a legal holiday,
then said Monday shall also be considered a legal holiday for the purposes
of construing this Ordinance.
§ 29-1602. [Ch. 29, Sec. 124] Regulations not exclusive.
The provisions of this article imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive
provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles in specified places or at specified times.
§ 29-1603. [Ch. 29, Sec. 125] Parking prohibited at all times on
certain streets. [Ord. No. 1980-3]
When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall
park a vehicle between the hours specified in Schedule IX of any day within
the district or upon any of the streets described in said Schedule attached
to and made a part of this Ordinance.
§ 29-1604. [Ch. 29, Sec. 126] Parking prohibited during certain
hours on certain streets. [Ord. No. 1995-62]
When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall
park a vehicle between the hours specified in Schedule X on the specified
days within the district or upon any of the streets described in said Schedule
attached to and made a part of this Ordinance.
§ 29-1605. [Ch. 29, Sec. 127] Standing or parking prohibited during
certain hours on certain streets.
A. When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person
shall stand or park a vehicle between the hours specified in Schedule XI
of any day except Sundays and public holidays within the district or
upon any of the streets described in said Schedule. [Ord. No. 1980-3]
B. When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person
shall stand or park a vehicle between the hours specified in Schedule
§ 29-1601 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1605
1:995
§ 29-1606. [Ch. 29, Sec. 128] Parking time limited on certain
streets and City parking. [Ord. No. 2008-64]
XII of any day except Saturdays, Sundays and public holidays upon any
of the streets described in said Schedule. [Ord. No. 1980-3]
A. Parking time limits - Monday through Saturday.
(1) When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park
a vehicle for longer than the time specified on the sign(s) during
the specified portion of the day on any day except Sundays and
public holidays within the district or upon any of the streets
described in Subsection A of Schedule XIV attached to and made a
part of this Ordinance.
(2) When the time limit for parking a vehicle in a parking space has
expired from the time a vehicle has been initially parked in such a
space, a parking ticket may be issued for each additional restricted
time period the vehicle is parked in such space. [Ord. No.
2001-122]
B. Parking time limits - Monday through Friday - same space parking.
(1) When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park
a vehicle for longer than the time specified on the sign(s) during
the specified portion of the day on any day except Saturdays,
Sundays and public holidays within the district or upon any of the
streets described in Subsection B of Schedule XIV attached to and
made a part of this Ordinance.
(2) It is a violation for the same vehicle to be parked again by any
person in the same space on any of the streets described in
Subsection B of Schedule XIV during the same day, whether or not
it remained in the space for part or all of the time specified.
(3) When the time limit for parking a vehicle in a parking space has
expired from the time a vehicle has been initially parked in such a
space, a parking ticket may be issued for each additional restricted
time period the vehicle is parked in such space. [Ord. No.
2001-122]
C. Parking time limits - Monday through Friday - same block parking.
(1) When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park
a vehicle for longer than the time specified on the sign(s) during
the specified portion of the day on any day except Saturdays,
Sundays and public holidays within the district or upon any of the
streets described in Subsection C of Schedule XIV attached to and
made a part of this Ordinance.
(2) It is a violation for the same vehicle to be parked again by any
person in any space in the same block on any street described in
§ 29-1605 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1606
1:996
§ 29-1607. [Ch. 29, Sec. 129] Parking signs required.
Whenever by this or any other Ordinance of this City any parking time limit
is imposed or parking is prohibited on designated streets, it shall be the
duty of the City Traffic Engineer to erect appropriate signs giving notice
thereof and no such regulations shall be effective unless said signs are
erected and in place at the time of any alleged offense.
§ 29-1608. [Ch. 29, Sec. 130] Parking permits.
Any contractor, utility company, or other agency desiring to occupy a
parking space in excess of the time limits specified in § 29-1606 shall
first obtain a parking permit from the City Facilities Management/Parking
Division. The permit application shall state the location (Street Name and
Subsection C of Schedule XIV (including the opposite side of the
street) during the same day, whether or not it remained in any
space for part or all of the time specified.
(3) When the time limit for parking a vehicle in a parking space has
expired from the time a vehicle has been initially parked in such a
space, a parking ticket may be issued for each additional restricted
time period the vehicle is parked in such space. [Ord. No.
2001-122]
D. Parking time limits - at all times.
(1) When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park
a vehicle for longer than the time specified on the sign(s) during
the specified portion of the day on any day within the district or
upon any of the streets described in Subsection D of Schedule XIV
attached to and made a part of this Ordinance.
(2) When the time limit for parking a vehicle in a parking space has
expired from the time a vehicle has been initially parked in such a
space, a parking ticket may be issued for each additional restricted
time period the vehicle is parked in such space. [Ord. No.
2001-122]
E. Parking time limits - Monday through Friday - same lot parking.
(1) When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park
a vehicle for longer than the time specified on the sign(s) during
the specified portion of the day on any day except Saturdays,
Sundays, and public holidays within the lots described in
Subsection E of Schedule XIV.
(2) It is a violation for the same vehicle to be parked again by any
person in any space in the same lot described in Subsection E of
Schedule XIV during the same day, whether or not it remained in
any space for part or all of the time specified on the signs. [Ord.
No. 2017-108]
§ 29-1606 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1608
1:997
Block) of the desired parking, reason for time limit variance and length of
time the parking space will be occupied.
§ 29-1609. [Ch. 29, Sec. 131] Truck parking limited in residential
areas. [Ord. No. 1985-109]
Motor vehicles hereinafter defined in the category of heavy trucks shall
not be parked at any time on streets located within the areas of the said
City zoned and classified as Zone R-1A, R-1B, R-1C, R-2, R-3A, R-3B or R-4,
except for temporary parking as required to load or unload cargo. For the
purpose of this section, streets so restricted shall be the portions of such
streets that abut said residentially zoned property.
§ 29-1610. [Ch. 29, Sec. 132] Trucks defined.
For the purpose of the parking limitations in § 29-1609, a heavy truck is
defined as any vehicle having more than two axles or any vehicle having a
gross weight of more than 8,000 pounds.
A. A maximum of two parking permits will be issued to each company
performing work the specified location. A charge, as set forth in the
Schedule of Fees, will be assessed per permit.
B. A parking permit may be obtained upon proof of the following:
(1) Address where construction is being performed;
(2) Valid driver's license or State ID with current address.
C. Parking permits are not transferable.
D. A replacement fee, in the amount set forth in the Schedule of Fees, will
be charged for any lost, stolen or misplaced parking permits.
E. When renewing a parking permit, the old permit must be turned in and
the aforementioned fee paid before a new permit will be issued.
F. Misuse of parking permits, or willfully providing false information to
the City to obtain parking permits shall be punished by a minimum fine
of $100 and a maximum fine of $500.
G. Any vehicle towed for violating this section shall pay a release fee, in an
amount set forth in the Schedule of Fees, to the City of Bloomington
Police Department upon proof of ownership or proof of the right to
possession of the vehicle.
H. Parking permits will be issued only for Commercial Vehicles as defined
by 625 ILCS 5/1-111.8.
I. Parking permits must be prominently displayed from the rearview
mirror. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
§ 29-1608 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1611
1:998
§ 29-1611. [Ch. 29, Sec. 133] Weight limitations on certain streets.
No person shall drive or permit to be driven a motor vehicle having a total
gross weight in excess of those shown herein over or across the following
streets:
January 15th - April 15th [Ord.
No. 2015-25]
High from Lafayette to Hazel 8 tons
April 15th - January 15th — 2 Axle - 13 tons, 3 Axle - 18 tons, 5
Axle - 23 tons [Ord. No. 2007-91]
Greenwood from Heidloff to Lutz
Lutz from Greenwood to Morris
High from Lafayette to Hazel
No Class I Truck Access [Ord. No. 2000-76]
Hinshaw - north of Locust
Maple Hill from 1,800 feet east of Wylie to Enterprise
Stillwell - Market to Washington
Western - north of Locust
§ 29-1611 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1611
1:999

ARTICLE XVII
Penalties And Procedure On Traffic Citations
§ 29-1701. [Ch. 29, Sec. 134] Penalties.
§ 29-1702. [Ch. 29, Sec. 135] Alteration of traffic citation.
§ 29-1703. [Ch. 29, Sec. 136] Citation on illegally parked vehicle.
Whenever any motor vehicle without driver is found parked or stopped
in violation of any of the restrictions imposed by Ordinance of this City
or by state law, the officer finding such vehicle shall take its registration
number and may take any other information displayed on the vehicle which
may identify its user and shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a traffic
citation, on a form provided by the City, for the driver to answer to the
charge against him within five days during the hours and at a place
specified in the citation.
§ 29-1704. [Ch. 29, Sec. 137] Failure to comply with traffic citation
attached to parked vehicle.
If a violator of the restrictions on stopping, standing or parking under
the traffic law or ordinances does not appear in response to a traffic
citation affixed to such motor vehicle within a period of five days, the Police
Department shall send to the owner of the motor vehicle to which the traffic
citation was affixed a letter informing him of the violation and warning
him that in the event such letter is disregarded for a period of five days, a
warrant of arrest will be issued.
A. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this Ordinance in
Schedule XVI, included as a part of this Ordinance, every person
convicted of a violation of any provision of this Ordinance shall be
punished by a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $500. [Ord. No.
2007-09]
B. Whenever the terms first, second, third and subsequent offenses are
used in this Ordinance or attached Schedules, reference is made to the
number of violations of the same type by any person during any twelvemonth
period.
A. It shall be unlawful and official misconduct for any member of the Police
Department or other officer or public employee to dispose of, alter or
deface a traffic citation or any copy thereof, or the record of the
issuance or disposition of any traffic citation, complaint, or warrant in a
manner other than as required in this or any other Ordinance of this
City.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to cancel or solicit the cancellation of
any traffic citation in any manner other than as provided by this or any
other Ordinance of this City.
§ 29-1701 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1705
1:1001
§ 29-1705. [Ch. 29, Sec. 138] Presumption in reference to illegal
parking.
§ 29-1706. [Ch. 29, Sec. 139] Official misconduct.
Failure, refusal or neglect on the part of any judicial or other official or
employee receiving or having custody of any such fine or forfeiture, either
before or after a deposit in said fund or funds to comply with the foregoing
provisions of this section shall constitute misconduct in office and shall be
ground for removal therefrom.
A. In any prosecution charging a violation of any law or regulation
governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular
vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any such
law or regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the
complaint was at the time of such parking the registered owner of such
vehicle shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the
registered owner of such vehicle was the person who marked or placed
such vehicle at the point where and for the time during which such
violation occurred.
B. The foregoing stated presumption shall apply only when the procedure
as prescribed in §§ 29-1703 and 29-1704 has been followed.
§ 29-1705 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1706
1:1002
ARTICLE XVIII
Schedules Of Designated Streets, Fines And Parking Zones Referred
To In This Ordinance
§ 29-1801. [Ch. 29, Sec. 141] Schedule I: Right, Left and U-Turns
Prohibited.
In accordance with § 29-604 and when properly sign posted, traffic shall not
turn in the directions indicated when moving into the named intersections
upon the following streets:
A. Left turn prohibited: [Ord. No. 2007-45]
Location
Clinton, northbound at Oakland
Dairy Queen's west drive onto RT Dunn
Southbound from State Farm entrance onto eastbound Oakland
Post Office, southernmost drive, at Towanda
Stevenson School parking lot exit at Arrowhead
Walgreens Drive onto GE
7:00 a.m. - 9:00 a.m.; 4:00 p.m. - 6:00 p.m. [Ord. No. 1994-52]
Springfield, eastbound at Morris
School Days - 8:15 - 8:45 a.m. and 3:00 - 3:45 p.m. [Ord. No.
2015-25]
College Eastbound at Northpoint School Drives
Northpoint School Drives Southbound at College
B. Left turn permitted on arrow only: [Ord. No. 2006-131]
Location
Empire, eastbound and westbound, at Fairway
Empire, (Rt. 9), eastbound and westbound, at K-Mart/Eastland
Crossover
Lincoln, westbound at Arcadia
Main, northbound and southbound at Hamilton
Main, southbound, at Dunn Road
Main, northbound, at Veterans Parkway North Ramp
Market at Wylie, all left turns
Veterans at Commerce, east-west left turns
Veterans, northbound and southbound at Fox Creek/Hamilton
§ 29-1801 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1801
1:1003
Location
Veterans, eastbound and westbound, at Brickyard
Veterans, eastbound and westbound at Mercer
Veterans, eastbound and westbound, at Morris
Veterans, at Morrissey, all left turns
Veterans at Eastland, all left turns
Veterans at Jumer Drive/Von Maur, all left turns
Veterans and Lincoln, all left turns
Veterans, northbound and southbound, at Empire
Veterans, northbound, at Jackson
Veterans, northbound and southbound, at Oakland
Veterans at Clearwater, all left turns
Veterans, southbound at Ireland Grove Road
Veterans at Vernon-G.E., all left turns
Veterans at Washington, all left turns
Veterans, westbound and eastbound, at Morris
C. U-turn prohibited: [Ord. No. 2007-91]
Location
College, Woodfield to Stone Mountain
Fairway at south end of median south of Empire
General Electric at Auto Row/Keaton - Eastbound Traffic
Main at the 3 median breaks between Armory Drive and Veterans
Pkwy.
Towanda at north end of median south of Post Office, north entrance
(1) All intersections controlled by automatic signals.
(2) No vehicle shall be turned around in a street except at an
intersection, and then only at intersections where U-Turns are not
prohibited. No U-turn shall be made at a time or in such a manner
as to impede traffic.
D. Right turn prohibited: [Ord. No. 2001-77]
Location
Livingston, southbound at MacArthur
Stevenson School horseshoe drive exit at Arrowhead
§ 29-1801 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1801
1:1004
§ 29-1802. [Ch. 29, Sec. 142] Schedule II: One-Way Streets.
In accordance with § 29-702 and when properly sign posted, traffic shall
move only in the direction indicated upon the following streets:
Through Prohibited on School Days
8:15 - 8:45 a.m. and 3:00 - 3:45 p.m. [Ord. No. 2015-25]
Biasi, Northbound at College
Turn on Red Prohibited [Ord. No. 2007-45]
Clinton, northbound, onto Grove
Empire westbound onto Fairway
Empire eastbound onto Eastland/K-Mart Crossover
Turn on Red Prohibited on School Days When Children Are
Present [Ord. No. 1995-61]
Center at Empire - southbound and westbound
Colton at Locust - northbound
Hinshaw at Market - all directions
Towanda at Washington - all directions
Towanda at Empire - southbound and westbound
Turn on Red Prohibited When Bicyclists or Pedestrians Are
Present [Ord. No. 1999-20]
Airport Road, southbound onto G.E. Road
G.E. Road, westbound onto Airport Road
A. Streets: [Ord. No. 2008-76]
Location
Alley north of Bent School - eastbound - Lee to Roosevelt
Alley bounded by Linden, Walnut, Eugene, and Empire - Westbound
Center - southbound - Division to Front
Center - southbound - Olive to Main
Cottage - northbound - Perry to Forrest
East (U.S. 51) - northbound - Olive to Locust
Empire - westbound - Towanda to Lee
Evans - northbound - Oakland to Locust (U.S. 150)
Jefferson - eastbound - Prairie to Clinton
Jefferson - eastbound - Morris to Allin
§ 29-1801 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1802
1:1005
§ 29-1803. [Ch. 29, Sec. 143] Schedule III: Through Streets. [Ord.
No. 2015-25]
In accordance with the provisions of § 29-801, the following named streets
or parts of streets are declared through streets, and when signs are erected
giving notice thereof, drivers of vehicles shall stop or yield at every
intersection before entering any of the following streets or parts of streets:
Location
Airport, Ft. Jesse to Empire
Allin, Wood to Front
Arrowhead, Holiday to Royal Pointe
Binghampton, Danbury to Lone Oak
Bissell, Low to Center
Location
Locust (U.S. 150) - eastbound - Lee to Towanda
MacArthur - eastbound - Oakland to Gridley
Madison (U.S. 51) - southbound - Locust to Olive
Main (U.S. 51) - northbound - Center to Olive
Main - northbound - Front to Mulberry
Main (U.S. 51) - northbound - Locust to north corporate limits
Manor Circle - counter clockwise
Miller Park Streets (See Exhibit C)66
Monroe - westbound - Oak to Morris
Monroe - westbound - Clinton to Prairie
Morris - northbound - Market to Mulberry
Mulberry - westbound - U.S. 51 to Main
Oakland - westbound - Gridley to MacArthur
O'Neil Park drive north of skate park counter counterclockwise
Tipton Park (counter clockwise) from Stone Mountain
Tracy - counter clockwise in circle drive at south end
B. Driveways (entrance): [Ord. No. 1996-38]
Location
600 Block North Main, Parking Lot westbound at East
600 Block North Main, Parking Lot northbound at Main
66.Editor's Note: Exhibit C is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 29-1802 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1803
1:1006
Location
Bradley, Mecherle to Rowe
Breezewood, Woodrig to Red Oak
Broadmoor, Lincoln to Oakland
Carrington, Rutherford to Fox Creek
Clearwater, Veterans Parkway to Airport Road
College, Veterans Parkway to Airport
Colton, Washington to Emerson
Commerce, Gilmore to Hamilton
Cornelius, Airport to Ekstam
Crooked Creek, Fox Creek to Carrington
Cumbria, Watford to Old Farm
Danbury, Cabintown to Binghampton
Delmar, Fairway to Rowe
Division, Adelaide to Center
Dover, Ireland Grove to Gloucester
East, Grove to Mulberry
East, Wood to Lincoln
Eastland, Fairway to Hershey
Eastport, Empire to Arrowhead
Eddy, Oakland to White Eagle
Eldorado, Lincoln to Oakland
Emerson, Seminary to Towanda
Empire, east City limit to Lee
Erickson, Olive to Indiana
Euclid, Washington to Oakland
Fairway, Towanda to Empire
Fox Creek Road, Beich to west corporate limits
Front, Morris to Clinton
Ft. Jesse, Hershey to Towanda/Barnes
Gailey, Stevenson to Radbourne
General Electric, Veterans to Towanda/Barnes
Gettysburg, Empire (Rt. 9) to Arrowhead Gridley, Wood to Oakland
Greenwood, Morris to south corporate limits
Grove, Morris to Mercer
§ 29-1803 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1803
1:1007
Location
Hamilton, Bunn to Morris
Hamilton, Commerce to Hershey
Hannah, Croxton to Oakland
Harvest Pointe, Empire to north corporate limits
Hershey, Hamilton to Ft. Jesse
Hinshaw, Market to Locust
Holiday, Empire (Rt. 9) northerly to Arrowhead
Huntington, Airport to Park Ridge
IAA, Empire to Vernon
Ireland Grove, Veterans to east corporate limits
JC Parkway, Market to Valley View
Jefferson, Morris to Allin
Jefferson, Prairie to Clinton
Jersey, Normal City limits to Towanda
Jumer, Veterans to Hershey
Keystone, Huntington to Southfork
Kickapoo, Ireland Grove to north corporate limits
Kreitzer, Oakland to Grove
Laesch, Morris to Greenwood
Lafayette, Main (U.S. 51) to Morrissey
Lee, Division to Miller
Lincoln, Main to Bunn
Lincoln, Morrissey to Hershey
Linden, north City limit to Locust (U.S. 150)
Livingston, Forrest to Locust (U.S. 150)
Locust (U.S. 150), White Oak to Towanda
Lumber, Oakland to Mill
MacArthur, Oakland to Gridley
Main (U.S. 51), north City limit to south City limit
Market, west City limit to East
Martin Luther King, Jr., Cottage to Market
Market, west City limit to East
Mason, Seminary to Chestnut
McGregor, Lincoln to Oakland
§ 29-1803 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1803
1:1008
Location
McLean, Empire to Oakland
Mercer, Washington to Hamilton
Mill, Lumber to Livingston
Miller, Morris to Alexander
Monroe, Clinton to Prairie
Monroe, East to Morris
Morris, Locust to Seminary
Morris, Walnut to Graham
Morris, south City limit to Market
Morrissey, south City limit to Croxton
Mt. Vernon, Empire to Arrowhead
Norma, GE to Pamela
North Pointe, College to Ft. Jesse
Oak, Seminary to Empire
Oakland, east City limit to west City limit
Old Farm Road, Oakland to Prenzler
Olive, west City limit to Gridley
Pamela, Towanda Barnes to Ekstam
Park Place, Martin Luther King, Jr. to north corporate limits
Park Ridge, Ft. Jesse to Fox Ridge
Prairie, Jefferson to Locust
Prairie Crossing, 2100 east to west corporate limits
Prenzler, Old Farm Road to Eddy
Prospect, Oakland to Empire
Radliff, Fairway to Rowe
Rainbow, Oakbrook to Royal Point
Regency, Oakland to Fairway
Riley, Mecherle to Rowe
Robinson, Oakland to Washington
Rocksbury, Binghampton to Carrington
Royal Pointe, Empire to Rainbow
Seminary, Cottage to Emerson
South Fork, Keystone to Graystone
Springdale, Breezewood to Ashwood
§ 29-1803 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1803
1:1009
Location
Springfield, Fox Creek to Morris
Springfield, Morris Avenue to Lake
State, Oakland to Washington
Stone Mountain, College to Hubbard
Towanda, Washington to Jersey
Towanda/Barnes, north corporate limits to south corporate limits
Trinity, Empire to Cornelius
Vale, Lincoln to Washington
Vista, Northway to Bradley
Washington, west City limit to Greenleaf
Wellington, Hershey to Greenleaf
Western, Market to Seminary
White Oak, north City limit to Locust (U.S. 150)
Wisteria, Airport to east end
Wood, Morris to Gridley
§ 29-1804. [Ch. 29, Sec. 144] Schedule IV: Intersections and
Crosswalks Controlled by Traffic Signal. [Ord. No. 2015-25]
In accordance with § 29-802 of this Ordinance, the following intersections
and cross-walks are controlled at all times by traffic signals:
Location
Airport - Clearwater
Airport - College
Airport - Empire
Airport Entrance - Empire Airport - General Electric
Arcadia - Lincoln
Bloomington High School Entrance - Locust
Brickyard - Veterans
Brown - Market
Bunn - Oakland
Caroline - Market
Center - Chestnut
Center - Emerson
Center - Empire
§ 29-1803 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1804
1:1010
Location
Center (at Front) [Repealed 7-8-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-51]
Center - Locust
Center - Mac Arthur
Center - Market
Center - Oakland
Center - Olive
Center - Washington
Center - Wood
Cira (east)/Haeffele - Empire
Cira (west) - Trinity at Empire
Clinton - Empire
Clinton - Grove
Colton - Locust
Clinton - Locust
Clinton - Oakland
Clinton - Washington
Colton - Locust
Commerce - Veterans
East - Front
East - Jefferson
East - Market
East - Monroe
East - Washington
Eastport - Empire
Empire - Fire House #3
Fairway - Eastland
Fairway - Eastland west entrance
Fairway - Empire
Four Seasons - Oakland
Franklin - Emerson
Gettysburg/Williamsburg - Empire
Hannah - Oakland
Hershey - Eastland
Hershey - Empire
§ 29-1804 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1804
1:1011
Location
Hershey - Ft. Jesse
Hershey - General Electric
Hershey - Heartland
Hershey - Ireland Grove
Hershey - Lincoln
Hershey - Oakland
Hershey - Washington
Hinshaw - Market
IAA - Vernon
I-55 Service Road - Market
JC Parkway - Market
King - Market
K-Mart/Eastland Crossover - Empire
Loop - Ireland Grove
Madison - Front
Madison - Jefferson
Madison - Market
Madison - Washington
Main - Dunn
Main - Emerson
Main - Empire
Main (at Front) [Repealed 7-8-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-51]
Main - Hamilton/Sale Barn
Main - Locust
Main - MacArthur
Main - Market
Main - Oak Creek/Hilltop
Main - Olive
Main - Veterans (north ramp)/Dunn
Main - Veterans (south ramp)
Main - Washington
Main - Wood
Mercer - Hamilton
Mercer - Veterans
§ 29-1804 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1804
1:1012
Location
McLean - Washington
Meijer Entrance - College
Mitsubishi - Market
Morris - Hamilton
Morris - Market
Morris - Veterans
Morrissey - Hamilton
Morrissey - Lafayette
Mt. Vernon - Empire
Prairie - Washington
Prospect - Washington
Regency - Oakland
Regency - State Farm west entrance
Road "F" - Hamilton
Six Points at Fire House #5
St. Joseph - Washington
Susan - College
Sweeney Drive at Hamilton Road
Towanda - Empire
Towanda - Fairway/Emerson
Towanda - Jersey/IAA entrance
Towanda - Post Office entrance
Towanda - Towanda Service Road
Towanda - Vernon (Town of Normal)
Towanda - Washington
Towanda Barnes - Empire
Towanda Barnes - Ft. Jesse
Towanda Barnes - General Electric
Towanda Barnes - Ireland Grove
Towanda Barnes - Oakland
Veterans - Clearwater
Veterans - Eastland
Veterans - Empire (Rt. 9) (east intersection, north intersection, central
intersection, south intersection, west intersection)
§ 29-1804 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1804
1:1013
Location
Veterans - Hamilton
Veterans - Ireland Grove
Veterans at Jackson
Veterans at Jumer Drive/Von Maur
Veterans - Lincoln
Veterans - Morrissey (U.S. 150)
Veterans - Oakland
Veterans - Vernon - General Electric
Veterans - Washington
Walton - Market
Washington - Regency
White Oak - Martin Luther King
Wylie - Market
§ 29-1805. [Ch. 29, Sec. 145] Schedule V: Stop Signs.
In accordance with §§ 29-804 and 29-805 of this Ordinance, all vehicles
traveling on the following named streets must come to a complete stop
before proceeding into or across said intersections:
A. The following intersections are declared to be all-way stops, and all
vehicles must come to a complete stop before proceeding into or across
said intersections: [Ord. No. 2018-29]
Location
Allin - Washington
Airport - Ft. Jesse
Bunn - Hamilton
Bunn - Lafayette
Bunn - Lincoln
Center - Front [Added 7-8-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-51]
Center - Jefferson
Clinton - Emerson [Added 7-8-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-51]
East/Albert - Olive
Emerson (at Clinton) [Repealed 7-8-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-51]
Empire (at Lee) [Repealed 7-8-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-51]
Evergreen - Washington
Front (at Lee) [Repealed 7-8-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-51]
§ 29-1804 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1805
1:1014
Location
Hershey - Arrowhead
Hershey - Clearwater
Hershey - College
Hershey - Ft. Jesse
Hinshaw - Locust
Lee - Empire [Added 7-8-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-51]
Lee - Front [Added 7-8-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-51]
Lee - Locust
Lee - Market
Lee - Olive
Lee - Washington
Linden - Emerson
Loop Drive - Old Ireland Grove Road
Locust - Towanda
Main - Jefferson
Main - Monroe
Main - Mulberry
McLean - Grove
Mercer - Ireland Grove
Mercer - Lincoln
Mercer - Oakland
Mercer - Washington
Miller Park at: T-intersection north of Pavilion and northeast of Zoo
building
Morris - MacArthur
Morris - Oakland
Morris - Washington [Added 7-8-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-51]
Morris - Wood
Prospect - Eastland
Washington (at Morris) [Repealed 7-8-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-51]
B. The following intersections are declared three-way stops and all
vehicles must come to a complete stop before proceeding into or across
said intersections: [Ord. No. 2005-111]
§ 29-1805 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1805
1:1015
Location
Eastland/K-Mart Crossover (southbound) - north Empire Frontage
Road
Fairway (southbound) - north Empire Frontage Road
Oakland (westbound) - Gridley
C. All vehicles traveling upon the following named through streets must
come to a complete stop before proceeding into or across the said
intersections: [Ord. No. 2018-29]
Name of Street Stop Intersection
Allin Stops for MacArthur
Allin Stops for Oakland
Allin Stops for Wood
Arrowhead Stops for Airport
Arrowhead Stops for Holiday
Arrowhead Stops for Royal Pointe
Bissell Stops for Center
Bissell Stops for Low
Breezewood Stops for Woodrig
Broadmoor Stops for Lincoln
Broadmoor Stops for Oakland
Carrington Stops for Fox Creek
Clayton Stops for Grove
Clayton Stops for Lincoln
Clayton Stops for Oakland
Colton Stops for Emerson
Colton Stops for Empire
Colton Stops for Washington
Commerce Stops for Hamilton
Cornelius Stops for Airport
Crooked Creek Stops for Fox Creek
Crooked Creek Stops for Carrington
East Stops for Lincoln
East Stops for Wood
Eastport Stops for Arrowhead
Eddy Stops for Oakland
§ 29-1805 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1805
1:1016
Name of Street Stop Intersection
Erickson Stops for Olive
Euclid Stops for Oakland
Euclid Stops for Washington
Fairway
(southbound)
Stops for north Empire Frontage Road
Front Stops for Clinton
Front Stops for Morris
General Electric Stops for Towanda/Barnes
Gettysburg Stops for Arrowhead
Gridley Stops for Market
Gridley Stops for Oakland
Grove Stops for Allin
Grove Stops for East
Grove Stops for Lee
Grove Stops for Madison
Grove Stops for Mercer
Grove Stops for Morris
Grove Stops for Roosevelt
IAA Drive Stops for Eastland/K-Mart Crossover
JC Parkway Stops for Valley View
Jefferson Stops for Allin
Jefferson Stops for Clinton
Jefferson Stops for Colton
Jefferson Stops for Lee
Jefferson Stops for McLean
Jefferson Stops for Perrin
Jumer Stops for Hershey
Kickapoo Stops for Ireland Grove
Kreitzer Stops for Oakland
Lafayette Stops for Center
Lafayette Stops for Main
Laesch Stops for Greenwood
Laesch Stops for Morris
Lee Stops for Division
§ 29-1805 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1805
1:1017
Name of Street Stop Intersection
Lee Stops for Emerson
Lee Stops for Oakland
Leslie Stops for General Electric
Lincoln Stops for Bunn
Lincoln Stops for Main
Lincoln Stops for Morrissey
Linden Stops for Empire
Linden Stops for Locust
Livingston Stops for Locust
Locust Stops for White Oak
McGregor Stops for Oakland
McLean Stops for Empire
McLean Stops for Front
McLean Stops for Locust
McLean Stops for Oakland
Mill Stops for Livingston
Miller Stops for Alexander
Miller Stops for Morris
Monroe Stops for Allin
Monroe Stops for Center
Monroe Stops for Lee
Monroe Stops for McLean
Monroe Stops for Madison
Monroe Stops for Morris
Monroe Stops for Prairie
Morris
(northbound)
Stops for Seminary
Norma Stops for GE
Norma Stops for Pamela
North Pointe Stops for College
North Pointe Stops for Ft. Jesse
Oakland Stops for Fox Creek
Oakland
(westbound)
Stops for Gridley
§ 29-1805 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1805
1:1018
Name of Street Stop Intersection
Oakland Stops for Livingston
Oakland Stops for Towanda-Barnes
Olive Stops for Allin
Olive Stops for Euclid
Olive Stops for Lee
Olive Stops for Morris
Pamela Stops for Towanda-Barnes
Prairie Stops for Jefferson
Prairie Stops for Locust
Prairie Crossing Stops for 2100 East
Prairie Crossing Stops for Kickapoo Creek
Prospect Stops for Oakland
Royal Pointe Stops for Clearwater
Robinson Stops for Grove
Robinson Stops for Oakland
Robinson Stops for Washington
Seminary
(westbound)
Stops for Cottage
Springdale Stops for Breezewood
Springfield Stops for Fox Creek
Springfield Stops for Morris
State Stops for Grove
State Stops for Oakland
Trinity Stops for Cornelius
Vale Stops for Grove
Vale Stops for Lincoln
Vale Stops for Oakland
Vale Stops for Washington
Western Stops for Locust
Western Stops for Market
Western Stops for Seminary
D. All vehicles traveling upon the following named streets must come to a
complete stop before proceeding into or across the named
intersections: [Ord. No. 2018-29]
§ 29-1805 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1805
1:1019
Name of Street Stop Intersection
1050E Stops for Six Points
Access Stops for Beich
Addison Stops for Fort Jesse
Airline Stops for Eastport
Albert Stops for Grove
Allin Stops for Chestnut
Allin Stops for Front
Allin Stops for Seminary
Andover Stops for Lincoln
Anglers Lake Stops for Morrissey
Ann Stops for Airport
Arcadia Stops for Eldorado
Arcadia
(southbound)
Stops for Fairmont (north intersection)
Arcadia
(northbound)
Stops for Fairmont (south intersection)
Arcadia Stops for Ireland Grove
Arlene Stops for Lincoln
Ash Stops for Lafayette
Ashley Stops for Beich
Astoria Stops for Streid
Audie Murphy Stops for Empire
Auto Row Stops for G.E.
Bainbridge Stops for Rutherford
Baker Stops for Bunn
Baker Stops for Center
Ballyshannon Stops for Ireland Grove
Bancroft Stops for Arrowhead
Bancroft Stops for Slayton
Bardwell Stops for Springdale
Barker Stops for Miller
Barker Stops for Wood
Bayberry Stops for Washington
Bay Pointe
(north)
Stops for North Pointe
§ 29-1805 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1805
1:1020
Name of Street Stop Intersection
Bay View Stops for Ireland Grove
Baywood Stops for Towanda-Barnes
Baywood Stops for Woodbine
Beacon Circle
(both
intersections)
Stops for North Pointe
Beacon Court Stops for North Pointe
Bear Creek Stops for Ireland Grove
Bedeker Stops for Carrington
Beechwood Stops for Maple
Beich Stops for Fox Creek
Beich Stops for Springfield
Bell Stops for Bunn
Bell Stops for Clayton
Bell Stops for Hannah
Bell Stops for Maizefield
Bell Stops for McClun
Bellemont Stops for Washington
Belvedere Stops for Kickapoo Creek
Bent Stops for Ireland Grove
Berenz Stops for Lafayette
Berenz Stops for Stewart
Berry Stops for Monticello
Berry Stops for Wisteria
Bettis Stops for Wylie
Bettis Stops for JC Parkway
Beverly Stops for Lafayette
Beyer Stops for Hinshaw
Biasi Stops for College
Bissell Stops for Bunn
Bissell Stops for Clayton
Bissell Stops for Clinton
Bissell Stops for East
Bissell Stops for Main
§ 29-1805 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1805
1:1021
Name of Street Stop Intersection
Black Oak Stops for Ireland Grove
Blackstone Stops for Hinshaw
Blackstone Stops for Livingston
Blackstone Stops for Morris
Blackstone Stops for Western
Bloomington
Country Club
Drive
Stops for Towanda
Blue Ash Stops for Fox Creek
Bohmer Stops for Streid
Bowen Stops for Dinsmore
Brad [Amended
7-8-2019 by
Ord. No.
2019-51]
Stops for Truckers Lane
Bradley Stops for Rowe
Brandywine
Court (east-west)
Stops for Washington
Breckenridge Stops for Emerson
Breckenwood Stops for Streid
Breezewood Stops for Red Oak
Broad Creek Stops for General Electric
Brookshire
Green
Stops for Hershey
Brompton Stops for Hershey
Brown Stops for Washington
Buchanan Stops for Bunn
Buchanan Stops for Center
Buchanan Stops for Clayton
Buchanan Stops for Clinton
Buchanan Stops for East
Buchanan Stops for Main
Buchanan Stops for Miller
Buckeye Stops for Eldorado
Buckeye Stops for Fairmont
Bunn Stops for Springdale
§ 29-1805 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1805
1:1022
Name of Street Stop Intersection
Butchers Lane Stops for Alexander
Butchers Lane Stops for Morris
Cabintown Stops for Fox Creek
Cadwell Stops for Arrowhead
Calhoun Stops for Seminary
Camelot Stops for Washington
Canterbury Stops for Fairway
Canterbury Stops for Regency
Capen Stops for Broadmoor
Capen Stops for Lincoln
Caroline Stops for Washington
Castle Stops for Moore
Castle Stops for Vale
Castlebar Stops for Kickapoo Creek
Castleton Stops for Hershey
Catherine Stops for Locust
Catherine Stops for Market
Catherine Stops for Monroe
Challis Stops for Arrowhead
Challis Stops for Slayton
Chelsea Stops for Oakland
Cheshire Stops for Oakland
Chestnut Stops for Colton
Chestnut Stops for Eugene
Chestnut Stops for Hinshaw
Chestnut Stops for Lee
Chestnut Stops for Linden
Chestnut Stops for Livingston
Chestnut Stops for Madison
Chestnut Stops for McLean
Chestnut Stops for Morris
Chestnut Stops for Prairie
Chestnut Stops for Western
Chestnut Stops for White Oak
§ 29-1805 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1805
1:1023
Name of Street Stop Intersection
Circle (north and
south)
Stops for Brown
Circle Stops for Stillwell
Clayton Stops for Front
Clayton Stops for Jefferson
Clayton Stops for Market
Clayton Stops for Monroe
Clayton Stops for Oakland
Clayton Stops for Washington
Clinton Stops for Bell
Clinton Stops for Lincoln
Clinton
(northbound)
Stops for Oakland
Clinton Stops for Wood
Clobertin Court Stops for Four Seasons
Cloud Stops for McGregor
Cloud Stops for Vale
Cloud Stops for Springdale
Commerce
[Added
7-8-2019 by
Ord. No.
2019-51]
Stops for Gilmore
Conlor Stops for Springdale
Cooper Stops for Heartland
Cottage Stops for Forrest
Cottage Stops for Graham
Cottage Stops for Martin Luther King Drive
Cottage Stops for Perry
Cottonwood Stops for Lafayette
Country Club Stops for Towanda
Country Stops for Morningside
Country Lane Stops for Oakland
Coventry Court Stops for Broadmoor
Coventry Stops for Country
Creamery Stops for Harvest Pointe
§ 29-1805 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1805
1:1024
Name of Street Stop Intersection
Crimson Stops for General Electric
Crimson Stops for Wisteria
Crista Ann Stops for Ireland Grove
Crown Stops for Lincoln
Croxton Stops for Bunn
Croxton Stops for Hannah
Croxton Stops for McGregor
Croxton Stops for Vale
Crystal Stops for Lafayette
Crystal Stops for Oakland
Cumbria Stops for Old Farm
Currency Stops for Commerce
Dallas Stops for Clearwater
Danbury Stops for Cabintown
Darrah Stops for Western
Davis Stops for Monroe
Davis Stops for Washington
Dawes Stops for Linden
Dean Stops for King
Dee Farm Stops for Harvest Pointe
DeGarmo Stops for Gailey
DeGarmo Stops for Stone Mountain
Delmar Stops for Fairway
Derby (East) Stops for Baywood
Derby (West) Stops for Baywood
Devonshire Stops for Washington
Division Stops for Adelaide
Division Stops for Center
Division Stops for Main
Division Stops for University
Dodge Stops for Broadmoor
Dodge Stops for Country
Dodge Stops for Hershey
Dogwood Stops for Arrowhead
§ 29-1805 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1805
1:1025
Name of Street Stop Intersection
Dogwood Stops for Mt. Vernon
Douglas Stops for Evans
Dover Stops for Gloucester
Dover Stops for Ireland Grove
Dry Sage Stops for Harvest Pointe
Eagle Creek Stops for Airport
Eagle Crest Stops for Airport
East Stops for Beecher
East Stops for Chestnut
East Stops for Emerson
East Stops for Empire
East Stops for Lafayette
East Stops for Locust
East Stops for Mac Arthur
East Stops for Oakland
East Stops for Stewart
East Stops for Walnut
Eastgate Stops for Mercer
Eastholme Stops for Emerson
Eastholme Stops for Empire
Eastholme Stops for Marion
Eastport Stops for Clearwater
Ebach Stops for Emerson
Eddy Stops for Oakland
Eddy Stops for White Eagle
Ekstam Stops for Pamela
Eldorado Stops for Lincoln
Eldorado Stops for Oakland
Eldorado Stops for Prospect
Eldorado
(relocated)
Stops for Prospect
Eisenhower Stops for Jersey
Elder Stops for Walnut
Elm Stops for Bunn
§ 29-1805 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1805
1:1026
Name of Street Stop Intersection
Elm Stops for Center
Elm Stops for Lee
Elm Stops for Livingston
Elm Stops for Miller
Elm Stops for Morris
Elmwood Stops for Colton
Emerald Crest Stops for Crooked Creek
Empire Stops for Livingston
Empire Stops for Mason
Empire Stops for Morris
Empire Stops for Western
Empire Service
Road (north)
Crossover
Stops for Eastland and K-Mart
Empire Service
Road (north)
Stops for Fairway
Empire Service
Road (north)
Stops for Towanda Service Road
Empire Service
Road (south)
Crossover
Stops for Eastland and K-Mart
Empire Service
Road (south)
Stops for Fairway
Erickson Stops for Indiana
Ethell Stops for Emerson
Essington Stops for Binghamton
Essington Stops for Carrington
Eugene Stops for Locust
Eugene Stops for Walnut
Evans Stops for Chestnut
Evans Stops for Empire
Evans Stops for Lincoln
Evans Stops for Graham
Evans Stops for Locust
Evans Stops for Oakland
Evans Stops for University
§ 29-1805 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1805
1:1027
Name of Street Stop Intersection
Evans Stops for Walnut
Ewing Stops for Seminary
Ewing Park exit Stops for Ethell
Fedor (East) Stops for Six Points
Fedor (West) Stops for Six Points
Fell Stops for Emerson
Felton Stops for Robinson
Ferryman Stops for Kickapoo Creek
Fiddlestix Stops for Crooked Creek
Fifer Stops for Market
Finlen Stops for Kickapoo Creek
Fleetwood Stops for Towanda
Flag Tree Stops for Crooked Creek
Florence Stops for Jackson
Florence Stops for Taylor
Folson Stops for Morris
Forest Park Road
(north entrance)
Stops for Tanner
Forrest Stops for Morris
Forrest Stops for Western
Fountain Lake Stops for Old Farm
Four Seasons
(southbound)
Stops for Four Seasons (Relocated)
Four Seasons Stops for Lincoln
Francesco Stops for Kickapoo Creek
Fremont Stops for Bunn
Fremont Stops for Clayton
Fremont Stops for Clinton
Front Stops for McClun
Front Stops for Robinson
Front Stops for State
Front Stops for Western
Fuller Stops for Beich
Gabby Stops for Ark
§ 29-1805 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1805
1:1028
Name of Street Stop Intersection
Gailey Stops for Stevenson
Gailey Stops for Radbourne
Garfield Stops for Bradley
Garfield Stops for Northway
Garling Stops for Vale
Gas Stops for Washington
Gerig Stops for Haeffele
Gettysburg Stops for Arrowhead
Gill Stops for Airport
Gina Stops for Norma
Ginger Creek Stops for Washington
Glasson Stops for Ireland Grove
Glenbridge Stops for Ireland Grove
Glenwood Stops for Arrowhead
Gloucester Stops for Hershey
Golden Stops for Vale
Goldenrod Stops for Laesch
Goose Creek Stops for Morris
Graham Stops for Fell
Graham Stops for Hinshaw
Graham Stops for Livingston
Graham Stops for Madison
Graham Stops for Mason
Graham Stops for McLean
Graham Stops for Morris
Graham Stops for Oak
Graham Stops for Park
Graham Stops for Roosevelt
Graham Stops for Western
Graham Stops for White Oak
Granada Stops for Olive
Grandview Stops for Hershey
Grandview Stops for Prospect
Gray Stops for Lee
§ 29-1805 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1805
1:1029
Name of Street Stop Intersection
Greenleaf Stops for Washington
Greenwood Stops for Hamilton
Greenwood
(Southbound)
Stops for Heidlott
Greenwood Stops for Morris
Greyhound Stops for Hamilton
Gridley Stops for Market
Gridley Stops for Washington
Grove Stops for Euclid
Grove Stops for Lumber
Grove Stops for Western
Guido Stops for Oakland
Gunderson Stops for Carrington
Hall Stops for Prospect
Handle [Added
7-8-2019 by
Ord. No.
2019-51]
Stops for Lutz
Haney Stops for Morris
Harbord Stops for Meadows
Harbord Stops for Maizefield (north intersection)
Harbor Pointe
(north and south
intersection)
Stops for North Pointe
Hardman Stops for Lafayette
Harvest Stops for Old Farm
Harwood Stops for Taylor
Hayloft Stops for Old Farm
Hedgewood Stops for College
Heidloff Stops for Greenwood
Helen Stops for Norma
Herbert Stops for Mercer
High
(northbound)
Stops for Lafayette
Hillside Stops for Delmar
Hillside Stops for Radliff
§ 29-1805 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1805
1:1030
Name of Street Stop Intersection
Hilltop Mobile
Home driveways
Stops for Bunn
Hinshaw Stops for Butchers Lane
Hinshaw
(northbound)
Stops for Market
Hinshaw Stops for Miller
Hinshaw Stops for Wood
Holiday Stops for Mt. Vernon
Horenberger
(northbound)
Stops for Emerson
Horenberger
(southbound)
Stops for Beecher
Hoyt Stops for South Market Service Road
Humanity Stops for Stockholm
Huntington Stops for Airport
IAA Service
Drive
Stops for IAA
Illinois Stops for Erickson
Illinois Stops for Euclid
Imperial Stops for Towanda
Independence
(west
intersection)
Stops for Wellington
Indianapolis Stops for Croxton
Indiana Stops for Euclid
Inglewood Stops for Fox Creek
Inglewood Stops for G.E. Road
Interlocken Stops for Eagle Crest
Inverness Stops for Emerson
Iowa Stops for Erickson
Iowa Stops for Euclid
Ireland Grove Stops for Brickyard
Jackson Stops for Allin
Jackson Stops for Clayton
Jackson Stops for Clinton
Jackson Stops for Denver
§ 29-1805 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1805
1:1031
Name of Street Stop Intersection
Jackson Stops for East
Jackson Stops for Evans
Jackson Stops for Gridley
Jackson Stops for Kreitzer
Jackson Stops for Livingston
Jackson Stops for Mason
Jackson Stops for McClun
Jackson Stops for Mercer
Jackson Stops for Morris
Jackson Stops for State
Jackson Stops for Vale
Jefferson Stops for Allin
Jefferson Stops for Colton
Jefferson Stops for Davis
Jefferson Stops for Perrin
Jefferson Stops for Towanda
Joseph Stops for Brigham
Julie Stops for Lafayette
Julie Stops for Lincoln
Juniper Stops for Six Points
Juniper Stops for Woodhavens
Kaisner Stops for Ft. Jesse
Keaton Stops for G.E. Road
Kell Stops for Ireland Grove
Kelsey Stops for Center
Kelsey Stops for East
Kelsey
(eastbound)
Stops for Franklin
Kelsey Stops for Main
Kelsey Stops for Roosevelt
Kenneth Stops for Clearwater
Kentucky Alley Stops for Center
Kentucky Alley Stops for Main
Keybridge Stops for Ireland Grove
§ 29-1805 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1805
1:1032
Name of Street Stop Intersection
Knollbrook Stops for For Creek
Koch Stops for Bissell
Koch
(northbound)
Stops for Lincoln
Koch Stops for Stewart
Kreitzer Stops for Cloud
Kurt Stops for IAA
Kurt Stops for Towanda
Lake Stops for Springfield
Lake Stops for Summitt
Lake
(southbound)
Stops for Tanner
Lake Fork Stops for Morris
Lake Ridge Stops for Fox Creek
Lake Shore Stops for Ft. Jesse
Lake Shore (both
intersections)
Stops for North Pointe
Lake Trail Stops for Martin Luther King Drive
Lamon Stops for Gettysburg
Lamon Stops for Hershey
Leadville Stops for Springdale
Lee Stops for MacArthur
Lee Stops for Wood
Leland Stops for Oakland
Leland Stops for Taylor
Leslie Stops for Pamela
Lincoln Stops for Center
Lincoln Stops for Madison
Linden Stops for Woodruff
Linwood Stops for Lafayette
Lisa Stops for Airport
Livingston Stops for MacArthur
Livingston Stops for Market
Livingston Stops for Miller
Livingston Stops for Oakland
§ 29-1805 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1805
1:1033
Name of Street Stop Intersection
Livingston Stops for Wood
Lone Oak Stops for Binghamton
Lone Oak Stops for Carrington
Longden Stops for Hollycrest
Longden Stops for Six Points
Longfield Stops for Kickapoo Creek
Longwood Stops for Woodbine
Longwood Stops for Armstrong
Low Stops for MacArthur
Low Stops for Miller
Low
(Southbound)
Stops for Taylor
Low Stops for Wood
Lumber Stops for Locust
Lumber Stops for Oakland
Lumber Stops for Olive
Lyon Stops for Brock
MacArthur Stops for Bunn
MacArthur Stops for Livingston
Madison Stops for Bissell
Madison Stops for Chestnut
Madison Stops for Empire
Madison Stops for Locust
Madison Stops for MacArthur
Madison Stops for Miller
Madison Stops for Olive
Madison Stops for Stewart
Madison Stops for Wood
Magoun Stops for Olive
Maizefield Stops for McGregor
Maizefield (north
intersection)
Stops for Meadows
Maizefield
(south)
Stops for Harbord
Maloney Stops for Williamsburg
§ 29-1805 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1805
1:1034
Name of Street Stop Intersection
Maloney Stops for Prospect
Manor Circle Stops for Hershey
Maple Stops for Bell
Marion Stops for Colton
Marion Stops for Linden
Marion Stops for State
Market Stops for Evans
Mary Ellen Way Stops for Emerson
Marzel Stops for Mercer
Mason Stops for Bissell
Mason Stops for Chestnut
Mason
(northbound)
Stops for Division
Mason Stops for Front
Mason Stops for Grove
Mason Stops for Jefferson
Mason Stops for Locust
Mason Stops for MacArthur
Mason Stops for Market
Mason Stops for Mill
Mason Stops for Miller
Mason Stops for Monroe
Mason Stops for Oakland
Mason Stops for Olive
Mason Stops for Seminary
Mason Stops for Washington
Mason Stops for Wood
Mayflower Stops for Pierce
Mays Stops for Towanda
Maysel Stops for Four Seasons
McGraw Stops for Eldorado
McKay Stops for Six Points
McLean Stops for University
McNiff Stops for Streid
§ 29-1805 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1805
1:1035
Name of Street Stop Intersection
Meadowbrook Stops for Magnolia
Mecherle Stops for Delmar
Mecherle Stops for Radliff
Mercer Stops for Ireland Grove
Mid America Stops for Main
Mill Stops for Allin
Mill Stops for Evans
Mill Stops for Gridley
Mill Stops for Madison
Mill Stops for McLean
Mill Stops for Morris
Mill Stops for Roosevelt
Mill Creek Stops for Clearwater
Miller Stops for Bunn
Miller Stops for Center
Miller Stops for Clayton
Miller Stops for Clinton
Miller Stops for East
Miller Stops for north-south drive in Irvin Apts.
Miller
(eastbound)
Stops for Lee
Miller Stops for Main
Miller Stops for Summit
Miller Stops for Wright
Miller Park - east
entrance/exit
Stops for Summit
Mirium Stops for Airport
Mission Stops for Gridley
Mission Stops for MacArthur
Mockingbird Stops for Hershey
Mockingbird Stops for Morningside
Monroe Stops for Colton
Monroe Stops for Hinshaw
Moore Stops for Grove
§ 29-1805 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1805
1:1036
Name of Street Stop Intersection
Moore Stops for Jackson
Moore Stops for Oakland
Moore Stops for Washington
Morningside Stops for Broadmoor
Morningside Stops for Hershey
Morris Stops for Locust
Mt. Vernon Stops for Arrowhead
Mulberry Stops for Allin
Mulberry Stops for Catherine
Mulberry Stops for Center
Mulberry Stops for Evans
Mulberry Stops for Hinshaw
Mulberry Stops for Mason
Mulberry Stops for Morris
Mulberry Stops for Roosevelt
Mulberry Stops for Western
Mulberry Stops for White Oak
Niccolls Stops for East
Niccolls Stops for Main
Niccolls Stops for Wright
Northcrest Stops for North Country Club Place
Northport Stops for Empire
Northway Stops for Rowe
Northwood Stops for Hedgewood
Norton Stops for Rave
Norton Stops for Watertown
Oak Stops for Bissell
Oak Stops for Chestnut
Oak Stops for Empire
Oak Stops for Jackson
Oak Stops for Locust
Oak Stops for MacArthur
Oak Stops for Mill
Oak Stops for Miller
§ 29-1805 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1805
1:1037
Name of Street Stop Intersection
Oak Stops for Mulberry
Oak Stops for Seminary
Oak Stops for Taylor
Oak Stops for Washington
Oak Stops for Wood
Oakbrook Stops for Clearwater
Oak Creek Plaza Stops for Tracy
Oak Park Stops for Martin Luther King Drive
O'Connell Stops for Croxton
O'Connell Stops for Maizefield
O'Hara Stops for Mason
Old Farm Road Stops for Oakland
Old Jamestown Stops for Airport Road
Olive Stops for Allin
Olive Stops for Center
Olive Stops for Clayton
Olive Stops for Clinton
Olive Stops for Denver
Olive Stops for Evans
Olive Stops for Gridley
Olive Stops for Lee
Olive Stops for McClun
Olive Stops for McLean
Olive Stops for Mercer
Olive Stops for Robinson
Olive Stops for State
Orchard Stops for Wildwood
Owens Stops for Vale
Pacific Stops for Vermont/Reading
Packard Stops for Magoun
Packard Stops for Oakland
Packard Stops for Olive
Pancake Stops for Miller
Park Stops for Empire
§ 29-1805 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1805
1:1038
Name of Street Stop Intersection
Park Stops for Walnut
Park Place Stops for Martin Luther King, Jr.
Park Ridge Stops for Ft. Jesse
Parkshores Stops for Martin Luther King, Jr.
Parkshores Stops for Cottage
Parmon Stops for Benjamin
Parmon Stops for Lincoln
Parmon Stops for Pierce
Partner Stops for Miller
Peach Stops for Dogwood
Pebblebrook Stops for Fox Creek
Perrin Stops for Country Club
Perrin Stops for Washington
Perry Stops for Hinshaw
Perry Stops for Livingston
Perry Stops for Morris
Perry -
(northwest
corner)
Stops for Western
Pheasant Run Stops for Broadmoor
Piney Run Stops for Carrington
Phoenix Stops for Fell
Pierce Stops for Mercer
Pinehurst Stops for Arrowhead
Powell Stops for Stone Mountain
Prairie Stops for Empire
Prairie Stops for Jackson
Prairie
(northbound)
Stops for Olive
Prenzler Stops for Eddy
Providence Stops for Airport
Pump House Stops for Harvest Pointe
Radliff Stops for Fairway
Radliff Stops for Robinhood
Radliff Stops for Rowe
§ 29-1805 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1805
1:1039
Name of Street Stop Intersection
Rainbow Stops for Hershey
Rathmore Stops for Francesco
Rave Stops for Townda-Barnes
Red Oak Stops for Springdale
Red Autumn Stops for Harvest Pointe
Reeves
(northbound)
Stops for Olive
Revenue Stops for Mitsubishi
Rexel Stops for Ft. Jesse
Ridge Creek Stops for Fox Creek
Ridge Crest Stops for Airport
Ridge Road Stops for Hershey
Ridge Road Stops for Prospect
Riverwoods Stops for Lay
Robert Stops for Brigham
Robinhood Stops for Fairway
Robinhood Stops for Towanda
Robinson Stops for Jefferson
Robinson Stops for Locust
Rocksbury Stops for Binghamton
Rocky Ford Stops for Morris
Rosney Stops for Emerson
Rosney Stops for Marion
Roosevelt Stops for Chestnut
Roosevelt Stops for Empire
Roosevelt Stops for MacArthur
Roosevelt Stops for Olive
Roosevelt Stops for Stewart
Ross Stops for Four Seasons
Rowe Stops for Delmar
Rowe Stops for IAA
Rowe Stops for Towanda
Royal Stops for Airport
Rust Stops for Regency
§ 29-1805 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1805
1:1040
Name of Street Stop Intersection
Rust Stops for Washington
Ruth Stops for Washington
Rutledge Stops for Arrowhead
Salem Stops for Mt. Vernon
Sandburg Stops for Arrowhead
Savanna Stops for Fox Creek
Savanna Stops for Grey Fox
Scogin Creek Stops for Ridge Creek
Scarborough Stops for Binghamton
Scarborough Stops for Carrington
Scott Stops for Mason
Scott Stops for Oak
Seminary Stops for Roosevelt
Sesame Stops for Washington
Seville Stops for Olive
Shaunessey Stops for Ireland Grove
Sheridan
(westbound)
Stops for Stillwell
Sherman Stops for Seminary
Shorewood Stops for North Pointe
Silverton Stops for Six Points
Six Points Stops for Morris
Slayton Stops for Eastport
Smokey Stops for Airport
Springdale Stops for Breezewood
Staghorne Stops for 2100 East
Starlight Stops for Clearwater
State Stops for Emerson
State Stops for Locust
Stephanie Stops for Longwood
Stern Stops for Prospect
Stewart Stops for Center
Stillwell Stops for Market
Stillwell Stops for Washington
§ 29-1805 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1805
1:1041
Name of Street Stop Intersection
Stockholm Stops for Miller
Stockholm Stops for Oakland
Stockholm,
eastbound
Stops for Stockholm, north-south section
Stonehedges Stops for Fox Creek
Stonehouse Stops for Harvest Pointe
Stone Mill Stops for Harvest Pointe
Stone Mountain Stops for College
Stone Mountain Stops for Radbourne
Stortz Stops for Empire
Stratford Stops for Broadmoor
Strawgrass Stops for Harvest Pointe
St. Joseph Stops for Eastland
Summerview Stops for Valley Brook
Summit Stops for Lake
Summit Stops for MacArthur
Summit Stops for Wood
Sunset (east and
west)
Stops for Emerson
Sunshine Stops for Clearwater
Swan Lake Stops for Old Farm
Sweetbriar Stops for Butcher
Szarek Stops for Six Points
Tanner Stops for Morris
Tanner Stops for Springfield
Taylor Stops for Allin
Taylor Stops for Clayton
Taylor Stops for Denver
Taylor Stops for Evans
Taylor Stops for Gridley
Taylor Stops for Kreitzer
Taylor Stops for Mason
Taylor Stops for McClun
Taylor Stops for McLean
§ 29-1805 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1805
1:1042
Name of Street Stop Intersection
Taylor Stops for Mercer
Taylor Stops for Moore
Taylor Stops for Morris
Taylor Stops for Robinson
Taylor Stops for State
Taylor Stops for Vale
Teal Stops for Old Farm
Thornwood Stops for Airport
Tiehack Stops for Jumer
Timberwolf Stops for Scottsdale
Tipton Stops for Caroline
Towanda Service
Road
(southbound)
Stops for Empire Service Road (north)
Towanda Service
Road
Stops for Empire
Townley Stops for Arrowhead
Todd Stops for Gettysburg
Tullamore Stops for Ireland Grove
Union Stops for Oak
University Stops for Clinton
University Stops for Park
University Stops for Whites Place
Valley Brook Stops for Ft. Jesse
Valley View Stops for Wylie
Van Schoick Stops for Springfield
Ventor/
Boardwalk
Stops for Park Place
Vic Stops for Towanda-Barnes Road
Vic Stops for Detroit
Vladimir Stops for Rainbow
Wall Stops for Lee
Wall Stops for Madison
Walnut Stops for Colton
Walnut Stops for Hinshaw
§ 29-1805 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1805
1:1043
Name of Street Stop Intersection
Walnut Stops for Livingston
Walnut Stops for Madison
Walnut Stops for Mason
Walnut Stops for McLean
Walnut Stops for Morris
Walnut Stops for Oak
Walnut Stops for Prairie
Walnut Stops for Roosevelt
Walnut Stops for Western
Waterford
Estates
Stops for Oakland
Watford Stops for Oakland
Weathervane Stops for Old Farm
Wedgewood Stops for Foxtail
Wedgewood Stops for Hedgewood
Wedgewood Stops for Oakwood
Weldon Stops for Oakland
Weldon
(northbound)
Stops for Olive
Wellington Stops for Hershey
Western Stops for MacArthur
Western Stops for Mill
Western Stops for Miller
Western Stops for Oakland
Western Stops for Olive
Western Stops for Taylor
Western Stops for Washington
Westgate Stops for Interstate
Westport Stops for Eastport
White Eagle Stops for Streid
White Stone Stops for Springdale
Whites Place Stops for Emerson
Whites Place Stops for Empire
Wildflower Stops for Laesch
Wildwood Stops for Holiday
§ 29-1805 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1805
1:1044
Name of Street Stop Intersection
Wildwood Stops for Mt. Vernon
Willard Stops for Jackson
Willard Stops for Taylor
Williamsburg Stops for Eastland
Williamsburg Stops for Washington
Willow Creek Stops for 2100 East
Wilson Stops for Lafayette
Windham Hills Stops for General Electric
Windmill Stops for Old Farm
Wine Way Stops for Norma
Wisteria Stops for Airport
Witten Woods Stops for Morris
Wood Stops for Bunn
Wood Stops for Clayton
Woodbine Stops for General Electric
Woodbridge
(northbound)
Stops for Lincoln
Woodbury Stops for Miller
Woodfield Stops for College
Woodhavens Stops for Persimmon
Woodhavens Stops for Six Points
Wright Stops for Lincoln
Wright Stops for Stewart
Wright Stops for Wood
Yorktown Stops for Hershey
E. All vehicles traveling upon the following streets must yield the right-ofway
as provided in this Ordinance before passing into or across the said
intersections as provided in § 29-802: [Ord. No. 2015-25]
Name of Street Yield Intersection
Allin -
northbound
Yields for Front
Anabelle Yields for Escalade
Amber Yields for Hillsboro
Amber Yields for Interlocken
§ 29-1805 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1805
1:1045
Name of Street Yield Intersection
Bainbridge Yields for Rocksbury
Bandecon (west
intersection)
Yields for Clearwater
Bandecon (east
intersection)
Yields for Clearwater
Bay Point (south
intersection)
Yields for North Pointe
Bear Creek Yields for Crossgate
Beyer Yields for Hinshaw
Blarney Stone Yields for Fox Ridge
Blarney Stone
(northbound)
Yields for Huntington
Boardwalk
(eastbound)
Yields for Park Place
Brennan Yields for Crimson
Brighton Yields for Royal Pointe
Brittany Yields for Chesapeake
Bronco Yields for Oakland
Buckingham Yields for Royal Pointe
Carl Yields for Wellington
Carney Yields for Longwood
Case Yields for Reading
Cashel Yields for Cave Creek
Cecil Yields for Elmwood
Chelsea Yields for Cumbria
Chesapeake Yields for Eagle Crest
Chesterfield Yields for Royal Pointe
Christopher Yields for Arrowhead
Cinnamon Yields for Wisteria
Cobblestone
(southbound)
Yields for Southfork
Commerce (at
Gilmore)
[Repealed
7-8-2019 by
Ord. No.
2019-51]
§ 29-1805 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1805
1:1046
Name of Street Yield Intersection
Congress Yields for Barker
Congress Yields for Livingston
Conley Yields for McGregor
Conley Yields for Meadowbrook
Cornelius Yields for Ekstam
Crimson Yields for Wisteria
Crossgate Yields for Plantation
Currant Yields for Wisteria
Currie Yields for Longwood
Cygnet Yields for Eddy
Detroit Yields for Oakland
Drake Yields for Eddy
Durham Yields for Cumbria
Dutchess Yields for Royal Pointe
Eastland/K-Mart
Crossover
(northbound
right turn)
Yields for North Empire Service Road
Elizabeth Yields for Royal Pointe
Elm Yields for Mason
Elm Yields for Oak
Foxridge Yields for Graystone
Franklin
(southbound)
Yields for Beecher
Fullerton Yields for Riverwoods
Garlington Yields for Hershey
Gill Yields for turning trucks in turn around area
Gray Yields for Oak
Grant
(northbound)
Yields for Olive
Greenfield
(westbound)
Yields for Park Ridge
Hackberry Yields for Wisteria
Hayes Yields for Gabby
Hearthstone
(eastbound)
Yields for Keystone
§ 29-1805 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1805
1:1047
Name of Street Yield Intersection
Hinshaw
(northbound)
Yields for Forrest
Hodgehaven
(north
intersection)
Yields for Kolby
Hodgehaven
(south
intersection)
Yields for Kolby
Holder Way
(east)
Yields for Clearwater
Holder Way
(west)
Yields for Clearwater
Huntington Yields for Keystone
Huntington
(westbound)
Yields for Park Ridge
Independence
(east
intersection)
Yields for Wellington
Jackson Yields for Seville
Kara Yields for Kolby
Ketchum
(northbound)
Yields for Arrowhead
Kleggstone
(north
intersection)
Yields for Kolby
Kleggstone
(south
intersection)
Yields for Kolby
Lake Street
(westbound)
Yields for Lake Drive
Lake Pointe Yields for North Pointe
Lake Shore
(south
intersection)
Yields for North Pointe
Lake Trail Yields for Oak Park
Lavender Yields for Woodbine
Leafy Yields for Crimson
Lexis Yields for Eddy
Lisa Yields for Kenneth
§ 29-1805 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1805
1:1048
Name of Street Yield Intersection
Long Core Yields for Eagle Creek
Maizefield (south
intersection)
Yields for Meadows
Marvin Gardens Yields for Pacific
Matlock Yields for Cumbria
McGregor Yields for Lafayette
Meadowbrook Yields for Lafayette
Meadowbrook Yields for McGregor
Mill Creek
(southbound)
Yields for Arrowhead
Mill Creek Yields for Rainbow
Minks Yields for Eddy
Navajo
(southbound)
Yields for Arrowhead
North Country
Club
Yields for Country Club Place
Oakbrook Yields for Rainbow
Oak Park Yields for Christian Louis
Olympia Yields for Oakland
Park Yields for Beecher
Parker
(eastbound)
Yields for Park Place
Peppertree Yields for Chesapeake
Polo Yields for Royal Pointe
Powers Yields for Castleman
Privet Yields for Wisteria
Rader Yields for Cornelius
Raspberry Yields for Woodbine
Ravenwood
(north and south
intersections)
Yields for Park Ridge
Red Stone
(northbound)
Yields for Huntington
Reed Yields for Royal Pointe
Remi Yields for Royal Pointe
Ridgeport Yields for Rainbow
§ 29-1805 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1805
1:1049
Name of Street Yield Intersection
Rock Garden Yields for Eddy
Rocksbury Yields for Carrington
Rosewood Yields for Eddy
Rounds Yields for Royal Pointe
Sable Oaks Yields for Saddlebrook
Sarah Anne Yields for Rave
Sarah Anne Yields for Connie Kay
Scofield Yields for Watford
Sesame Yields for Wellington
Shire
(westbound)
Yields for Park Place
Stark Yields for Eddy
Stonehurst
(eastbound)
Yields for Keystone
Stone Mountain Yields for Southfork
Strawberry Yields for Longwood
Sun Pointe Yields for North Pointe
Swarthmore Yields for Royal Pointe
Taylor Yields for Moore
Tokio Yields for Hinshaw
Towanda
(southbound left
turn)
Yields for Empire
Treesdale Yields for Spahn
Trumpet Yields for Crimson
Tyler Trail Yields for Fullerton
Van Schoick
(westbound)
Yields for Lake Drive
Vermont Yields for Pacific
Veterans - right
turn
Yields for Mercer
Veterans - right
turn
Yields for Morris
Viney Yields for Crimson
§ 29-1805 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1805
1:1050
Name of Street Yield Intersection
Washington
(eastbound right
turn)
Yields for Euclid
Waterford Yields for Castlemain
Weaver Yields for Longwood
Wedgewood Yields for Berrywood
Wedgewood Yields for Oakwood
Windsong Yields for Longwood
Yotzonot Yields for Eastport
F. All vehicles proceeding in the direction indicated below must yield to
pedestrians before proceeding into or across the following park
crosswalks: [Ord. No. 1996-38]
Location
In Miller Park:
Eastbound on drive in front of Pavillion at "T"
On east-west drive at pedestrian crossing northwest of monument
On north-south drive at pedestrian crossing west of the Band Shell
Southbound on drive in front of Zoo Building and crossing from
parking lot
G. All vehicles exiting from the following driveways shall come to a
complete stop before entering the named streets: [Ord. No. 2015-25]
Driveway Stop Intersection
Abraham Lincoln
Parking Lot
Stops for East
Aspen Stops for Airport
Bloomington
Nursing and
Rehabilitation
Center
Stops for Calhoun
Bloomington
Police Dept. Drive
Stops for East
Brookridge Park
exit
Stops for Ireland Grove
Burrell
Motorsports Drive
Stops for Brigham
Butler Parking Lot
drive
Stops for Madison
§ 29-1805 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1805
1:1051
Driveway Stop Intersection
CCHS drive Stops for Airport
City Hall drives Stops for East
Country Club Stops for Towanda
Cultural District
Drive
Stops for Locust
Developmentally
Disabled Housing
drive
Stops for Jackson
Developmentally
Disabled Housing
drive
Stops for Oakland
Doral Stops for Lafayette
Doral Stops for Lincoln
Eastland
driveways
Stops for Eastland
Eastland
driveways
Stops for south Empire Service Road
Eastland
driveways
Stops for St. Joseph
Forest Park drives Stops for Morris
Forest Park drives Stops for Springfield
Funk Upper Limits
drives
Stops for Washington
Gas Station Drive Stops for Maysel
Grandview Estates
drive
Stops for Alexander
Grieder
Landscaping
westernmost drive
Stops for General Electric
Hilltop Mobile
Home Park drive
Stops for Bunn
Highland Park
Golf Course Drive
Stops for Center
Holton Homes
drive
Stops for Market
Hundman Do-It-
Center
Stops for Hamilton
Jewel drive Stops for Mercer
Inglewood Stops for Wine
§ 29-1805 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1805
1:1052
Driveway Stop Intersection
K-Mart drive Stops for IAA drive
K-Mart drive Stops for north Empire Service Road
Krispy Kreme Stops for Washington
Krispy Kreme Stops for Prospect
Kroger entrance Stops for Four Seasons
Kroger entrance Stops for Oakland
Lakewood Plaza
drives
Stops for Clearwater
Maple Grove
Trailer Court
drives
Stops for Alexander
Meadow Ridge
Road
Stops for Morris
Mercantile Bank
drive
Stops for Eastland
Miller Park drives Stops for Morris
Miller Park drives Stops for Summit
Miller Park drives Stops for Tanner
Miller Park drives Stops for Wood
North Main
Parking Lot
Stops for East
North Point
School Drives
Stops for College
Parkway Plaza
drive
Stops for College
Parkway Plaza
drive
Stops for Jumer Drive
Pepper Ridge
School drives
Stops for Danbury
Prairie Vista
drives
Stops for Sale Barn
Reeveston Stops for Maple Hill
Second
Presbyterian
Church
Stops for Prairie
Southeast Water
Tower Drives
Stops for Hamilton
§ 29-1805 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1805
1:1053
§ 29-1806. [Ch. 29, Sec. 146] Schedule VI: Restricted Parking
Zones. [Repealed 1-22-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-4]
§ 29-1807. [Ch. 29, Sec. 147] Schedule VII: Restricted Zones for
Passenger and Freight Loading From Which Parked Vehicles May Be
Towed Under Article XXII of This Chapter.
Driveway Stop Intersection
St. Joseph
Hospital drives
Stops for Eastland
State Farm
Parking Lot drive
Stops for Oakland
State Farm
driveways
Stops for Arcadia
State Farm
driveways
Stops for Ireland Grove
State Farm
driveways
Stops for Hamilton
State Farm
Corporate drives
Stops for Regency
State Farm
Corporate drives
Stops for Rust
St. Joseph
Hospital drives
Stops for Eastland
Stevenson School -
2 western most
drives
Stops for Arrowhead
Towanda Plaza
entrance
Stops for Towanda
Towanda Plaza
exit
Stops for Empire
Wegeng Stops for Streid
Vladimir Stops for Rainbow
Wilder Stops for Streid
A. Passenger loading zones. No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle
for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading
or unloading of passengers in any of the following places marked as a
passenger loading zone during the hours when the following
regulations are effective and then only for a period not to exceed the
time limits as hereinafter provided:
§ 29-1805 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1807
1:1054
15 Minute Time Limit: At All Times - Sunday through Saturday
[Ord. No. 2015-25]
Center, on the east side, from 30 feet to 50 feet south of the south
line of Market
Chestnut, on the south side from Mason, 130 feet east of the east line
of Mason
Front, on the south side, Lee to Madison
Grove, on the south side, from 20 feet to 40 feet east of the east line
of East
Jackson, on the north side from 20 feet to 50 feet east of Oak
Jefferson, on the south side, from Evans to a point 250 feet west
MacArthur, on the north side, from 30 feet to 165 feet east of the east
line of Main
Madison, on the west side, from 20 feet to 75 feet north of the north
line of Elm
Main, on the west side, from Scott to Graham
Market, on the north side, from 30 feet to 50 feet east of the east line
of Center
Market, on the north side, from 65 feet to 85 feet west of the west
line of Mason
Miller Park, on the west side of drive adjacent to the Zoo for a
distance of 70 feet
Olive, on the north side, from 110 feet to 150 feet west of the west
line of Allin
Taylor, on the south side, from 20 feet to 50 feet east of Mason
Washington, on the north side, from 20 feet to 60 feet west of the
west line of East
Washington, on the north side, from Oak to a point 115 feet east
Western, on the west side, from 20 feet to 120 feet south of Locust
Wood, on the south side, from 110 feet west to 190 feet, west of the
west line of Gridley
8:00 a.m. - 12:00 noon — 6:00 p.m. - 9:00 p.m. [Ord. No.
1989-54]
Washington, on the north side from 20 feet to 64 feet west of the west
line of Mason
8:00 a.m. - 1:00 p.m. - Monday – Friday [Ord. No. 2005-111]
Lee on the east side from 30 feet to 120 feet south of the south line of
Washington
§ 29-1807 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1807
1:1055
8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. - Monday – Friday [Ord. No. 2005-111]
Washington on the south side from 35 feet to 95 feet east of the east
line of Lee
11:00 a.m. - 11:00 p.m. [Ord. No. 1998-11]
Washington on the south side from 20 feet to 45 feet east of the east
line of Allin
9:00 a.m. - 6:00 p.m. [Ord. No. 1989-111]
Bell, on the north side, from 50 feet to 75 feet west of the west line of
Hannah
2:30 p.m. - 3:30 p.m. [Ord. No. 1989-111]
Roosevelt, east side, from Locust to a point 175 feet north
At All Times [Ord. No. 2004-39]
Main, east side, from 20 feet north to 68 feet north of the north line of
Chestnut
Roosevelt, west side, from Walnut to a point 300 feet north
Woodhill Towers (see Exhibit A)67
Weekdays [Ord. No. 2004-39]
Livingston, west side, from 20 feet to 120 feet north the north line of
Walnut
Mason, west side, Jackson to Mill
Roosevelt, west side, from Walnut to a point 300 feet north
B. Freight loading zones. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle any
purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious unloading and
delivery or pickup and loading of materials in any of the following
places marked as a freight loading zone during the hours when the
following regulations applicable to such zones are effective and then
only for a period not to exceed the time limits as hereinafter provided in
this section:
(1) Thirty-minute time limit (Available to commercial vehicles only):
67.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 29-1807 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1807
1:1056
6:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
Monday through Friday [Ord. No. 2008-64]
Alley (north-south), bounded by East, Locust, Prairie and
Mulberry, on the west side, from Locust to a point 110 feet south
Center, on the east side, from 30 feet to 50 feet north of the north
line of Front
Center, on the east side, from 39 feet south to 112 feet south of
the south line of Olive
Center, on the east side, from 130 feet to 150 feet north of
Monroe
Center, on the west side, from 45 feet to 85 feet north of the
north line of Kentucky Alley
Currency, on the north side, from 82 feet to 20 feet east of the
east line of Finance
Jefferson, on the south side, from 20 feet to 109 feet east of the
east line of East
Jefferson, on the south side, from 20 feet to 89 feet east of the
east line of Main
Jefferson, on the south side, from 30 feet west to 47 feet west of
the west line of East
Main, on the east side, from 30 feet south to 68 feet south of the
south line of West Mulberry extended east to the east line of
Main
Main, on the east side, from 50 feet south to 98 feet south of the
south line of Market
Main, on the east side, first space north of the north line of
Washington
Main, on the east side, from 255 feet to 300 feet south of Olive
Market, on the north side, from 24 feet to 65 feet west of the
west line of East
Monroe, on the north side, from 30 feet east to 88 feet east of the
east line of Center
Olive, on the south side, from 85 feet to 117 feet west of East
Prairie, on the west side, from 30 feet to 80 feet north of the
north line of Grove in the parkway
Washington, on the south side, from 30 feet west to 77 feet west
of the west line of Madison
At All Times [Ord. No. 1993-12]
Front, on the north side, from 20 feet to 107 feet west of the west
line of East
§ 29-1807 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1807
1:1057
§ 29-1808. [Ch. 29, Sec. 148] Schedule VIII: Public Carrier Stops,
Taxicab/TNC Stands.
In accordance with § 29-1413 of this Ordinance and when properly sign
posted, the following areas are hereby declared to be public carrier stops or
taxicab stands:
C. Passenger and freight loading zones. No person shall stop, stand or
park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other than for the
expeditious loading or unloading of passengers or the expeditious
unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials in any of the
following places marked as a passenger and freight loading zone during
the hours when the following regulations applicable to such zones are
effective and then only for a period not to exceed the time limits as
hereinafter provided:
At All Times Sunday Through Saturday [Ord. No. 1993-112]
Jefferson, on the north side, from 51 feet west to 98 feet west of the
west line of Center
McLean, on the east side, from Washington to Jefferson
8:00 a.m. - 5:00 p.m. [Ord. No. 2007-45]
Washington, on the south side, from 40 feet to 60 feet west of the west
line of East
8:30 a.m. - 5:00 p.m. [Ord. No. 1998-58]
Washington on the north side 84 feet to 130 feet east of east line of
Gridley
Washington, on the north side, from 40 feet to 82 feet west of the
west line of Madison
Washington on the north side from 22 feet to 52 feet west of the west
line of McLean
6:00 a.m. - 5:00 p.m. [Ord. No. 2003-47]
Mason on the west side from 75 feet to 155 feet south of the south
line of Chestnut
15-Minute Time Limit, At All Times, Sunday through Saturday
[Added 7-8-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-51]
Washington on the north side from Main to Center
A. Bus Stops from which parked vehicles may be towed under Article XXII
of this chapter:
§ 29-1807 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1808
1:1058
§ 29-1809. [Ch. 29, Sec. 149] Schedule IX: Parking. [Ord. No.
2018-29]
Prohibited at all times on certain streets. In accordance with § 29-1603
and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall at any
time park a vehicle upon any of the following described streets or parts of
streets:
At All Times [Ord. No. 2018-29]
Front on the north side from Center to Madison
Front on the south side from Center to Main
Main, on the east side, from 180 feet to 250 feet south of the south
line of Empire
Washington on the north side from Main to Center
3:00 a.m. - 10:00 p.m. [Ord. No. 2003-120]
Front Street on the south side Madison to Center
Weekdays 6:00 a.m. - 6:00 p.m. [Ord. No. 2004-39]
Colton, on the west side, from Walnut to a point 60 feet south
8:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. [Ord. No. 2005-35]
Lee on the east side from 30 feet to 125 feet south of the south line of
Washington
8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. [Ord. No. 2005-35]
Washington on the south side from 30 feet to 95 feet east of the east
line of Lee
B. Taxicab/TNC Stand from which parked vehicles may be towed under
Article XXII of this chapter:
Thursday, Friday, Saturday, and Sunday
10:00 p.m. - 3:00 a.m. [Ord. No. 2017-87]
Main, on the east side, from Market to Mulberry
C. Shuttle Bus Stops: [Ord. No. 1991-118]
Location
Jefferson, on the south side, from 47 feet to 70 feet west of the west
line of East
§ 29-1808 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1809
1:1059
Location
Airport on both sides from Empire to north corporate limits
Albert on both sides from Olive to Grove
Alley (north-south) bounded by Center, Stewart, Madison and east-west
alley on both sides
Alley (east-west) bounded by Chestnut, Walnut, Clinton and north-south
alley
Alley (north-south) bounded by Clinton, Empire, Evans and Chestnut on
both sides
Alley (east-west) bounded by Hinshaw, Chestnut, Livingston, Locust on
both sides
Alley (east-west) bounded by Locust, Western, Mulberry and Hinshaw on
the north side adjacent to Western Avenue Community Center building
Alley (east-west) bounded by Hannah, Oakland, Maple and Bell
Alley (north-south) bounded by Fell, University, Clinton and Emerson on
both sides
Alley (east-west and north-south) north of Emerson between White Pl. and
Clinton Boulevard except 2 spaces on east side at north end of alley
Alley (east-west) north of Miller - between Barker and Livingston, on both
sides
Alley (east-west) bounded by Hinshaw, Miller, Barker and Wood on both
sides
Alley (east-west) on both sides from 400 South Madison to the east end
Alley (east-west) bounded by Morris, Olive, Western and Grove on both
sides
Alley (east-west) bounded by Western, Olive, Grove, west end on both
sides
Alley (east-west) on both sides bounded by Olive, Erickson, Illinois and
Euclid
Alley (north-south) between Charles and James
Alley (north-south) bounded by East, Graham, Prairie and Empire on the
west side from Graham to 100 feet south
Alley immediately east of East from Market to Douglas
Alley (north-south) between East, Locust, Prairie and Mulberry on the
west side
Alley (north-south) bounded by Locust, Evans, Chestnut and Clinton on
the east side from the east-west alley south to Locust
Alley (north-south) bounded by Main, Chestnut, Locust and East on both
sides
§ 29-1809 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1809
1:1060
Location
Alley (north-south) bounded by Main, Jefferson, Center and Monroe on
both sides
Alley (north-south) bounded by Oak, Hickory, Koch and Bissell on the west
side
Allin on the east side from Jefferson to a point 120 feet north
Allin on the east side from Front to Norfolk and Western Railroad
Allin on the east side from Seminary to a point 60 feet north of Seminary
Allin on the east side from 80 feet north to 100 feet south of Taylor
Allin on the west side from Division to Seminary
Allin on the west side from Wood to Walnut
Anglers Lake on both sides from Morrissey to east end
Arcadia on both sides from Eldorado to Fairmont south
Arcadia on both sides from Lincoln to Ireland Grove
Arcadia on the east side from Fairmont south to Lincoln
Arcadia on the west side from Lincoln to 280 feet north
Arcadia on the west side from 10 feet north to 10 feet south of the
driveway to 2714 McGraw
Ash on both sides from Lafayette to Baker
Auto Row Drive on both sides from G.E. Road to north end
Baker, on the south side, from Evans to 60 feet west
Baker on the south side from Main to Center
Barker on the east side from 80 feet to 130 feet south of south line at
Miller
Beecher on the north side from East to McLean
Beecher on the north side from Main to East
Beecher on the south side from 70 feet west of the west line of East to 80
feet east of the east line of East
Beecher on the south side from the west line of Franklin to 20 feet east of
the east line at Franklin
Beecher on the south side from 220 feet to 280 feet east of Main
Beich on the west side from Beich Candy Plant drive to a point 600 feet
south
Beich on both sides from Springfield to Beich (north south)
Bell on the north side from Hannah to 60 feet east
Bell on the north side from Hannah to 50 feet west
Bell on the north side from Maple to Maizefield
§ 29-1809 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1809
1:1061
Location
Bell on the north side from McClun to 50 feet east
Bell on the south side from Indianapolis to Maple
Bettis on both sides JC Parkway to Wylie
Biasi on both sides from College to a point 125 feet south
Bissell on the north side from Low to East
Bissell on the south side from 160 feet to 210 feet west of the west line of
Koch
Bissell on the south side from Center to a point 50 feet west
Bradley on the east side from Riley to Rowe
Briarwood on the east side from Dawes to north corporate limits
Brickyard on both sides from Ireland Grove Road to north end
Brigham School Road on the north side from the crosswalk west of Joseph
to a point 30 feet east
Brigham School Road on the south side from Joseph to a point 30 feet
west of crosswalk
Brigham School Road on both sides from Main to Robert
Broadmoor on the east side from Oakland to Lincoln
Brock on the north side from Market to a point 200 feet west
Brock on the south side from Market to a point 650 feet west
Brock on the west side from General Telephone Company's drive to a
point 75 feet north
Bronco on the west side from Oakland to south property line of 405
Bronco
Buchanan on the south side between Center and East
Buckeye on the north side from 300 feet east of Eldorado to Fairmont
Bunn on the east side from Oakland to 250 feet south
Bunn on the west side from Buchanan to Lincoln
Butcher's Lane on both sides from Alexander to Cornflower
Cabintown on both sides to and including the cul-de-sac exception on the
west side from the cul-de-sac to a point 385 feet south
Calhoun on the east side from Seminary to the Dead End
Canterbury on both sides from Fairway to 400 feet west
Caroline on both sides from Market to Washington
Castleton on both sides from Hershey to a point 250 feet east
Catherine on the west side from 20 feet north to 20 feet south of the
public alley between Mulberry and Locust
§ 29-1809 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1809
1:1062
Location
Cecil on the east side from Towanda to Elmwood
Center on both sides from Division to Locust
Center both sides from Kentucky Alley to Veterans
Center on the east side from 105 feet to 125 feet north of Market
Center on the east side from south line of Market 90 feet south
Center on the east side from Monroe to a point 110 feet north
Center on the east side from Mulberry to 65 feet north
Center on the west side from 200 feet south of Locust to Market
Chancellor on the east side, from 415 feet to 490 feet north of Eastland
Charles on the south side
Chestnut - 600 Block East - Alley to Walnut also alley from Clinton to this
alley
Chestnut on the north side from Center to 100 feet east of East Street
Chestnut on the north side from Hinshaw to White Oak
Chestnut on the north side from Madison to a point 55 feet east
Chestnut on the north side from Main to Center
Chestnut between Prairie and McLean on the north side from 30 feet east
to 20 feet west of the crosswalk to Franklin Park near the center of the
block
Chestnut on the north side from Popular to Morris
Chestnut on the south side from East to 50 feet west
Chestnut on the south side from Eugene to a point 50 feet west
Chestnut on the south side from east line of Madison to west line of
Madison
Chestnut on the south side from 50 feet to 90 feet west of Main
Chestnut on the south side from Morris to Lumber
Chestnut on the south side from Prairie to East
Chestnut between Prairie and McLean on the south side from 30 feet west
to 20 feet east of the crosswalk to Franklin Park near the center of the
block
Circle on the north side from Darrah to Caroline
Clayton on the west side from Oakland to Lincoln
Clayton on the east side from Jefferson to a point 50 feet south
Clearwater on both sides from Veterans to a point 120 feet east of the
east line of Oakbrook
§ 29-1809 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1809
1:1063
Location
Clearwater on the north side from 138 feet east of the east line to 100
feet west of west line of Ridgeport
Clearwater on both sides from Kim to Airport
Clinton on both sides from Oakland to Chestnut
Clinton on the east side from north line of Emerson to 70 feet north
Clinton on the east side from 70 feet north of Empire to Chestnut
Clinton on the east side from Oakland to Bell
Clinton on the west side from Empire to 180 feet south of Graham
Clinton on the west side from Lincoln to Bissell
Clobertin on the south side from Four Seasons to and around the cul-desac
Cloud on the north side from 250 feet west of Vale to Florence
College on both sides from Airport to west corporate limits
Colton on both sides from Empire to 175 feet south
Colton on both sides from Locust to 175 feet north
Colton on the east side from Washington to Jefferson
Colton on the east side from 75 feet south of the south line of Elmwood to
50 feet north of the north line of Elmwood
Colton on the west side from Empire to Emerson
Commerce, on both sides, north end to Hamilton
Cornelius on both sides from Airport to East Corporate limits
Cornelius on both sides from Lockenvitz to Ekstam
Cottage on the east side from Martin Luther King, Jr. to 1,300 feet south
Cottage on the west side from Seminary to the north corporate limits
Crimson on the east side from General Electric to Viney
Croxton on the north side from Bunn to 45 feet east of Indianapolis
Croxton on the north side from Hannah to O'Connell
Croxton on the north side from McGregor to Ryan
Croxton on the south side from Bunn to the east line of Indianapolis
Croxton on the south side from U.S. 150 to McGregor
Danbury on both sides from Fox Creek to Binghampton
Davis on the east side from Monroe to Jefferson
Dawes on the north side from Linden to Norbloom
Denver on the east side from Grove to 200 feet south
Denver on the west side from Grove to Oakland
§ 29-1809 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1809
1:1064
Location
Dickerson on both sides from Hamilton to south end
Dinsmore on both sides from Market to Washington
Division on the south side from Adelaide to Main, except from a point 100
feet east of Allin to 65 feet west of Mason
Division on the north side from underpass to Adelaide
Dogwood on the west side from Lawndale to Mt. Vernon
Douglas on the north side from Prairie to McLean
Douglas on the south side from Clinton to McLean
Dunn on both sides from Lafayette to Main
Eagle Crest from Airport to a point 150 feet east
East on the west side from Beecher to Kelsey
East on both sides on Crossover from Douglas to Locust
East on both sides from Oakland to 50 feet north of Norfolk and Western
Railroad East on both sides from Olive to Mulberry
East on the east side from the north line at Emerson to a point 53 feet
north
East on the east side from Graham to Empire
East on the east side from Mulberry to Graham
East on the east side from Oakland to MacArthur
East on the east side from the south line of University north to the north
side of University
East on the east side from Walnut to Empire
East on the west side 100 feet north of Kelsey to Beecher
East on the west side from Olive to MacArthur
East of the west side from Stewart to a point 105 feet south
East on the west side from University to Graham
Eastland on both sides from Fairway to Castleton
Eastport on the east side from Empire to Arrowhead
Eastport on the west side from Empire to 100 feet north of Westport
Eddy on the west side from Oakland to White Eagle Road
Eisenhower on the east side from Jersey to a point 55 feet south
Eisenhower on the north side from the Dead End to a point 100 feet west
Eisenhower on the west and south side from Jersey to dead end
Ekstam on the west side from Pamela to Gerig
Eldorado on both sides from Lincoln to Oakland
§ 29-1809 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1809
1:1065
Location
Eldorado (north) on both sides from Prospect to 315 feet west
Eldorado on both sides from Stern south 1,550 feet to Curve
Elm on the north side from Center to Main
Elm on the north side from the west line of Center, 30 feet west
Elm on the south side from 95 feet to 115 feet west of the west line of
Main
Elmwood on the north side between 1206 and 1208 Elmwood
Elmwood on the north side from Colton to a point 50 feet east
Elmwood on the north side from Cecil to Towanda
Elmwood - alley north both sides from Towanda to Colton
Emerson on both sides from Franklin to 160 feet west of Center
Emerson on the north side from 110 feet east to 80 feet west of Ethell
Emerson on the north side from Linden to a point 100 feet west
Emerson on the north side from Linden to a point 275 feet east
Emerson on the north side from Allin to 160 feet west of Center
Emerson on the north side from Sunset west to State
Emerson on the north side from Towanda to State
Emerson on the south side from Center to a point 180 feet west
Emerson on the south side from Clinton to Linden
Emerson on the south side from Foley to Mary Ellen
Emerson on the south side from Franklin to a point 110 feet east of
Horenberger
Emerson on the south side from Allin to 50 feet east of Lee
Emerson on the south side from Linden to a point 255 feet east
Emerson on the south side from Towanda to a point 150 feet west
Emerson on the south side from Towanda to Ebach
Emerson on the south side from 850 feet west of Towanda to 1,080 feet
west of Towanda
Empire on both sides from Colton to the east corporate limits
Empire on both sides from Main to East
Empire on both sides from Morris to Popular
Empire on the north side from Center to a point 65 feet west
Empire on the north side from Clinton to a point 110 feet west
Empire on the north side from Colton to Clinton
Empire on the north side from Park to 150 feet east
§ 29-1809 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1809
1:1066
Location
Empire on the north side from State to 200 feet east
Empire on the north side from Towanda to 150 feet west
Empire on the south side from Clinton to 200 feet east of Clinton
Erickson on the west side from Olive to 60 feet south
Euclid on both sides Washington to Oakland
Evans on the east side from Mulberry to Locust
Evans on the east side from Stewart to Lincoln
Evans on the east side from Washington to Jefferson
Evans on the west side from Market to Jefferson
Evans on the west side from Washington to Bell
Fairmont on both sides from Arcadia north to Arcadia south
Fairway from Regency to 300 feet north of Robinhood
Fairway on both sides from Towanda to Radliff
Fell on the east side from Empire to Division
Felton on the south side from Clinton to Robinson
Fillmore on both sides from Center to Main
Four Seasons on both sides from Oakland to a point 150 feet north
Four Seasons on both sides from Lincoln to 175 feet north
Four Seasons on both sides from Oakland south to relocated Four Seasons
Four Seasons on the east side from relocated Four Seasons south to and
including the cul-de-sac
Fox Creek on both sides from Oakland to Veterans Parkway
Fox Creek on both sides from Stonehedges to south corporate limits
Fox Creek on the north side from 30 feet west of Crooked Creek to 73 feet
east of Crooked Creek
Fox Creek on the north side from 770 feet east of Knollbrook to 78 feet
west of Pebblebrook
Fox Creek on the north side from Oakland to a point 45 feet west
Fox Creek on the north side from 400 feet to 450 feet west of Pebblebrook
Fox Creek on the south side from Oakland to Stonehedges
Franklin on both sides from Emerson to a point 95 feet south
Franklin on the east side from Emerson to a point 60 feet north
Franklin on both sides from the north line of vacated Kelsey to a point 30
feet south
§ 29-1809 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1809
1:1067
Location
Franklin on both sides from the south line of vacated Division to a point
30 feet south
Franklin on the west side from 125 feet to 175 feet north of Beecher
Fremont on the south side from Clayton to Clinton
Front on the north side from Allin to GM&O Bridge
Front on the north side from East to a point 50 feet east
Front on the north side from Evans to a point 30 feet west
Front on the north side from Gridley to a point 50 feet east
Front on the north side from Gridley to a point 50 feet west
Front on the north side from 80 feet to 110 feet east of the east line at
McLean
Front on the south side from the drive to 403 East Front to a point 25 feet
east
Front on the south side from Allin to 135 feet east
Front on the south side from Main to East
Front on the south side from 54 feet west of Prairie to 116 feet east of
Gridley [Amended 7-8-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-51]
Front on the south side from Robinson to 52 feet west
Front on the south side from State to 150 feet west
Front on the south side from Western to GM&O R.R. Bridge
Ft. Jesse on both sides from east corporate limits to west corporate limits
General Electric on both sides from Veterans to Towanda-Barnes
Gerig on both sides from Ekstam to Haeffele
Gettysburg on both sides from Lamon to Empire
Gettysburg on the east side from Lamon to Arrowhead
Gill on the north side from 1,150 feet to 1,230 feet west of the west line of
Airport
Gill on the south side from Airport west to and including Turn Around
Area
Gilmore on both sides from Morrissey to Commerce
Glenbridge on both sides from Ballybunion to Ireland Grove [Added
7-8-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-51]
Glenbridge on the west side from Dunloe to Ballybunion [Added
7-8-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-51]
Goose Creek on both sides from Morris to west end
Graham on both sides from Center to Main
§ 29-1809 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1809
1:1068
Location
Graham on the north side from East to Roosevelt
Graham on the south side from Park to 60 feet east
Gray on the north side from Madison to Madison
Greenwood on both sides from Morris to south corporate limits
Greyhound on the east side from Hamilton to south end
Gridley on the east side from Front to Washington
Gridley on the east side from 85 feet to 115 feet north of Market
Gridley on the east side from Wood to Jackson
Gridley on the west side from Douglas to Washington
Gridley on the west side from Oakland to Front
Gridley on the west side from Wood to Mission
Grove on both sides from 105 feet east of Clinton to 105 feet west of
Clinton
Grove on both sides of north-south jog (known as 1200 block West Grove)
Grove on both sides from 40 feet west of McLean to 40 feet east of
McLean
Grove on the north side from Euclid to Lumber
Grove on the north side from Gridley to 115 feet east
Grove on the north side from Mason to Lee
Grove on the north side from McClun to a point 85 feet east
Grove on the north side from Prairie to Gridley
Grove on the south side from Gridley to a point 100 feet east
Grove on the south side from Mercer to a point 100 feet west
Grove on the south side from Robinson to Kreitzer
Grove on the south and west sides from 470 feet to 545 feet east of
Magoun
Grove on the south side from Vale to a point 40 feet east
Guido on both sides from Oakland to and around the cul-de-sac
Haeffele on both sides Empire to beginning of private section north of
Gerig
Hall on the north side from Prospect to Williamsburg
Hamilton on both sides from Commerce to Mercer
Hamilton on both sides from Veterans to Bunn
Hamilton on both sides from Morrissey to East End
Hannah on both sides from Bell to Oakland
§ 29-1809 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1809
1:1069
Location
Hannah on both sides from Croxton to Bell
Harbord on the east side from Oakland to Maizefield north
Harbord on the west side from Croxton to Maizefield north
Harvest Pointe on both sides from Empire to Dee Farm
Heartland on the north side from Hershey to the east end, including culde-
sac
Heartland on the south side from Hershey to a point 475 feet east
Heartland on the south side from 725 feet east of Hershey to cul-de-sac
Heatherhill on both sides except in front of 706, 708, 710, 712
Hershey on both sides from College to Garlington
Hershey on both sides from Empire to Yorktown
Hershey on both sides from Ft. Jesse Road to Rainbow
Hershey on both sides from Oakland to Hamilton
Hershey on the east side from Empire to Rainbow
Hershey on the east side from 85 feet north to 60 feet south of Wellington
Way
Hershey on the west side from a point 80 feet south of Arrowhead to a
point 250 feet north of Arrowhead
Hershey on the west side from Empire to Lamon
Hershey on the west side from Oakland to Washington
Hinshaw on both sides from Market to Monroe
Hinshaw on both sides from Market to Mulberry
Hinshaw on both sides from Sheridan to Half
Hinshaw on the east side from Chestnut to Blackstone
Hinshaw on the east side from Mulberry to 50 feet north
Hinshaw on the west side from the north line of O'Neil Park to Chestnut
Hinshaw on the west side from Sheridan to Monroe
Holiday on both sides from 550 feet north of Arrowhead to Dead End
Holiday on both sides from Mt. Vernon to a point 250 feet south of
Wildwood
Holton on the west side from Monroe to Market
Horenberger on the west side from Emerson to Beecher
Hoyt on both sides from Brock to south end
IAA on both sides from Vernon to North Empire Frontage Road
§ 29-1809 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1809
1:1070
Location
Illinois on the north side from 60 feet to 95 feet east of the east line of
Erickson
Illinois on the north side from 65 feet to 105 feet west of the west line of
Erickson
Illinois on the north side from 230 feet to 285 feet west of the west line of
Erickson
Illinois on the north side from 450 feet to 490 feet west of the west line of
Erickson
Indianapolis on both sides from the turn around to a point 50 feet south
Indianapolis on the west side from Oakland to Croxton
Interstate Drive on both sides from Market north to north end of public
road
Ireland Grove on both sides from Mercer to Loop Drive
Ireland Grove on both sides from Veterans to east corporate limits
Ireland Grove around cul-de-sac at west end west of Brickyard
IWU Area - See Exhibit D68
Jackson on both sides from Veterans to a point 100 feet west
Jackson on the north side from Clinton to a point 150 feet east
Jackson on the north side from Gridley to Prairie
Jackson on the north side from Mercer to a point 60 feet west
Jackson on the north side from 100 feet west of Morris to Lee
Jackson on the north side from State to Denver
Jackson on the south side from Clinton to a point 110 feet west
Jackson on the south side from East to Prairie
James on the north side from the east end to a point 50 feet west
James on the south side from Clinton to the east end
JC Parkway on both sides from Market to Valley View
Jefferson on both sides from Clinton to 50 feet east
Jefferson on the north side from East to Prairie
Jefferson on the north side from 275 feet to 333 feet west of Towanda
Jefferson on the south side from Clinton to 70 feet west
Jefferson on the south side from 465 feet to 504 feet east of Colton
Jefferson on the south side from East 70 feet east
Jefferson on the south side from 104 feet to 120 feet east of Main
68.Editor's Note: Exhibit D is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 29-1809 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1809
1:1071
Location
Jefferson on the south side from 110 feet to 135 feet west of McLean
Jefferson on the south side from 180 feet to 200 feet west of McLean
Jefferson on the north side from Madison to a point 90 feet west
Jefferson on the south side from Madison to Roosevelt
Jefferson on the south side from Morris to a point 60 feet east
Jefferson on the south side from Oak to Lee
Jefferson on both sides from Allin to a point 30 feet east
Jumer Drive on both sides from Veterans to Hershey
Kelsey on the north side from Lee to Oak
Kelsey on the south side from Fell west to Dead End
Kelsey on the south side from Main to Franklin
Kentucky Alley on the south side from the east line of Center to a point 30
feet east
Kentucky Alley on the south side from Main to a point 55 feet west
Kickapoo Creek on both sides from Ireland Grove to north corporate
limits
Kirkwood on the north side from Conway (west) to Moss Creek
Koch on the east side from Stewart to the cul-de-sac
Kreitzer on the west side from Grove to a point 47 feet south
Kreitzer on the east side between the 2 drives to 406 South Kreitzer
Kurt on the north side from Towanda to IAA
Laesch on the south side from Morris to Greenwood
Lafayette on both sides between Main and Center
Lake on the south side from Springfield to Lake
Lake Ridge on the west side from Martin Luther King to a point 70 feet
south
Lee on the east side from Division to Walnut
Lee on the east side from 98 feet to 114 feet south of the south line of
Front
Lee on the east side from Jefferson to a point 40 feet south
Lee on the east side from Jefferson to Market
Lee on the east side from Locust to 132 feet north
Lee on the east side from 60 feet north to 95 feet south of Olive
Lee on the west side Emerson to a point 30 feet south
Lee on the west side from Front to 130 feet south
§ 29-1809 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1809
1:1072
Location
Lee on the west side from Locust to Chestnut
Lee on the west side from Market to a point 30 feet south
Lee on the west side from Market to a point 45 feet north
Lee on the west side from Monroe to Washington
Lee on the west side from Oakland to a point 50 feet north
Lee on the west side from 95 feet north to 65 feet south of Olive
Lee on the west side from Washington to 100 feet north
Lee on the both sides Taylor to Grove
Lincoln on both sides from Mercer to Hershey
Lincoln on the north side from Evans to Main
Lincoln on the south side from Birchwood to Mercer
Lincoln on the south side from Center to Main
Lincoln on the south side from Morrissey to 230 feet east of Morrissey
Linden on both sides from 300 feet south of Emerson to north corporate
limits
Linden on the east side from Locust to 300 feet south of Emerson
Linden on the west side from Emerson to a point 270 feet south
Linden on the west side from Empire to a point 50 feet north
Linden on the west side from Empire to a point 140 feet south
Lisa on both sides from Airport to a point 50 feet west
Livingston on the west side from Blackstone to Walnut
Locust on both sides from Morris to Allin
Locust on both sides from Oak to Prairie
Locust on both sides from Western to a point 30 feet east
Locust on the north side from Clinton to 250 feet west
Locust on the north side from 100 feet east to 30 feet west of Hinshaw
Locust on the north side just west of Linden
Locust on the north side from the west line of McLean to 125 feet west
Locust on the north side from 80 feet west of Robinson to Towanda
Locust on the north side from Western to Hinshaw
Locust on the south side from Allin to a point 35 feet east
Locust on the north side from Allin to a point 40 feet east
Locust on the south side from Morris to a point 30 feet west
Locust on the south side from Prairie to Towanda
§ 29-1809 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1809
1:1073
Location
Locust on the south side from Western to a point 75 feet west
Low on both sides from Lake to a point 90 feet north
Lumber at the south end south of Chestnut
Lumber on both sides from Oakland to a point 175 feet south of Jackson
Lumber on the east side from Front to a point 50 feet east
Lumber on the west side from Grove to Olive
MacArthur on both sides from Madison to Gridley
MacArthur on both sides from Oakland to 150 feet east of Livingston
MacArthur on the north side from 170 feet to 205 feet west of the west
line of Bunn
MacArthur on the north side from 150 feet east of Livingston to Morris
MacArthur on the north side from Oakland/MacArthur Crossover to a
point 200 feet west
MacArthur on the north side from Morris to Madison
MacArthur on the south side from Allin to a point 80 feet west
MacArthur on the south side from Lee to a point 80 feet west
MacArthur on the south side from Summit to a point 40 feet west
MacArthur on the south side from west line of Western to a point 36 feet
wide
Madison on both sides from northwest crossover to southwest crossover
Madison on the east side from Chestnut to Walnut
Madison on the east side from 110 feet to 450 feet north of the north line
of Mall
Madison on the east side from Mulberry to Locust
Madison on the east side from Kentucky Alley to 50 feet south
Madison on the east side from Wood to Miller
Madison on the west side from Lafayette to a point 60 feet north
Madison on the west side from 285 feet to 355 feet south of Olive
Madison on the west side from 105 feet to 225 feet south of the south line
of Olive
Magoun on the west side from the south line of Raymond School to Olive
Magoun on the east side from Olive to a point 90 feet south
Main on both sides from the south corporate limits to Miller
Main on both sides from 100 feet south of Wood to Grove
Main on the east side from 205 feet south of Beecher to Division
§ 29-1809 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1809
1:1074
Location
Main on the east side from 68 feet to 200 feet north of Chestnut
Main on the east side from Chestnut to a point 65 feet south
Main on the east side from Empire to 60 feet north
Main on the east side from 40 feet south of the south line of Graham to 42
feet north of the north line of Graham
Main on the east side from Miller to Wood
Main on the east side from Niccolls to Oakland
Main on the east side from 35 feet to 80 feet south of the south line of
Union
Main on the east side from University to a point 90 feet south
Main on the east side from 20 feet south to 42.5 feet south of the south
line of Walnut
Main on the east side from Union to a point 60 feet north
Main on the east side from 75 feet to 125 feet south of Union
Main on the east side from 70 feet to 120 feet north of University
Main on the west side from Chestnut to 200 feet north
Main on the west side from Chestnut Street to a point 30 feet south
Main on the west side from Division to Seminary
Main on the west side from Locust to 30 feet north
Main on the west side from Scott to Empire
Main on the west side from Thompson to 56 feet north
Main on the west side from Union to 70 feet north
Main on the west side from Union to 50 feet south
Main on the west side from Walnut to a point 65 feet south
Maizefield on the north side from Harbord to Meadows
Maizefield on the south side from Harbord (south) to Meadows
Maizefield on the west side from O'Connell to Harbord
Maloney on both sides from Prospect to Williamsburg
Maple on the east side from Bell to Oakland
Maple on the west side from Oakland to a point 40 feet south
Maple on the west side between the drives to 1211 East Oakland and 603
South Maple
Maple Hill on both sides from Wylie to north corporate limits
Marion on the north side from Rosney to Colton
Market on both sides from 150 feet west of west line of Lee to Center
§ 29-1809 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1809
1:1075
Location
Market on both sides from Morris to Catherine
Market on both sides from Stillwell to west corporate limits
Market on the north side from Allin to a point 55 feet west
Market on the south side from 80 feet west of Allin to 60 feet east of Allin
Market on the north side from Catherine to a point 65 feet east
Market on the north side from Catherine to Howard
Market on the north side from Clinton to Robinson
Market on the north side from East to Douglas
Market on the north side from 180 feet east to 180 feet west of Hinshaw
Market on the north side from Lee to 120 feet west
Market on the north side from Mason to 80 feet east
Market on the north side from Morris to a point 150 feet west of Western
Market on the north side from Prairie to Gridley
Market on the south side from 10 feet east to 10 feet west of the District
87 drive
Market on the south side from East to Prairie
Market on the south side from 60 feet to 120 feet east of Prairie
Market on the south side from Gridley to Clinton
Market on the south side from Lee to 150 feet west
Market on the south side from Mason to 90 feet west
Market on the south side from Morris to a point 220 feet west of Western
Market on the south side from Stillwell to 180 feet east of Hinshaw
Martin Luther King, Jr. on both sides from Market to Cottage
Mason on the east side from 225 feet to 280 feet south of Bissell
Mason on the east side from Market to Mulberry
Mason on the east side from Seminary to 75 feet south
Mason on the east side from 20 feet north to 20 feet south of the alley
south of Seminary
Mason on the west side from Chestnut to a point 75 feet south
Mason on the west side from Grove to 90 feet south
Mason on the west side from Jackson to Mill
Mason on the west side from Market to Monroe
Mason on the west side from Seminary to 500 feet south
Maysel on the north side from Four Seasons to the west end
§ 29-1809 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1809
1:1076
Location
McClun on the east side from Oakland to a point 128 feet north
McClun on the east side from a point 35 feet north of Taylor's north rightof-
way line to Taylor
McClun on the both sides from Washington to Grove
McClun on the west side from Grove to Bell
McGraw on the south side from Eldorado to Arcadia
McGraw on the north side from the easternmost drive to 2708 west to
Eldorado
McGregor on the east side from Croxton to Cloud
McGregor on the west side from Croxton (south) to Croxton (north)
McLean on the east side from Empire to 40 feet south
McLean on the east side from 55 feet south of Monroe to 40 feet north of
Monroe
McLean on the east side from Oakland to Washington
McLean on the west side from 40 feet north of Grove to 40 feet south of
Grove
McLean on the west side from Locust to University
McLean on the west side from Walnut to Graham
McLean on the west side from Washington to Front
Meadows on the east side from Oakland to Maizefield
Mecherle on the east side from Robinhood to Delmar
Mercer on both sides from Benjamin to Lincoln
Mercer on both sides from Castle to Washington
Mercer on both sides from Lincoln to Herbert
Mercer on both sides from Marzel to Hamilton
Mercer on the east side from Herbert to Marzel
Mercer on the west side from Washington to a point 100 feet north
Mill on the north side from 40 feet east of Mason to Allin
Mill on the south side from Morris to a point 50 feet west
Mill on the south side from Evans to a point 40 feet west
Miller on the north side from Center to Madison
Miller on the south side from Center to Main
Miller on the south side from Wright to the cemetery entrance
Miller Park - See Exhibit
Mirium on both sides from Airport to a point 50 feet west
§ 29-1809 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1809
1:1077
Location
Mission on the west and south sides from Gridley to MacArthur
Monroe on both sides from Hinshaw to Holton
Monroe on the north side from Clinton to 244 feet east of the east line of
East Street
Monroe on the south side from Center to a point 70 feet west
Monroe on the south side from Livingston to Holton
Monroe on the south side from Madison to Oak
Monroe on the south side from Mason to Allin
Monroe on the south side from Mason to Morris
Morningside on the north side from Hershey to a point 65 feet west
Morris on the east side from 100 feet south of Locust to Locust
Morris on both sides from Locust to Chestnut
Morris on both sides from Market to south corporate limits
Morris on the west side from Forrest to Seminary
Morrissey on both sides from Croxton to south City limits
Mount Vernon on the east side from Lawndale to Empire
Mount Vernon on the west side from Empire to Dogwood
Mount Vernon on the west side from Wildwood to a point 50 feet south
Mulberry on both sides from 40 feet east to 30 feet west of Hinshaw
Mulberry on both sides from northeast crossover to Main
Mulberry to the east line of East north of Mulberry
Mulberry on the north side from Lee to Allin
Mulberry on the north side from Main to McLean
Mulberry on the north side from the northwest crossover to 120 feet east
of Roosevelt
Mulberry on the south side from Allin to Howard
Mulberry on the south side from the east line of East south of Mulberry to
the east line of East north of Mulberry
Mulberry on the south side from Madison to Lee
Mulberry on the south side from Prairie to McLean
Norbloom on the east side from Dawes to north corporate limits
North Country Club from north end of Island at Country Club to south end
of Island at Country Club Place on west side
North Empire Frontage Road on both sides from Towanda Service Road to
IAA
§ 29-1809 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1809
1:1078
Location
North Empire Frontage Road on the north side from Mt. Vernon to east
end
Oak on the west side from Front to Seminary
Oakbrook on the west side from Clearwater to Rainbow
Oakbrook Court on the north side from Oakbrook Drive west to and
including around the cul-de-sac
Oak Creek on the north side from Main to 275 feet east of Tracy
Oak Creek on the south side from Main to Tracy
Oakland on both sides from Fox Creek to a point 750 feet north
Oakland on both sides from Magoun to Livingston
Oakland on both sides from Moore to east corporate limits
Oakland on the north side from Euclid to Magoun
Oakland on the north side from Morris to 100 feet east of State
Oakland on the north side from 95 feet east of Woodland to 75 feet west
of Woodland
Oakland on the south side from Allin to a point 80 feet east
Oakland on the south side from Livingston to Morris
Oakland on the south side from Madison to Leland
Oakland on the south side from the west line of Mason south to west line
of Mason north
Oakland on the south side from Morris to a point 90 feet east
Oakland on the south side from west line of Oakland School to Vale
Oakland on the south side from 370 feet to 430 feet east of the east line of
Vale
Oakland on the south side from Vale to a point 40 feet east
Oakland Court on both sides from the east-west alley to a point 15 feet
south
O'Connel on both sides from Maizefield to Croxton
O'Hara on the north side from Allin to 100 feet east
Old Jamestown on both sides from Airport to Auburn
Olive on the north side from Euclid to a point 70 feet east
Olive on the north side from Euclid west to GM&O RR
Olive on the north side from Gridley to a point 130 feet west
Olive on the north side from drive to Lincoln Towers to a point 15 feet
west
Olive on the north side from Madison to Albert
§ 29-1809 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1809
1:1079
Location
Olive on the north side from the west line of Madison to a point 30 feet
west
Olive on the north side from Reeves to 40 feet east of east line of Morris
Olive on the north side from Roosevelt to a point 35 feet west
Olive on the north side from 90 feet to 105 feet east of the east line of
Roosevelt
Olive on the south side from Erickson to 90 feet west
Olive on the south side from 65 feet to 165 feet east of the east line of
Erickson
Olive on the south side from 230 feet to 270 feet east of the east line of
Erickson
Olive on the south side from 215 feet to 255 feet west of the west line of
Erickson
Olive on the south side from 450 feet to 495 feet west of the west line of
Erickson
Olive on the south side from Euclid to a point 40 feet east
Olive on the south side from 50 feet west of Lumber to 140 feet west of
Western
Olive on the south side from Morris to Center
Olive on the south side from Morris to East
Olive on the south side from Prairie to Gridley
Olive on the south side from west line of Raymond School to 75 feet east
of Magoun
Packard on the north side from Magoun to a point 85 feet east
Packard on the south side from Magoun to a point 40 feet east
Packard on the south side from Reeves to Lumber
Pamela on the north side from Towanda Barnes to Ekstam
Pamela on the south side from Towanda Barnes to 130 feet east of Norma
Park on the east side from Beecher to a point 40 feet south
Park on the east side from Graham to Empire
Park on the east side from Phoenix to a point 30 feet north [Amended
7-8-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-51]
Park (United Methodist Office Building) [Repealed 7-8-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-51]
Park on the east side from 90 feet south to 182 feet north of University
Park on the west side from Beecher to University
§ 29-1809 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1809
1:1080
Location
Park on the west side from 90 feet to 130 feet south of the south line of
University
Park Place on west side of one way inset area between Martin Luther
King and Parker
Patterson on the east side from the north line of Oakland to 205 feet north
Patterson on the west side from Oakland to East Gate
Peach on the north side from Rutledge to Dogwood
Perrin on the east side from Washington to Country Club
Phoenix on the north side from 135 feet to 155 feet west of the west line
of Fell
Phoenix on the north side from 200 feet to 220 feet east of Park
Phoenix on the south side from Fell to Park
Prairie Lane on the south side from the east end to a point 12 feet west
Prairie on the east side from 85 feet north of Walnut to Grove
Prairie on the west side from Empire to Walnut
Prairie on the west side from Jackson to a point 75 feet south
Prairie on the east side from Jackson to a point 50 feet south
Prairie on the west side from Jackson south to alley
Prairie on the west side from Market to a point 40 feet south
Prairie on the west side from 50 feet north to 50 feet south of Monroe
Prairie on the west side from Olive to Jackson
Prairie Crossing on both sides from 2100 East to west corporate limits
Prospect on both sides from Oakland to Empire
Radliff on the east side from Robinhood to Sherwood
Rainbow on both sides from Hershey to a point 180 feet east
Rainbow on the north side from Oakbrook to Hershey
Rainbow on the south side from 50 feet west to 50 feet east of Anchor
Rainbow on the south side from 50 feet west to 50 feet east of Carraway
Rainbow on the south side from 50 feet west to 50 feet east of Moonstone
Rainbow on the south side from 50 feet west to 50 feet east of Oakbrook
Rainbow on the south side from 50 feet west to 50 feet east of Ridgeport
Rave on the north side from Towanda Barnes to the east property line of
3710 Rave
Regency on both sides from Fairway to Oakland
§ 29-1809 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1809
1:1081
Location
Ridgeport on the west side from 3 feet south of the driveway to 1508
Ridgeport north to Rainbow
Riley on the south side from Mecherle to Bradley
Robinhood on the south side from Towanda to Mecherle
Robinson on the east side from Taylor to Washington
Robinson on the west side from point 80 feet south of property line of
Felton to Oakland
Robinson on the west side from Taylor to Oakland
Robinson on the west side from Olive south to alley
Robinson on the west side from Washington south 1/2 block to the alley
Roosevelt on the east side 13 feet north and south of Daily Pantagraph
loading dock
Roosevelt on the east side from Market to 130 feet south
Roosevelt on the east side from Olive to 90 feet north
Roosevelt on the west side from Graham to Union
Roosevelt on the west side from Locust to Empire
Roosevelt on the west side from Olive north to and including the cul de
sac
Roosevelt on the west side from Water to a point 250 feet north
Royal Pointe on both sides from Empire to a point 50 feet north of Reed
Rust on both sides from Regency to Washington
Rutledge on the west side from Arrowhead to Peach
Sale Barn on both sides from Morris to Main
Sandburg on the west side from Arrowhead to Lamon
Scott on the south side from Center to Main
Seminary on the north side from Mason to Calhoun
Seminary on the south side from Western to Mason
Seville on the east side from Oakland to Jackson
Seville on the west side from Jackson to Granada
Seville on the west side from Oakland to 110 feet north
Six Points from Morris east to Dead End
South Empire Frontage Road on both sides from Fairway to Veterans
Frontage Road
Springfield on both sides from Morris to Fox Creek
State on the east side from 30 feet south of the south line of Front to
Washington
§ 29-1809 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1809
1:1082
Location
State on the west side from Empire to 150 feet north
State on the west side from Washington to Oakland
Stewart on the north side from Center to Main
Stewart on the south side from Center to Wilson
Stewart on both sides Madison to Center
Stillwell on the west side from Market to Sheridan
Stone Mountain from Southfork to Degarmo
St. Joseph on both sides from Washington to Eastland
Summit on the east side from Lake to a point 190 feet north of Lake
Summit on the west side from Wood south to Lake
Szarek on the west side from Six Points to 100 feet south
Tanner on the south side from Springfield to a point 240 feet west
Taylor on the south side from Clinton to Robinson
Taylor on the south side from Denver to State
Taylor on the south side from 75 feet to 125 feet east of Low
Thompson on the north side from Main to Center
Timberwolf on both sides from Scottsdale to North End
Tipton on the north side from Circle to Caroline
Todd on the north side from Gettysburg to and including the west cul-desac
Todd on the south side from Gettysburg to and including the east cul-desac
Towanda on both sides from Washington to north corporate limits
Tracy left side of one-way circle drive at south end
Trinity on both sides Empire to Cornelius
Union on the south side from Center to Main
University on the north side from 20 feet east to 20 feet west of the northsouth
alley located between Clinton and Whites Place
University on the north side from Main to East
University on the north side from Whites Place to a point 35 feet west
University on the south side from Park to McLean
University on the south side from Whites Place to Clinton
Urban on the south side from Tracy to east end
Vale on the east side from Washington to Lincoln
Valley View on both sides from Wylie to West End
§ 29-1809 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1809
1:1083
Location
Veterans Parkway on both sides from north corporate limits to south
corporate limits
Walnut on the north side from 60 feet west of Center to Main
Walnut on the north side from East to a point 85 feet west
Walnut on the north side from Hinshaw to Livingston
Walnut on the south side from Center to a point 50 feet west
Walnut on the south side from 20 feet east of the east line of East to 20
feet west of the west line of East
Walnut on the south side from 90 feet west of East to East
Walnut on the south side from 65 feet to 115 feet east of the east line of
Main
Washington on both sides from Mercer to Bayberry
Washington on the north side from Center to Main
Washington on the north side from Colton to 50 feet east of McClun
Washington on the north side 140 feet east of Brown to west corporate
limits
Washington on the north side from Evans to 120 feet east of Kreitzer
Washington on the north side from Main to a point 40 feet west of East
Washington on the north side from Mercer to 300 feet west
Washington on the north side from 50 feet east to 25 feet west of Stillwell
Washington on the north side from Western to the Southern Pacific
Railroad
Washington on the south side from Bayberry to Evergreen
Washington on the south side from Clayton to Mercer
Washington on the south side from Euclid to a point 135 feet west
Washington on the south side from Gridley to 50 feet east
Washington on the south side from 134 feet east of Gridley to McLean
Washington on the south side from Madison 100 feet westerly
Washington on the south side from Morris to 65 feet west
Washington on the south side from Morris to 35 feet east
Washington on the south side from Stillwell to Western
Western on both sides from Forrest to Seminary
Western on the east side from Mulberry to Chestnut
Western on the east side from 50 feet south of Penn Central Railroad to
Washington
Western on the east side from Perry to 24 feet north
§ 29-1809 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1809
1:1084
Location
Western on the west side from Chestnut to Seminary
Western on the west side from Front to Olive
Western on the west side from Front to Washington
Western on the west side from Mulberry to Market
Westgate on both sides Interstate Drive to Wal-Mart parking lot
Westport (70 feet west of Eastport) [Repealed 7-8-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-51]
Westport on the north side from Eastport west to and including the culde-
sac
Westport (170 feet west of Eastport) [Repealed 7-8-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-51]
Westport on the south side from Eastport to 375 feet west [Amended
7-8-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-51]
White Eagle on both sides from Streid to Saddlebrook
White Oak on both sides from Market to the north corporate limits
White's Place on both sides from Empire to 60 feet north
White's Place across north Dead End
Willard on the east side from the alley south of Grove to Grove
Willedrob on the north side to and around the cul-de-sac
Williamsburg on the east side from Hall to north end
Williamsburg on the west side from Eastland to a point 50 feet south
Williamsburg on the west side from 30 feet north to 30 feet south of the
drive to 206 North Williamsburg
Williamsburg on the west side from 470 feet to 510 feet south of Eastland
Wood on both sides from Center to Main
Wood on the north side from Center to Madison
Wood on the north side from Main to Gridley
Wood on the north side from 90 feet east of the east line of Lee to 65 feet
west of the west line of Lee
Wood on the south side from Gridley to 70 feet west
Wood on the south side from Morris to Center
Wood on the south side from Pancake to Morris
Woodruff on the south side from Kenyon to Colton
Wright on both sides from 50 feet north to 50 feet south of Miller
Wylie on both sides from Market to the north corporate limits
§ 29-1809 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1810
1:1085
§ 29-1810. [Ch. 29, Sec. 150] Schedule X: Parking Prohibited
During Certain Hours on Certain Streets.
In accordance with § 29-1604, and when signs are erected giving notice
thereof, no person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified herein
on the specified days upon any of the streets or parts of streets as follows:
Alternate Side Parking — 3:00 a.m. to 5:00 a.m. [Ord. No. 2012-57]
In an area commencing in the center of Gridley at the south line of Olive
Street; thence north along the center line of Gridley Street to the north line
of Douglas Street; thence west along the north line of Douglas Street to the
east line of East Street; thence north along the east line of East Street to
the north line of Locust Street; thence west along the north line of Locust
Street to the west line of U.S. 51 southbound; thence south along the west
line of U.S. 51 southbound to the north line of Monroe Street; thence west
along the north line of Monroe Street to the west line of Roosevelt Avenue;
thence south along the west line of Roosevelt Avenue to the north line of
Grove Street; thence south along the east line of Roosevelt Avenue to the
north line of Olive Street; thence east along the north line of Olive Street
to the east line of Madison Street; thence east along the south line of Olive
Street to the point of beginning with the following exceptions;
(1) Jefferson Street between Prairie Street and Gridley Street. In the area
described above, vehicles are allowed to park during this period on
the west side and north sides of the streets on Mondays, Wednesdays,
Fridays and Sundays and on the east and south sides of the streets on
Tuesdays, Thursdays, Saturdays and Sundays.
(2) Main Street, between Market Street and Mulberry Street. In the area
described above, vehicles are allowed to park during this period on the
west side of the street on Mondays, Wednesdays, Thursdays, Fridays,
Saturdays, and Sundays and on the east side of the street on Tuesdays
and Sundays.
(3) Washington Street Between Center Street and Main Street. In the area
described above, vehicles are allowed to park during this period on the
south side of the street on Tuesdays and Sundays.
7 days a week — 3:00 a.m. - 5:00 a.m. [Ord. No. 2015-25]
Jefferson on both sides Main to Center (Tow Away Zone on Saturday and
Sunday)
Main on both sides Front to Jefferson (Tow Away Zone on Saturday and
Sunday)
Hall on the south side from Prospect to 535 feet east
Jefferson, both sides, Main to Center (Tow Away Zone, Saturday and
Sunday)
Washington on the south side from Caroline to west corporate limits
Washington on both sides from Morris to ICG Railroad
§ 29-1810 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1810
1:1086
3:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. on School Days When Children are Present
[Ord. No. 2015-25]
Grove on the north side from State to Leland
7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
Grove on the south side from McClun to Denver
5:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. [Ord. No. 2003-47]
Mission on the north side from Gridley to 340 feet west
6:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.
MacArthur on the south side from Center to Main
Tuesday — 6:00 a.m. - 3:00 p.m. [Ord. No. 1994-116]
Oakland Court on both sides from 250 feet to 300 feet north of the north
line of Oakland
Except 8:00 a.m. to 12:30 p.m. Sundays [Ord. No. 2002-101]
Four Season on the east side from 40 feet to 160 feet north of Clobertin
Lincoln on the north side between Capen and Broadmoor
Except 4:00 p.m. - 8:00 p.m. - Saturday; 6:00 a.m. - Noon Sunday
[Ord. No. 1997-4]
Locust on both sides from Western to Morris
6:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. [Ord. No. 2005-111]
Parking Lot on southeast corner of Hinshaw at Market
6:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. [Ord. No. 1990-97]
Fillmore on the south side from Center to Main
Main on the west side from Fillmore to Graham
10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. [Ord. No. 2005-111]
Atwood Wayside Parking Lot
Currency on both sides from Commerce to southwest end
Finance on both sides from Currency to south end
24 Hour Restriction [Ord. No. 1984-157]
Albert on the west side from Grove to Olive
East Street on the east side from Monroe to Market
Oakland on the south side from Seville to Regency
§ 29-1810 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1810
1:1087
6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Except Saturdays and Sundays (Tow-Away
Zone) [Added 7-8-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-51]
Oak Street on both sides from Stewart to Bissell
§ 29-1811. [Ch. 29, Sec. 151] Schedule XI: Standing or Parking
During Certain Hours on Certain Streets Prohibited.
In accordance with § 29-1605A and when signs are erected giving notice
thereof, no person shall stand, or park, a vehicle between the hours
specified herein of any day except Sunday and public holidays within the
district or upon any of the streets or parts of streets as follows:
9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. [Ord. No. 1995-61]
Parkshores on the east side from east-west section north to Martin Luther
King Drive
At All Times [Ord. No. 2008-64]
Black Oak on both sides from Ireland Grove to Jackpine
Breezewood on both sides from Woodrig to 150 feet north of Springdale
College on the north side from the easternmost drive to North Pointe
School to a point 100 feet east
Hannah on the west side from Croxton to 150 feet north, including
parkway
Hershey on the east side from Empire to Clearwater
Main on the east side from 113 feet to 240 feet north of Chestnut Street
Main on the west side from Fillmore to Graham
Oakland on the south side from 30 feet east of Lee to 75 feet east of Lee
Rowe on the north side from IAA Drive to Delmar
Truckers Lane on both sides from Market north to the Dead End
[Amended 7-8-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-51]
Washington on the north side from McLean to Evans
7 Days a Week [Ord. No. 2001-4]
Miller on the south side from Center to Main
Washington on the south side from Caroline to Euclid
Washington on the south side from 10 feet east to 110 feet west of the
Cemetery Entrance located west of Caroline Street
Washington on the south side from Nords Road to 300 feet east of
Emerson
Washington on the south side from 1,160 feet to 1,270 feet east of
Emerson
§ 29-1810 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1811
1:1088
7 Days a Week [Ord. No. 2001-4]
Washington on the south side from 2,050 feet to 2,285 feet east of
Emerson
§ 29-1812. [Ch. 29, Sec. 152] Schedule XII: Standing or Parking
During Certain Hours on Certain Streets Prohibited. [Ord. No.
1982-93]
In accordance with § 29-1605B and when signs are erected giving notice
thereof, no person shall stand or park a vehicle between the hours specified
herein, of any day except Saturdays, Sundays and public holidays within the
district or upon any of the streets or parts of streets as follows:
6:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.
3:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. [Ord. No. 1986-67]
Grove on the north side from Clinton to 100 feet east of Clinton
Jackson on the south side from Seville to east end
Washington on the south side from McClun to 150 feet west of Colton
Washington on the south side from McLean to Evans
6:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. [Ord. No. 2002-101]
McLean on the east side from Oakland to a point 60 feet south
6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. [Ord. No. 1980-87]
Broadmoor Drive on the west side from Oakland to Lincoln
7:00 a.m. - 9:00 a.m.
3:00 p.m. - 4:00 p.m. [Ord. No. 2001-4]
Jackson on the south side from the west end west of Lumber to a point 39
feet east
7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.
3:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m. [Ord. No. 2015-25]
Granada on both sides from Olive to Seville
Harbord on the east side from Maizefield north to Meadows
Olive on both sides from Seville east to the Dead End
Seville on the west side from Oakland to Jackson
Seville on both sides from Olive to Granada
§ 29-1811 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1812
1:1089
7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.
3:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. [Ord. No. 2015-25]
Empire on the south side from 200 feet east of Clinton to Elder
Empire on the south side from Clinton to 200 feet west
Empire on the north side from Clinton to Fell
Empire on the north side from East to Prairie
Jackson on the north side from Grant to the east end
Washington on the south side from Evans to Clayton
Washington on the south side from McClun to 150 feet west of Colton
7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. [Ord. No. 2015-25]
Arrowhead on the north side from 110 feet east of Gettysburg to 50 feet
east of Townley
Arrowhead on the south side from Gettysburg to a point 50 feet west
Morris on both sides from Seminary north to the dead end
Reed on both sides from Chathum to Royal Pointe
7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. [Ord. No. 2005-35]
Barker on the east side from Miller to a point 80 feet south
Beecher on the north side from Park to Horenberger
Clinton on both sides from Bell to Wood
Market on the south side from Prairie to a point 120 feet east
Roosevelt on the west side from 150 feet south of Olive to Water
Roosevelt on the west side from Walnut to 200 feet north of Walnut
Sheridan on the north side from Hinshaw to the west property line of
1409 West Sheridan
7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. [Ord. No. 2005-111]
Emerson on both sides from Clinton to Fell
Emerson on the north side from Clinton to 100 feet west of Linden
Gloucester on both sides from Hershey to Dover
Hershey on the east side from Oakland to Yorktown
Seminary on the south side from Cottage to Western
Tracy on the east side from Urban to a point 675 feet south of Oak Creek
Plaza
8:00 a.m. - 3:00 p.m. [Ord. No. 1995-61]
Stortz on both sides from Empire to north end
§ 29-1812 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1812
1:1090
8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. [Ord. No. 2004-39]
Bell on the south side from Clayton to Emerson School
Empire on the south side from Park east to the alley
Meadows on the south side from Maizefield (south) to Harbord
Woodfield on the east side from Northwood to College
8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. [Ord. No. 2008-64]
Clayton on the east side from south property line of Oakland to 250 feet
south
Currency on the south and east sides to and including the cul-de-sac
Front on the south side from McLean to a point 80 feet east
Grove on the north side from 40 feet east of McLean to 130 feet east of
McLean
Jackson on the south side from Mason to the west line of Irving School
Mercer on the west side from Herbert to Marzel
Orchard on the west side from Salem to Wildwood
8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. [Ord. No. 2002-101]
Monroe on both sides Colton to Towanda
8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.
3:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m. [Ord. No. 2002-101]
McClun on the east side from Bell to Oakland
9:00 a.m. to 10:30 a.m.
5:00 p.m. to 7:00 p.m.
Elmwood on both side from Colton to Towanda
Cecil on the west side from Towanda to Elmwood
9:00 a.m. - 2:00 p.m. [Ord. No. 2002-101]
Greenlawn on both sides from State to east end
State on both sides from Empire to Marion
9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
Bell on the north side from McClun to Indianapolis
State on the east side from Grove to Front
§ 29-1812 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1812
1:1091
At All Times [Ord. No. 2006-53]
Hershey on the west side from Lamon to 80 feet south of Arrowhead
Hershey on the west side from 250 feet north of Arrowhead to Rainbow
Jackson on the north side from Mason to a point 500 feet west
Roundhouse on both sides from Lumber to north end
US 51 southbound from Washington to Olive
§ 29-1813. [Ch. 29, Sec. 153] Schedule XIII: Parking Spaces for
Handicapped Persons on Streets, Municipally Owned Parking Lots
and Private Parking Lots.
The provisions of § 29-1411 of this chapter relating to parking with special
license plates, a decal or card apply to the use of the following parking
spaces as well as other spaces which comply with the provisions of
§ 29-1411. The listed parking spaces are hereby recognized and approved
as having been properly designated and reserved for the use of handicapped
persons and as having been inspected and approved for enforcement on
private property by representatives of the City including specifically the
Bloomington Police Department.
A. On-Street Parking Spaces: [Ord. No. 2018-29]
Location
Allin on the east side 40 feet to 60 feet south of Walnut
Baker on the south side in front of 303 East Baker
Baker on the south side in front of 307 East Baker
Beecher on the south side from 40 feet to 60 feet west of the west
line of East
Beecher on the south side from 60 feet to 80 feet west of the west
line of Franklin
Beecher on the south side from 105 feet to 125 feet west of the west
line of Park
Bell on the north side from 50 feet to 95 feet east of the east line of
Clinton
Catherine on the west side in front of 504 Catherine
Center on the east side from 87 feet to 107 feet north of Mulberry
Center on the east side from 20 feet to 40 feet north of the north line
of Washington
Center on the east side from 20 feet to 60 feet north of the north line
of Market
Center on the west side from 90 feet to 110 feet north of the north
line of Washington
§ 29-1812 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1813
1:1092
Location
Chestnut on the north side in front of 412 East Chestnut
Chestnut on the south side from 130 feet to 150 feet, west of the west
line of East
Chestnut on the south side from 30 feet to 50 feet west of Main
Clayton on the west side adjacent to 611 East Front
College on the west side from 110 feet to 130 feet south of the south
line of Scott
Colton on the east side - 3 spaces adjacent to stadium entrance
Douglas on the south side from 20 feet to 44 feet east of East
Douglas on the south side in front of 805 East Douglas
East on the west side in front of 1409 South East
East on the east side from 20 feet to 40 feet south of the south line of
University
Eisenhower on the east side across the street from 209 Eisenhower
Elmwood on the north side in front of 1210 Elmwood
Eisenhower on the east side from 256 feet to 276 feet south of Jersey
Evans on the east side from 42 feet to 62 feet south of the south line
of Mill
Evans on the east side from 30 feet to 70 feet south of the south line
of Oakland
Folsom on the north side in front of 1019 West Folsom
Franklin on the west side from 30 feet to 50 feet north of the north
line of Emerson
Grove on the north side in front of 817 West Grove
Grove on the north side in front of 925 West Grove
Grove on the south side in front of 534 West Grove
Grove on the south side from 29 feet to 54 feet west of the west line
of Albert
Grove on the south side in front of 817 East Grove
Grove on the south side in front of 906 West Grove
Jackson on the north side from 30 feet to 50 feet east of the east line
of East
Jackson on the south side in front of 808 West Jackson
Jefferson on the north side in front of 514 East Jefferson
Jefferson on the north side in front of 818 1/2 East Jefferson
Jefferson on the north side in front of 917 West Jefferson
§ 29-1813 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1813
1:1093
Location
Jefferson on the north side from 20 feet to 60 feet west of the west
line of Roosevelt
Jefferson on the south side from 4 feet to 24 feet east of the drive to
824 West Jefferson
Lee on the east side from 28 feet to 48 feet north of the north line of
Front
Lee on the east side from 20 feet to 40 feet north of the north line of
Mill
Lee on the east side in front of 609 North Lee
Lee on the east side in front of 522 South Lee
Madison on the east side from 30 feet to 70 feet south of south line at
Oakland
Madison on the west side in front of 1208 North Madison [Added
7-8-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-51]
Madison on the west side in front of 1011 South Madison
Main on the east side, the first diagonal parking space south of
Jefferson
Main on the east side from 30 feet to 50 feet south of the south line of
Market
Main on the west side from 20 feet to 40 feet north of the north line
of Union
Main on the west side from 32 feet to 52 feet south of the south line
of Washington
Main on the west side in the first diagonal space south of Mulberry
Market on the north side from 65 feet to 85 feet west of East
Market on the south side from 20 feet to 80 feet east of the east line
of Center
Market on the south side in front of 819 East Market
Market on the south side in front of 821 East Market
Mason on the east side from 30 feet to 50 feet south of the south line
of Jefferson
Mason on the east side from 87 feet to 107 feet south of Locust
Mason in the cul-de-sac at south end south of Division
Mason on the west side from 20 feet to 40 feet south of Wood
Mason on the west side from 50 feet to 70 feet north of MacArthur
McLean on the east side in front of 705 North McLean
Mill on the south side in front of 404 West Mill
§ 29-1813 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1813
1:1094
Location
Mill on the north side in front of 811 West Mill
Monroe on the north side in front of 801 West Monroe
Monroe on the north side in front of 807 West Monroe
Monroe on the north side from 20 feet to 40 feet west of the west line
of Roosevelt
Monroe on the north side from 21 feet to 41 feet west of the west
right-of-way line of Center
Monroe on the south side from 30 feet to 50 feet east of the east line
of East
Monroe on the south side from 140 feet to 180 feet west of the west
line of Clinton
Monroe on the south side from 30 feet to 50 feet east of Main
Monroe on the south side in front of 603 East Monroe
Oak on the east side from 160 feet to 180 feet north of Jefferson
Oak on the east side in front of 1223 North Oak
Oak on the east side adjacent to 507 West Elm [Added 7-8-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-51]
Oak on the east side adjacent to 508 West Elm
Olive on the north side in front of 812 1/2 East Olive
Olive on the north side in front of 1008 East Olive
Packard on the north side in front of 107 West Packard
Park on the west side from 30 feet to 50 feet north of the north line of
Graham
Park on the east side from 70 feet to 90 feet south of the south line of
Phoenix
Roosevelt on the west side from 30 feet to 70 feet north of the north
line of Jefferson
Scott on the north side in front of 1101 North Roosevelt
Scott on the north side from 20 feet to 60 feet west of the west line of
Main
Stewart on the north side, across from 103 East Stewart
Tracy on the east side in front of 2004 Tracy
University on the north side from 30 feet to 50 feet east of the east
line of Park Walnut on the north side from 30 feet to 50 feet east of
the east line of Livingston
University on the south side from 30 feet to 50 feet west of the west
line of East
§ 29-1813 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1813
1:1095
Location
Walnut on the south side from 20 feet to 40 feet east of the east line
of Hinshaw
Walnut on the south side from 55 feet to 75 feet east of the east line
of Lee
Walnut on the south side in front of 406 North Walnut
Walnut on the south side in front of 1404 West Washington
Walnut on the south side from 70 feet to 90 feet east of the east line
of McLean
Washington on the north side from 138 feet to 158 feet of the east
line of Stillwell
Washington on the south side from 20 feet to 40 feet west of the west
right-of-way line of East
Washington on the north side from 20 feet to 40 feet west of the west
right-of-way line of Madison
Washington on the north side from 53 feet to 73 feet east of the east
line of Stillwell
Washington on the south side from 20 feet to 40 feet east of the east
line of Roosevelt
Washington on the south side from 30 feet to 70 feet west of the west
line of Lee
Washington on the south side in front of 908 West Washington
B. Parking spaces in municipally owned parking areas: [Ord. No.
2008-64]
Location
Abraham Lincoln Parking Garage - 7 spaces on north and west side of
ground floor
Abraham Lincoln Parking Lot - 3 spaces - on west side of lot
Airport Park - 1 space - northwest corner
BHS Tennis Court Lot - 1 space in northwest corner
Bitner Park - 1 space on south side
Bloomington Public Library Parking Lot - 4 spaces - east and west of
south public entrance
Brookridge Park Parking Lot - 1 space - in southwest section
City Hall Lot #1 - 2 spaces east of south public entrance
City Hall Lot #3 - 1 space on west side of lot
City Hall Lot #5 - 2 spaces on south end of center spaces
City Hall Lot #6 - 3 spaces on south side of lot
§ 29-1813 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1813
1:1096
Location
City Hall Lot #8 - 1 space on west side of lot
Clearwater Park - 2 spaces in northeast corner
City Parking Garage - 4 spaces - near Monroe Street exit
Coliseum Garage - 9 spaces, 3 on each floor
Constitution Trail Parking Lot on Robinson between Monroe and
Jefferson - 1 space near shelter
Constitution Trail Lot on West Market - southeast corner - 1 space
Constitution Trail Lot on West Washington near Brown - 1 space
Dean at Fox Creek Parking Lot - 6 spaces in southwest corner
Ewing Park I - 1 space on south side of lot
Ewing Park II - 5 spaces in southeast corner of lot
Fire Station #3 - 1 space
Government Center Lot - 2 spaces on west side
Hamilton Road Fire Station - 2 spaces
Holiday Park - 2 spaces on east side of lot
Holton Homes - Lot adjacent to Hinshaw - 1 space - southwest corner
Irving Park - 2 spaces - on north side of parking lot at north end of
McKay
Kane Homes - 3 spaces in lot on north side of Monroe between
Livingston and Hinshaw
Lake Bloomington Boat Launch - 4 spaces at north end
Lincoln Leisure Center - 2 spaces on the west side of lot, north of
entrance
Major Butler Parking Lot - 1 space - on south side of center island at
east end
Major Butler Parking Lot - 1 space on northeast corner
Miller Park - 1 space adjacent to Bath House
Miller Park - 4 spaces on south side of Pavilion
Miller Park - 4 spaces on east side of road east of Playground
Miller Park - 1 space adjacent to Tennis Courts on Summit
Miller Park Zoo Parking Lot - 4 spaces
O'Neil Park - 5 spaces on east side of lot west of Softball Diamond
O'Neil Park - 5 spaces - on east side of swimming pool
O'Neil Park - 5 spaces of skate park
Pepper Ridge Park - 3 spaces on south side
§ 29-1813 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1813
1:1097
§ 29-1814. [Ch. 29, Sec. 153.1] Schedule XIII(A): Snow Routes.
[Ord. No. 2007-91]
Location
Airport - Empire to north corporate limits
Arcadia - Lincoln to Ireland Grove
Arrowhead - Holiday Lane to Royal Pointe
Beecher - Park to Franklin
Location
Police Station: Lot 5 - 2 spaces; Lot 8 - 4 spaces
Prairie Vista Golf Course Lot - 4 spaces on south side
Public Service North Lot - 1st space at end of center right-of-way on
north side Northpoint School Lot - 2 spaces in northeast corner
Rollingbrook Park - 3 spaces - northwest, northeast and southeast
corners
Sale Barn Soccer Fields - 2 spaces - on west side of lot
Sunnyside Tennis Court Lot - 1 space on south side of Illinois
Water Department Building - 2 spaces
White Oak Park Baseball/Football Field Parking Lot - 7 spaces - north
and west side of Parking Lot
White Oak Park Parking Lot - west of Cottage - 2 spaces - on north
side of Parking Lot
White Oak Park Parking Lot - south of Martin Luther King - 2 spaces -
on southeast side
Wood Hill Towers - 9 spaces - on south side of building
C. Parking spaces in private parking lots: [Ord. No. 1999-138]
Location
Angler Manor Parking Lot - 8 spaces
Cub Foods - 8 spaces
Eastland Parking Lot - 38 spaces
Gaddy Electric, 2501 G.E. Road - 3 spaces
K-Mart Parking Lot - 6 spaces
Oakland Commons (Jewel/Osco) - 9 spaces
Original Smith Printing - 2 spaces
YWCA - Hershey Facility - 4 spaces
YWCA - Alexander Facility - 1 space
§ 29-1813 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1814
1:1098
Location
Beich - Fox Creek to south City limits (past Beich's Plant)
Bissell - Low to Center
Broadmoor - Oakland to Lincoln
Brock - Market to south end
Brompton Court - Hershey to west end
Brookshire Green - entire
Brown - Washington to Market
Bunn - corporate limit line to Oakland
Clearwater - Veterans to Airport Road
Clinton - Oakland to Division
College - Veterans to Airport
Commerce - Gilmore to Hamilton
Cottage - Forrest to Martin Luther King, Jr.
Country Club - Washington to Towanda
Dover - Kensington to Ireland Grove
Eastland - Fairway to Hershey
Eldorado - Lincoln to Oakland
Emerson - Towanda to Seminary
Empire - Towanda to Lee
Euclid - Oakland to Washington
Fairway - Regency to Towanda
Forrest - Hinshaw to Cottage
Four Seasons - Lincoln to Oakland
Fox Creek - Veterans to west corporate limits
Franklin - Beecher to Division
Ft. Jesse - Airport to west corporate limits
G.E. - Veterans to Towanda-Barnes
Greenleaf - Wellington to Washington
Greenwood - Morris to south corporate limits
Grove - East to Mercer
Hamilton - Main to Mercer
Hamilton - Morrissey to Hershey
Hannah - Oakland to Croxton
Hershey - Hamilton to Ft. Jesse
§ 29-1814 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1814
1:1099
Location
Hinshaw - Forrest to Locust
Hinshaw - Locust to Market
IAA - Vernon to north Empire Service Road
Ireland Grove - Mercer to Loop Drive
Ireland Grove - Veterans to east corporate limits
Jumer - Veterans to Hershey
Laesch - Greenwood to Morris
Lafayette - Main to Morrissey
Lee - Empire to Locust
Lincoln - Main to Bunn
Lincoln - Morrissey to Hershey
Locust - White Oak to Towanda
Low - Lake to Wood
MacArthur - Oakland to Gridley
Market - Madison to west corporate limits
Martin Luther King, Jr. - Cottage to Market
Mason - Locust to Seminary
McGregor - Lincoln to Oakland
Mercer - Washington to Hamilton
Morris - Heather Hill to Market
North Empire Service Road - IAA to Towanda
North Pointe - College to Ft. Jesse
Oakland - Hershey to west corporate limits
Olive - Euclid to Center
Park - Empire to Beecher
Pendleton - Woodbridge to south end
Prospect - Oakland to Empire
Regency - Fairway to Oakland
Route 51 northbound and southbound - Division to Armory
Rowe - Towanda to IAA
Seminary - Emerson to Cottage
Seminary - Mason to Main
South Empire Service Road - Fairway to Eastland Crossing
Springfield - Fox Creek to Morris
§ 29-1814 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1814
1:1100
Location
Springfield - Morris to Lake
State - Oakland to Washington
Towanda - Washington to Locust
Towanda - Empire to Vernon
Truckers - Market to north end
Vale - Lincoln to Washington
Washington - west of City limits to Evergreen
Wellington - Hershey to Greenleaf
Western - Market to Seminary
Wood - Morris to Main
Woodbridge - Lincoln to Pendleton
Wylie - Market to Empire
§ 29-1815. [Ch. 29, Sec. 154] Schedule XIV: Parking Time Limited
on Certain Streets.
A. In accordance with § 29-1606A, parking shall be restricted upon any of
the streets or parts of streets as follows:
Monday through Saturday
4 Hour Time Limit
7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. [Ord. No. 2001-122]
Bloomington Municipal Campus Lot #5 - Visitor Parking
9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. [Ord. No. 2001-122]
Meadows on the east side from Harbord to Maizefield north
Meadows on the west side from Oakland to Maizefield north
2 Hour Time Limit
7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. [Ord. No. 2002-101]
Croxton on the south side from 660 feet east of the east line of Bunn
to 200 feet west of Hannah
Croxton on the north side from 260 feet west of Hannah to 45 feet
east of Indianapolis
8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. [Ord. No. 2001-122]
Denver on the east side from Oakland to Jackson
Gridley on the east side from Market north 150 feet
Lee on the east side from Mulberry to a point 80 feet south
§ 29-1814 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1815
1:1101
8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. [Ord. No. 2001-122]
Union on the north side from Main to Center
Washington on both sides from 200 feet east of the east curb of
Morris to the Illinois Central Gulf Railroad
9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. [Ord. No. 2004-110]
State on the east side from Grove to 30 feet south of the south line of
Front
At All Times
Monday through Friday [Ord. No. 2004-110]
McLean on the east side from Front to a point 110 feet north
30 Minute Time Limit
6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. [Ord. No. 2002-101]
Croxton on the south side from 380 feet to 660 feet east of the east
line of Bunn
7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. [Ord. No. 2001-122]
McClun on the east side from Grove south to alley
8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. [Ord. No. 2007-45]
Jackson on the south side from 50 feet east of Morris to 150 feet east
of Morris
10 Minute Time Limit — 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. [Ord. No.
2015-25]
Center on the west side from Monroe to 135 feet north
Jackson on the south side from Morris to 50 feet east
Main on the west side from 44 feet to 67 feet north of the north line
of Mulberry
Monroe on the north side from Center to Madison
B. In accordance with § 29-1606B, parking shall be restricted upon any of
the streets or parts of streets as follows:
Monday through Friday — 4 Hour Time Limit
7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. [Ord. No. 2007-91]
Olive on the north side from East/Albert to a point 60 feet east of
Prairie
Olive on the south side from East/Albert to Prairie
§ 29-1815 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1815
1:1102
Monday through Friday — 2 Hour Time Limit
7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. [Ord. No. 2015-25]
Bloomington Municipal Campus Lot #1 - Visitor Parking
Bloomington Municipal Campus Lot #8 - 3 Visitor Parking spaces on
south side
Chestnut on the south side from Main to East
Douglas on both sides from East to Prairie
East on the west side from Mulberry to Chestnut
Front on both sides from East to Prairie
Front on both sides from Roosevelt to Madison
Front on the north side from Prairie to Gridley
Front on the south side from Prairie to a point 80 feet east
Grove on the south side from East to Gridley
Jackson on the south side from 20 feet to 60 feet east of Prairie
Jefferson on both sides from Roosevelt to Madison
Jefferson on the south side from East to Prairie
Main on both sides from Locust to Chestnut
Olive on the south side from Center to East/Albert
Olive on the north side Madison to Roosevelt
Prairie on both sides from Front to Grove
Prairie on the west side from Jefferson to Front
Roosevelt on the both sides from Jefferson to Front
Roosevelt on the east side from 90 feet to 175 feet north of Olive
Seminary on the south side from Main to a point 75 feet west
Washington on both sides from Lee to Madison
Washington on both sides from East to Gridley
1 Hour Time Limit — 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. [Ord. No.
2001-122]
Main on the west side from Beecher to Seminary
30 Minute Time Limit — 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. [Ord. No.
2006-131]
Center on the west side from 30 feet to 50 feet north of Jefferson
Front on the north side from Madison to a point 68 feet east
Main the east side the first 2 diagonal parking spaces north of
Washington
§ 29-1815 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1815
1:1103
30 Minute Time Limit — 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. [Ord. No.
2006-131]
Main on the west side the first space north of Monroe
Olive on the south side from Main to East
C. In accordance with § 29-1606C, parking shall be restricted upon any of
the streets or parts of streets as follows:
Monday through Saturday
90 Minute Time Limit
7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. [Ord. No. 2006-131]
Center on both sides Locust Street to Front
Lee on the east side from Front to 120 feet south
Main on both sides Front Street to Locust
Market on both sides East Street to Center
Monroe on both sides East Street to Center
Monroe on the south side Madison to Center
Jefferson on both sides Madison to Main
Jefferson on the north side East to Main
Washington on both sides East to Main
Washington on the south side Center to Main
Washington on both sides Madison to Center
Mulberry on both sides Main to Center
Front on the north side East to Madison
D. In accordance with § 29-1606D, parking shall be restricted upon any of
the streets or parts of streets as follows:
30 Minute Time Limit
At All Times [Ord. No. 2001-122]
Front on the north side from McLean to 80 feet east of McLean
Main on the east side from 42 feet to 95 feet south of the south line of
Walnut
E. In accordance with § 29-1606E, parking shall be restricted in any of the
City Parking Facilities as follows:
§ 29-1815 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1815
1:1104
§ 29-1816. [Ch. 29, Sec. 155] Schedule XV: Parallel Parking in
Parkway.
In accordance with § 29-1404 of this chapter and when signs are erected
giving notice thereof, parallel parking in parkways shall be restricted as
follows:
Government Center Parking Lot [Ord. No. 2017-108]
No vehicle shall be allowed to park more than two hours per day in
this lot. Vehicles exceeding the two hour daily limit shall be fined in
the amount provided under § 29-2124 of this article for each additional
two-hour period, or part thereof, the vehicle is parked in excess of
the initial time or any subsequent two-hour period. No vehicle may be
parked in this lot more than one time during the same day, regardless
of whether the vehicle occupied the same or another space in any
portion of the lot and regardless of whether the vehicle was parked for
the full amount of time allowed by this ordinance.
A. Parking time limited. In accordance with § 29-1404 and when signs are
erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle in a
parkway for a period of time longer than the time specified on the signs
during the specific portion of the day, of any day, except Sundays and
public holidays within the district or upon any of the streets or parts of
streets as follows:
2 Hour Time Limit
7:00 a.m. - 5:00 p.m. [Ord. No. 2015-25]
Grove on the north side from 20 feet to 145 feet west of the west line
of Prairie
Madison on the west side from 75 feet to 185 feet north of the north
line of Mill
Prairie on the east side from 70 feet to 115 feet north of the north line
of Grove
Seminary on the north side from Main to Center
B. Parking during certain hours prohibited. In accordance with § 29-1404
and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall stand
or park a vehicle in a parkway between the hours specified herein, of
any day, except Saturdays, Sundays and public holidays within the
district or upon any of the streets or parts of streets as follows: [Ord.
No. 2015-25]
C. Parking Allowed at All Times. [Ord. No. 1999-138]
§ 29-1815 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1816
1:1105
§ 29-1817. [Ch. 29, Sec. 155.5] Angle parking in parkway.
In accordance with § 29-1404 of this chapter and when signs are erected
giving notice thereof, angle parking in the parkway shall be restricted as
follows:
§ 29-1818. [Ch. 29, Sec. 155.6] No parking in municipally owned
drives and parking areas. [Ord. No. 1986-67]
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall at any time
park a vehicle upon any of the following described areas or parts of areas
located within municipally owned drives and parking areas:
Location
Madison on the west side from 20 feet to 80 feet north of the north
line of Mill
Oakland on the south side from 20 feet west of the west line of
Madison to 20 feet east of the east line of Roosevelt
Prairie on the east side from 75 feet to 122 feet south of Douglas
Western on the east side from 50 feet to 70 feet north of the north
line of Perry
A. Parking Time Limited in accordance with § 29-1404 and when signs are
erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle in a
parkway for a period of time longer than the time specified on the signs
during the specific portion of the day, of any day, except Sundays and
public holidays within the district or upon any of the streets or parts of
streets as follows: [Ord. No. 2015-25]
B. Parking during certain hours prohibited. In accordance with § 29-1404
and when signs are erected when signs are erected giving notice
thereof, no person shall stand or park a vehicle in a parkway between
the hours specified herein, of any day, except Saturdays, Sundays and
public holidays within the district or upon any of the streets or parts of
streets as follows: [Ord. No. 2015-25]
C. Parking allowed at all times. [Ord. No. 2015-25]
Location
Clinton on the east side from 170 feet to 240 feet north of the north
line of Emerson
Grove on the north side from 230 feet to 290 feet west of the west
line of McClun
Roosevelt on the east side from 120 feet to 280 feet south of the
south line of Olive
§ 29-1816 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1818
1:1106
Location
Sunnyside Court: north side of parking lot located east of Erickson
between Illinois and Olive
600 Block North Main - Parking Lot: west side from the north line of
Mulberry to a point 30 feet north
Nierstheimer - East and West (816 West Washington): east, west and
south side of drive and parking lot south of Washington
Irvin - North and South (800 Block West Jackson and Oakland): east side
of drive between Oakland and Jackson
McGraw Building (701 South Evans): north side of drive and parking lot
west of Evans
Wood Hill: at various areas shown in Exhibit "A" of this chapter
No Parking or Standing [Ord. No. 1987-66]
City Hall: both sides of Drive Up Teller Ramp on east side of City Hall
between Olive and City Hall entrance drive
Lake Drive on the south and east side from Summit to Van Schoick
§ 29-1819. [Ch. 29, Sec. 156] Schedule XVI: Schedule of Fines.
[Ord. No. 2007-09]
In accordance with § 29-1701 of this Ordinance, the following Schedule of
Fines is established:
Offense Fine
Nature of
Violation 1st 2nd
3rd and
Subsequent
Exceeding the
Speed Limit -
§ 29-501
$1 - $100
Exceeding the
Weight Limit -
§ 29-1611
$250 $500 $1,000
Unnecessary
Noise - Sound
Amplification
System -
§ 29-1102B
$250 $500 $1,000
Windshields -
§ 29-1111A
$250 $500 $1,000
§ 29-1818 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1819
1:1107
Offense Fine
Nature of
Violation 1st 2nd
3rd and
Subsequent
Prohibited
Compression or
Engine Braking -
§ 29-920
$50 $100 $500
Nature of Violation
If Paid Within
7 Days
If Paid After 7
Days But
Within 30
Days
If Paid After
30 Days
Parking Space
Boundaries -
§ 29-1304
$10 $25 $30
Curb Loading Zone -
§ 29-1410
$20 $25 $30
Parking in
Handicapped Zone -
§ 29-1411
$250 $250 $250
Compact Car Parking
Zone - § 29-1412
$20 $25 $30
Parking in No Parking
Zone - § 29-1603
$20 $25 $30
Parking or Standing
Where Prohibited at
Times - §§ 29-1604
and 29-1605
$20 $25 $30
Parking in Violation of
Time Limits -
§ 29-1606
$10 $15 $25
Parking Too Far From
Curb - § 29-1401
$20 $25 $30
Parking on Sidewalk -
§ 29-1401
$20 $25 $30
Parking Within 15
feet of Fire Hydrant -
§ 29-1401
$20 $25 $30
Parking Within 3 feet
of a Driveway on a
Residential Street -
§ 29-1401
$20 $25 $30
§ 29-1819 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1819
1:1108
Nature of Violation
If Paid Within
7 Days
If Paid After 7
Days But
Within 30
Days
If Paid After
30 Days
Parking Within 20
feet of Crosswalk -
§ 29-1401
$20 $25 $30
Parking Within 30
feet of Traffic Signal -
§ 29-1401
$20 $25 $30
Parking Within 50
feet of RR Crossing -
§ 29-1401
$20 $25 $30
Parking Near Fire
Station - § 29-1401
$20 $25 $30
Double Parking -
§ 29-1401
$20 $25 $30
Parking in Restricted
Zone - §§ 29-1401,
29-1409
$20 $25 $30
Parking in Parkway -
§ 29-1404
$20 $25 $30
Parking Near School -
§ 29-1406
$20 $25 $30
Parking in Front of
Theater - § 29-1407
$20 $25 $30
Parking in Front of
Driveway, Alley or
Crosswalk - § 29-1401
$20 $25 $30
Parking in
Intersection -
§ 29-1401
$20 $25 $30
Obstructing Traffic in
Street - § 29-1402
$20 $25 $30
Obstructing Traffic in
Alley - § 29-1403
$20 $25 $30
Parking for Sale or
Repair of Vehicles -
§ 29-1405
$20 $25 $30
Parking Against Flow
of Traffic - § 29-1401
$20 $25 $30
§ 29-1819 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1819
1:1109
Nature of Violation
If Paid Within
7 Days
If Paid After 7
Days But
Within 30
Days
If Paid After
30 Days
Parking Heavy Truck
in Residential Area -
§ 29-1609
$25 $35 $50
Violation of 7:00 a.m.
to 5:00 p.m. 2 Hour
Parking Time Limit -
Downtown
Bloomington -
§ 29-1815
$10 $15 $25
All Parking Violations
for Which a Fine is
Not Specified
$10 $15 $25
§ 29-1820. [Ch. 29, Sec. 156.5] Schedule XVII: Altered Speed
Limits. [Ord. No. 2018-29]
As provided in § 29-501C of this chapter, the maximum lawful speeds on the
following streets or parts of streets are as provided herein:
Street
Limit
(mph)
Airport, G.E. Road to
College
45
Airport, College to north
corporate limits
40
Airport, Empire (Ill. Rte.
9) to G.E. Road
40
Alexander Road, north
corporate limits to south
corporate limits
35
Arcadia, Lincoln to
Ireland Grove
35
Beich, Fox Creek to south
corporate limits
45
Bloomington Heights,
Market to Washington
40
Blue Ash, Fox Creek to
West End
35
§ 29-1819 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1820
1:1110
Street
Limit
(mph)
Brigham, Morris to 1,400
feet east
40
Bunn, Railroad Tracks
south of Veterans
Parkway south to south
corporate limits
35
Chestnut, White Oak (U.S.
150) to Hinshaw
20
College, Veterans to
Airport
35
Commerce, Veterans to
Hamilton
35
Cornelius, Airport to East
Corporate limits
35
East, Stewart to Lafayette 20
Empire, Morris to
Western - (Truck Speed
Limit)
20
Empire (111. Rte. 9,
eastbound), 500 feet east
of Mt. Vernon to 600 feet
east of Towanda Barnes
45
Empire, 500 feet east of
Mt. Vernon to Towanda
35
Ft. Jesse, east corporate
limits to west corporate
limits
45
Forrest Park 20
Fox Creek, Veterans to
Oakland
45
Fox Creek, Stonehedges
to Scottsdale
40
G.E. Road, 2,250 feet
west of Hershey to
Towanda-Barnes
45
G.E. Road, 2,250 feet
west of Hershey to 800
feet east of Veterans
35
§ 29-1820 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1820
1:1111
Street
Limit
(mph)
Greenwood, Morris to
Hamilton
35
Hamilton, Main Street to
Bunn
40
Hamilton, Morrissey to
Hershey
40
Hamilton, Main to Morris 35
Hamilton, Morrissey to
Commerce
35
Hamilton, Veterans to
Morris
45
Harvest Pointe, Empire to
north corporate limits
35
Hershey, Ireland Grove to
Hamilton
40
Hershey, 500 feet south
of Lincoln to Ireland
Grove
35
Ireland Grove, 1,000 feet
west of Hershey to Streid
45
Ireland Grove, 600 feet
east to 600 feet west of
Towanda Barnes
45
Ireland Grove, 600 feet
east to 1,150 feet west of
Kell
50
Ireland Grove, Mercer to
Loop Drive
40
JC Parkway, Market to
Valley View
35
Jumer Drive, 1,100 feet
east of Veterans to
Hershey
35
Kickapoo Creek, Ireland
Grove to north corporate
limits
40
Lake Drive, Tanner to
Summit
20
§ 29-1820 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1820
1:1112
Street
Limit
(mph)
Lake Street, Lake Drive
to Summit
20
Lincoln, 500 feet east of
Eldorado to Hershey
35
Main (U.S. 51), south
corporate limits to 400
feet south of Oak Creek
Plaza/Hilltop Frontage
Road
35
Main (U.S. 51,
northbound), 400 feet
south of Oak Creek Plaza/
Hilltop Frontage Road to
Lafayette
35
Main (U.S. 51,
southbound), 150 feet
south of south off-ramp
from eastbound Veterans
Parkway to 400 feet south
of Oak Creek Plaza/
Hilltop Frontage Road
35
Market (Ill. Rte. 9),
Brown to I-55/I-74 Bypass
southbound lane
40
Market (Ill. Rte. 9), I-55/
I-74 Bypass southbound
to west corporate limits
45
Martin Luther King, Jr.,
White Oak to Cottage
35
Martin Luther King, Jr.,
500 feet north of Market
to White Oak
45
Mercer, Ireland Grove to
Hamilton
40
Miller Park 20
Miller, Railroad Tracts to
Alexander
35
Morris, south corporate
limits to 600 feet south of
Veterans
40
§ 29-1820 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1820
1:1113
Street
Limit
(mph)
Morris, 600 feet south of
Veterans to 300 feet
south of Miller
35
Morrissey (U.S. 150), 200
feet north of Woodrig to
200 feet north of Veterans
45
Morrissey (U.S. 150), 200
feet north of Veterans to
600 feet south of Croxton
35
Oakland, 500 feet east of
Hershey to 500 feet east
of Old Airport Road
40
Oakland, 500 feet east of
Old Airport Road to
Streid
45
Oakland, Broadmoor to
500 feet east of Hershey
35
Oakland, east corporate
limits west to Airport
property
35
Oakwoods Subdivision, all
streets
25
Prairie Crossing, east
corporate limits to west
corporate limits
35
Rhodes, Bunn to
Morrissey
45
Scottsdale, Fox Creek to
west corporate limits
40
Six Points, Morris to
Oakland
40
Six Points, 1,200 feet
west to 1,000 feet west of
Mitsubishi
45
Springfield, Morris to Fox
Creek
35
Streid, Ireland Grove to
Oakland
50
Summit, Wood to Lake
Street
20
§ 29-1820 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1820
1:1114
Street
Limit
(mph)
Sunset, east intersection
with Emerson to west
intersection with
Emerson
25
Towanda (Ill. Rte. 9),
Locust (Ill. Rte. 9) to
Empire (Ill. Rte. 9)
35
Trinity, Empire to
Cornelius
35
Valley View, Wylie to west
end
35
Veterans (I-55 Business
Loop, south and
westbound) north
corporate limits to 1,000
feet south of Hamilton/
Fox Creek
45
Washington, Caroline to
Euclid
35
Washington, Caroline to
west corporate limits
45
Western, Empire to
Locust - (Truck Speed
Limit)
20
White Oak (U.S. 150),
Locust to 300 feet south
of Graham
35
White Oak (U.S. 150), 300
feet north of Graham to
north corporate limits
45
Woodrig, Main (U.S. 51)
to east corporate limits
35
Woodrig, Morrissey (U.S.
150) to west corporate
limits
50
Wylie, Market to north
corporate limits
35
§ 29-1820 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1821
1:1115
§ 29-1821. [Ch. 29, Sec. 156.6] Schedule XVIII: School Speed Zones.
[Ord. No. 2007-91]
As provided in § 29-501D of this chapter, the following parts of streets are
hereby established as school speed zones:
School Speed Limit - 20 m.p.h. on School Days When Children Are
Present
Airport, 300 feet south of south property line of CCHS to 300 feet north of
north property line of CCHS
Allin, 90 feet north of Oakland to Taylor
Arrowhead, Townley to Hershey
Center (U.S. 51), 70 feet north of Chestnut to Locust
College, 70 feet east of Hedgewood to 100 feet west of North Pointe
Colton, Empire to Locust
Empire (Ill. Rte. 9), 575 feet west of Towanda to Colton
Evans, Washington to Jefferson
Greenwood, Hamilton to Heidloff
Grove, 200 feet east to 200 feet west of State
Hamilton, 650 feet east to 150 feet west of Greenwood
Heidloff, Greenwood to 100 feet west
Hershey, 195 feet south of Arrowhead to 500 feet north of Arrowhead
Hinshaw, 200 feet north of Blackstone to 200 feet south of Walnut
Jackson, Allin to Mason
Jefferson, 125 feet east of McLean to Evans
Lee (U.S. 150/Ill. Rte. 9), north of Walnut to Empire
Lincoln, 70 feet west of Birchwood to 225 feet east of Mercer
Livingston, 100 feet north of Blackstone to 100 feet south of Walnut
Locust (Ill. Rte. 9), 230 feet west of Colton to Towanda
Mason, 120 feet north of Taylor to Mill
Mercer, 700 feet south of Lincoln to Lincoln
Mill, Mason to 90 feet east of Allin
Morris, Taylor to Mill
Roosevelt, Empire to 100 feet south of Walnut
Scottsdale, 500 feet west of Fox Creek to Timberwolf
State, Jackson to Taylor
Taylor, 150 feet east of Allin to Mason
Timberwolf, Scottsdale to North End
§ 29-1821 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1821
1:1116
School Speed Limit - 20 m.p.h. on School Days When Children Are
Present
Towanda, 40 feet north of Washington to Grove
Washington, 450 feet east of Colton to 300 feet west of Perrin
§ 29-1821 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1821
1:1117

ARTICLE XIX
Regulations For Bicycles
§ 29-1901. [Ch. 29, Sec. 157] Effect of regulation.
§ 29-1902. [Ch. 29, Sec. 158] Traffic laws apply to persons riding
bicycles.
§ 29-1903. [Ch. 29, Sec. 159] Obedience to traffic-control devices.
Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official trafficcontrol
signals, signs and other control devices applicable to vehicles,
unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
§ 29-1904. [Ch. 29, Sec. 160] Riding on bicycles.
§ 29-1905. [Ch. 29, Sec. 161] Riding on roadways and bicycle paths.
A. The parent of any child and the Guardian of any ward shall not
authorize or permit any such child or ward to violate any of the
provisions of this Ordinance and such parent or guardian shall be held
responsible for any violation.
B. It is a misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to
perform any act required in this article.
C. These regulations applicable to bicycles shall apply whenever a bicycle
is operated upon any highway or upon any path set aside for the
exclusive use of bicycles subject to those exceptions stated herein.
A. Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the
rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of
a vehicle by the laws of this State declaring rules of the road applicable
to vehicles or by the traffic ordinances of this City applicable to the
driver of a vehicle, except as to special regulations in this article and
except as to those provisions of laws and Ordinances which by their
nature can have no application.
B. When making a left turn, every person riding a bicycle shall stop at the
right curb and walk the bicycle across at the intersection.
A. A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than astride a
permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
B. No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the
number for which it is designed and equipped.
A. Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to
the right side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when
passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.
§ 29-1901 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1905
1:1119
§ 29-1906. [Ch. 29, Sec. 162] Speed.
No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and
prudent under the conditions then existing.
§ 29-1907. [Ch. 29, Sec. 163] Emerging from alley or driveway.
The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building
shall upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across
any alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on said
sidewalk or sidewalk area, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on said roadway.
§ 29-1908. [Ch. 29, Sec. 164] Carrying articles.
No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article
which prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the
handlebars.
§ 29-1909. [Ch. 29, Sec. 165] Parking.
No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway
against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or
against a building or at the curb, in such manner as to afford the least
obstruction to pedestrian traffic.
§ 29-1910. [Ch. 29, Sec. 166] Riding on sidewalks.
B. Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two
abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive
use of bicycles.
C. Wherever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to the
roadway, bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use the
roadway.
A. A person propelling a bicycle upon and along a sidewalk, or across a
roadway upon and along a crosswalk, shall yield the right-of-way to any
pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing
such pedestrian. [Ord. No. 1994-59]
B. A person shall not ride a bicycle upon and along a sidewalk, or across a
roadway upon and along a crosswalk, where such use of bicycles is
prohibited by official traffic-control devices. [Ord. No. 1994-59]
C. A person propelling a bicycle upon and along a sidewalk, or across a
roadway upon and along a crosswalk, shall have all the rights and
duties applicable to a pedestrian under the same circumstances. [Ord.
No. 1994-59]
D. No person shall ride a bicycle upon a public sidewalk within the Central
Business District as such district is defined in § 38-228 of Chapter 38 of
§ 29-1905 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-1910
1:1120
§ 29-1911. [Ch. 29, Sec. 167] Lamps and other equipment on
bicycles.
§ 29-1912. [Ch. 29, Sec. 168] Penalties.
Every parent or child convicted of a violation of any provision of this article
shall be punished by a fine of not more than $50 or by impounding of such
person's bicycle for a period not to exceed 10 days or by any combination
thereof.
the Bloomington City Code. This prohibition shall not apply to police
officers employed by the City of Bloomington who are riding bicycles in
the Central Business District while in the performance of their official
duties. [Ord. No. 1994-59]
A. Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp on
the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least
500 feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type which
shall be visible from all distances from 50 feet to 300 feet to the rear
when directly in front of lawful upper beams of head lamps on a motor
vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to
the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector.
B. No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a bell or
other device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at least
100 feet, except that a bicycle shall not be equipped with nor shall any
person use upon a bicycle any siren or whistle.
C. Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the
operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean pavement.
§ 29-1910 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1912
1:1121

ARTICLE XX
Traffic Ordinance
§ 29-2001. [Ch. 29, Sec. 173] Short title.
This chapter may be known and cited as the Traffic Ordinance.
§ 29-2001 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-2001
1:1123

ARTICLE XXI
City Parking System
DIVISION 1
Off-Street City Operated Parking Lots and Garages
§ 29-2101. [Ch. 29, Sec. 174] Establishment of the Division. [Ord.
No. 2017-62]
There is hereby established in the Facilities Management a Division of
Parking System for the operation and control of the off-street and on street
parking system of the City of Bloomington. This Division shall be
administered by the Facilities Management under the control and
supervision of the City Manager. Parking may also be enforced by the
Bloomington Police Department.
§ 29-2102. [Ch. 29, Sec. 175] Supervision. [Ord. No. 2011-12]
The off-street City operated parking lots and garages acquired, established
or operated by the City shall be under the supervision of the City Manager.
§ 29-2103. [Ch. 29, Sec. 176] Establishment of off-street parking
lots and garages.
There are hereby established certain off-street parking lots and garages for
public use which shall be known by the following designations:
§ 29-2104. [Ch. 29, Sec. 177] Twenty-four-hour operation. [Ord. No.
2017-62]
Off-street City parking lots and garages shall be opened for parking on a
twenty-four-hour basis, except that the Supervisor of Facilities Management
A. Abraham Lincoln Memorial Parking Garage in the block bounded by an
extension of Main Street southward from Front Street, Front Street and
northbound U.S. Route 51.
B. Major Butler Parking Lot in the block bounded by Front Street,
Roosevelt Avenue, Washington Street and Madison Street.
C. Association of Commerce Garage ("Market Street Garage") which is in
the block bounded by Monroe Street, Madison Street, Market Street
and Center Street.
D. Pepsi Ice Center Parking Garage which is in the block bounded by
Roosevelt Street, Olive Street and Lee Street.
E. Government Center Parking Lot which is in the block bounded by Front
Street, East Street and Washington Street.
F. Any other lots that the City may acquire from time to time. [Ord. No.
2017-62]
§ 29-2101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-2104
1:1125
may close all or part of any garage or lot, including entrances and exits,
when in his or her opinion conditions warrant closing.
§ 29-2105. [Ch. 29, Sec. 178] Daytime parking. [Ord. No. 2017-62]
Daytime parking in off-street City parking lots and garages provided under
§ 29-2107 of this article shall be from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. The Supervisor
of Facilities Management is authorized to establish a flat fee for parking
in all or part of the portions of the Association of Commerce Lot, Abraham
Lincoln Memorial Parking Garage, Major Butler Parking Lot, and Pepsi Ice
Center Parking Garage and all other City parking lots between 6:00 p.m.
and 8:00 a.m.
§ 29-2106. [Ch. 29, Sec. 179] Exits and entrances. [Ord. No.
2011-12]
The Traffic Engineer, under the control and supervision of the City Manager,
shall arrange the parking areas or spaces and arrange, locate and prepare
exits and entrances for entering and exiting the off-street parking lots and
garages and have them suitably marked as designated by plats.
§ 29-2107. [Ch. 29, Sec. 180] Fee lots and garages, rates and time
limits.
A. Parking rates for parking in off-street parking lots and garages
operated by parking devices shall be as follows:
(1) Abraham Lincoln Memorial Parking Garage: The hourly, daily
maximum and monthly parking fees shall be as set forth in the
Schedule of Fees, Monday, thru Friday, except holidays.
(2) Association of Commerce Parking Garage: The hourly, daily
maximum and monthly parking fees shall be set forth in the
Schedule of Fees, Monday thru Friday, except holidays, per space
per month. The first level shall be free; however, no vehicle shall be
allowed to park more than four hours per day in such facility.
Vehicles exceeding the four hour daily limit shall be fined in the
amount provided under § 29-2124 of this article for each additional
four-hour period, or part thereof, the vehicle is parked in excess of
the initial time or any subsequent four-hour period. No vehicle may
be parked in the free portion of the Association of Commerce
Parking Garage more than one time during the same day,
regardless of whether the vehicle occupied the same or another
space in the portion of the parking garage and regardless of
whether the vehicle was parked for the full amount of time allowed
by this ordinance.
(3) Major Butler Parking Lot: An amount set forth in the Schedule of
Fees per month for spaces at the north end of the lot, Monday thru
Friday, except holidays. Parking is free in all other spaces except
when events are held at the Arena for time periods in accordance
§ 29-2104 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-2107
1:1126
§ 29-2108. [Ch. 29, Sec. 181] Use of manual parking fee collection
devices. [Ord. No. 2017-62]
The Supervisor of Facilities Management is authorized to cause fees to
be collected in the Abraham Lincoln Memorial Parking Garage, the Major
Butler Parking Lot, the Association of Commerce Lot and the leased portion
of the Snyder Parking Garage by such manual parking fee collection device
or other means as is most efficient and convenient. If a card or other
payment device is disabled by reason of nonpayment of any fees required in
this article, the Supervisor of Facilities Management is authorized to charge
a reconnect fee of $15 to reactivate such card or other payment device.
§ 29-2109. through § 29-2110. (Reserved)
with contacts or policies related to the Arena; however, no vehicles
shall be allowed to park for more than four hours per day. Vehicles
exceeding the four hour daily limit shall be fined in the amount
provided under § 29-2124 of this article for each additional fourhour
period, or part thereof, the vehicle is parking in excess of the
initial time of any subsequent four-hour period. No vehicle may be
parked in the free portion of the Major Butler more than one time
during the same day, regardless of whether the vehicle occupied
the same or another space in that portion of the parking garage and
regardless of whether the vehicle was parked for the full amount of
time allowed by this ordinance.
(4) Arena Parking Garage: The hourly, daily maximum and monthly
parking fees shall be as set forth in the Schedule of Fees, Monday
thru Friday, except holidays per space per month. Except when
events are held at the Arena for time periods in accordance with
contacts or policies related to the Arena parking, shall be free;
however, no vehicle shall be allowed to park more than four hours
per day in such facility. Vehicles exceeding the four-hour daily limit
shall be fined in the amount provided under § 29-2124 of this article
for each additional four-hour period, or part thereof, the vehicle is
parking in excess of the initial time of any subsequent four-hour
period. No vehicle may be parked in the Arena Parking Garage
more than one time during the same day, regardless of whether the
vehicle occupied the same or another space in that portion of the
parking garage and regardless of whether the vehicle was parked
for the full amount of time allowed by this ordinance. [Ord. No.
2018-89]
B. Monthly parking. All other City owned parking facilities shall be rented
for an amount set forth in the Schedule of Fees per space per month at
the expiration of existing leases. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
§ 29-2107 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-2109
1:1127

DIVISION 2
Use of Parking System
§ 29-2111. [Ch. 29, Sec. 182] Responsibility of vehicle owners.
§ 29-2112. [Ch. 29, Sec. 183] Interference with parking system.
A. The regulations of the off-street parking facilities referred to in this
article are intended for the control of traffic and parking for the benefit
and convenience of the public.
B. No person shall directly or indirectly permit any vehicle owned by him
or her to be used in any manner so as to violate any of the parking
provisions of this article. An owner shall be responsible for his or her
vehicle while the vehicle is in the City. An owner shall be deemed to
have permitted, allowed and consented to the acts of any person
lawfully in possession of his or her vehicle while the vehicle is in the
City. No guilty intention by the owner, driver or the person in possession
of the vehicle is required to establish a violation of this article. Any
owner found to be in violation of this article consents to pay the fine and
accepts responsibility for the payment of the parking fines provided
under § 29-2124 of this article. [Ord. No. 2011-12]
A. Nonpayment of fee. It shall be unlawful for any person directly or
indirectly to permit a vehicle owned by him or her to park in any offstreet
City parking lot or garage without paying the required fee or
rent.
B. Occupying two spaces. No person shall directly or indirectly permit any
vehicle owned by him or her to be parked in any off-street parking lot or
garage so that any part of the vehicle occupies more than one space or
protrudes beyond the markings designating the space.
C. Parking outside designated spaces. No person shall directly or
indirectly permit any vehicle owned by him or her to be parked in any
off-street parking lot or garage in any space other than in a designated
parking space.
D. Nonpayment of rent. No person shall directly or indirectly permit any
vehicle owned by him or her to be parked in any off-street parking lot
for which a monthly rent has been established where egress is obtained
by means of an expired monthly parking rental card.
E. Obliteration of markings. No person shall remove, conceal or obliterate
any chalk mark or other distinguishing mark used by any police officer
or other employee of the City in connection with the enforcement of the
parking regulations of this article, if done for the purpose of evading the
provisions of this article.
F. Leaving inoperable vehicle in parking facility. No person shall leave or
permit any inoperable motor vehicle owned by him or her to remain in
any City parking lot or garage after being notified of its condition. The
§ 29-2111 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-2112
1:1129
§ 29-2113. through § 29-2120. (Reserved)
Supervisor of Facilities Management shall notify the owner in writing
of any inoperable motor vehicle found in a City parking lot or garage.
The notice shall direct the owner to remove the vehicle or put it in an
operable condition within 24 hours of the date of the notice. It shall
further advise the owner that upon his or her failure to comply with
the notice, the car will be towed and stored at the owner's expense.
Upon failure of the owner to take the action directed in the notice,
the Supervisor of Facilities Management may procure the removal
and storage of the vehicle. Towing and storage charges shall be at
owner's expense. It is not a defense to an order to remove or repair an
inoperable vehicle under this section that the owner has paid to the City
any required fee for parking the vehicle. If a vehicle is removed at the
order of the Supervisor of Facilities Management, any prepaid parking
rental for any period after the removal shall, at the City's discretion, be
refunded to the owner of the vehicle, or applied to towing and storage
charges.
G. Skateboarding, bicycling or roller skating. No person shall ride, stand,
sit, kneel, put any weight upon, or in any manner use a skateboard,
bicycle or roller skates in any off-street parking facility described in
§ 29-2103 of this article.
H. Speeding. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle
at a speed in excess of five m.p.h. in the Association of Commerce Lot,
or in excess of 10 m.p.h. in any other lot or garage provided under this
article. [Ord. No. 2017-62]
§ 29-2112 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-2113
1:1130
DIVISION 3
Enforcement
§ 29-2121. [Ch. 29, Sec. 184] Duties.
Parking regulations shall be enforced by the Facilities Management and the
Police Department with the following duties:
§ 29-2122. [Ch. 29, Sec. 185] Contents of tickets.
Parking tickets shall contain:
§ 29-2123. [Ch. 29, Sec. 186] Parking violation appeals process.
A. Maintain records of all tickets issued under this article and other
relevant provisions of Chapter 29.
B. Send out notices as required under this article and maintain records of
the notices.
C. With the approval of the City Manager, or his or her designee, void
parking tickets issued for a violation of this article.
D. Maintain sufficient equipment and records to determine the ownership
of motor vehicles from the license plate number.
E. Maintain all records required under this article. [Ord. No. 2017-62]
A. The date and time of issuance.
B. The license plate number (including the state for out-of-state licenses
and year for other than the current calendar year) of the ticketed
vehicle.
C. The provision of this article violated.
D. The name of the person issuing the ticket.
E. A number identifying the ticket.
F. A statement of the amount of the minimum fine as provided under this
article.
G. Instructions on method of payment for the fine.
H. A statement that the validity of the ticket may be challenged at City
Hall.
I. A statement that failure to challenge the validity of the ticket within
seven days will be considered as an admission of the violation. [Ord.
No. 2011-12]
A. Any person who believes that a parking ticket has been issued
improperly to a vehicle he or she owns may appeal the ticket in person
§ 29-2121 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-2123
1:1131
§ 29-2124. [Ch. 29, Sec. 187] Penalties - schedule of fines.
at City Hall, or through the electronic mail, facsimile or standard U.S.
Postal Service. Failure to appeal within seven day of the issuance of a
parking ticket shall be deemed an admission of responsibility for the
violation. The appeal must be postmarked within seven days of the
issuance if the U.S. Postal Service is used.
B. Once an appeal is appropriately filed, no additional penalties will be
assessed during the investigative review process. The person who filed
the appeal will be notified in writing of the results of the investigative
review within a reasonable amount of time. The outcome of the
investigative review is final. If the appeal is denied, the vehicle owner
must pay the fine within seven days, otherwise the fine will increase by
$5 if paid after seven days but within 30 days. An additional $10 will be
assessed if not paid within 30 days. [Ord. No. 2011-12]
A. Schedule.
Nature of
Violation
If Paid Within
7 Days
If Paid After
7 Days But
Within 30
Days
If Paid After
30 Days
Abuse of Reserved
Parking Regulation
$10 $15 $25
Failure to Pay Fee $25 $30 $40
Failure to Pay
Monthly Fee
$25 $30 $40
Obliteration of
Marking
$10 $15 $20
Parking Time
Violation
$10 $15 $25
Parking Vehicle in
City Lot in any Place
Other Than Marked
Place
$10 $15 $25
Parking Vehicle in
More Than 1
Parking Space
$10 $15 $25
Skateboarding/
Bicycling/Roller
Skating
$10 $15 $25
Speeding in City Lot
or Municipal Parking
Garage
$25 — —
§ 29-2123 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-2124
1:1132
B. Unless another penalty is expressly provided under this article, any
person convicted of a violation of the provisions of this article shall be
punished by a fine of not less than $1 or more than $200. [Ord. No.
2011-12]
§ 29-2124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-2124
1:1133

ARTICLE XXII
Towing Of Vehicles
§ 29-2201. [Ch. 29, Sec. 191] Responsibility of vehicle owners. [Ord.
No. 1977-118]
No person shall directly or indirectly permit any vehicle owned by such
person to be used in any manner so as to violate any of the parking
provisions of this chapter; that is, all such owners shall be responsible
for their vehicles while the same are parked anywhere within the City
of Bloomington and each such owner shall be deemed to have permitted,
allowed and consented to the acts of any person lawfully in possession
of his or her motor vehicle while the same is located within the City of
Bloomington. No guilty intention on the part of the owner nor on the part
of the driver or person in possession of any vehicle is necessary to establish
the responsibility of the owner for acts hereunder of any person lawfully in
possession of his or her motor vehicle, and the owner of every motor vehicle
in the City of Bloomington must, at his peril, see to it that the rules and
regulations hereunder are not violated by his acts or by the acts of another
using his vehicle. By having the use of the streets and of the municipal
parking system of the City of Bloomington, all owners of motor vehicles
consent to pay and accept responsibility for the payment of any fines for any
parking violations involving their vehicles and for any towing, storage and
other charges related thereto.
§ 29-2202. [Ch. 29, Sec. 192] Tow-away zones. [Ord. No. 1985-62]
The specifically prohibited parking areas from which motor vehicles may
be towed shall be posted by the City with a notice at or near the sign
identifying the prohibited parking, to wit: "TOW-AWAY ZONE" or with a
reasonable notice which conveys substantially similar information. No
person shall directly or indirectly (§ 29-2201) park or permit a vehicle
owned by him/her to be parked in the City of Bloomington in violation of
any such prohibited parking. All members of the City's Police Department
are hereby granted authority to authorize the towing removal and storage
by any City employee or by any person or persons or corporation with which
the City has a towing and/or storage agreement of any vehicle found parked
in violation thereof and such vehicles shall be towed from these areas and
stored.
§ 29-2203. [Ch. 29, Sec. 192.1] Specific tow-away zones.
A. At the times herein specified and when signs are erected giving notice
of the illegal parking and of the towing zone, no person shall directly or
indirectly (§ 29-2201) park or permit a vehicle owned by him/her to be
parked at the locations on the streets hereinafter described and any
vehicle so parked may be towed from these locations as provided in this
article: [Ord. No. 2012-56]
§ 29-2201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-2203
1:1135
Location
Alley (north-south) bounded by East, Locust, Prairie and Mulberry, on
the west side from Locust to a point 110 feet south between 6:00 a.m.
and 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday
Beecher on the north side from Franklin to Main
Beecher on the south side from 50 feet west of the west line of East
to 40 feet east of the east line of East
Beecher on the south side from 65 feet west of the west line of
Franklin to 20 feet east of the east line of Franklin
Beecher on the south side from the east line of Main to a point 20 feet
east
Center Street, on the west side, from 45 feet to 85 feet north of the
north line of Kentucky Alley between 6:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday
Center Street, on the east side, from 39 feet south to 112 feet south
of the south line of Olive Street between 6:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday
Center Street on the east side from 105 feet to 125 feet north of the
north line of Market Street between 6:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday
Chestnut Street, on the south side, from 50 feet to 90 feet west of the
west line of Main Street
Chestnut Street, on the south side from 110 feet to 150 feet west of
the west line of East Street
Chestnut Street, on the south side, from Mason Street to 130 feet
east of the east line of Mason Street
Chestnut Street between Prairie and McLean on the north side 60
feet east and west from the midpoint of the crosswalk to Franklin
Park near the center of the block
Douglas Street, on the north side, from 150 feet west to 173 feet west
of the west line of Prairie Street between 6:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
Monday through Friday
East on the east side from the north line of Beecher to a point 20 feet
north
East on the east side from the north line of Emerson to a point 53 feet
north
East on the east side from 290 feet north of Emerson to 42 feet north
of the south line of Kelsey
East on the east side from the south line of Emerson to a point 30 feet
south
East on the east side from the north line of Graham to a point 20 feet
north
§ 29-2203 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-2203
1:1136
Location
East on the east side from 365 feet north of Kelsey to north corporate
limits
East on the west side from Division to a point 38 feet south
East on the west side from Emerson to Beecher
East on the west side from the south line of Graham to a point 20 feet
south
Emerson on the north side from 250 feet west of the west line of Fell
to Franklin
Franklin on both sides from the north line of vacated Kelsey to a point
30 feet north
Franklin on both sides from the south line of vacated Division to a
point 30 feet south
Franklin Avenue, on the east side from Beecher to a point 20 feet
north
Franklin Avenue, on the west side from the Crosswalk north of
Emerson to a point 20 feet south
Front Street, on the north side, from 31 feet to 68 feet east of the
east line of East Street between 6:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday
Front Street, on the north side, from 20 feet west to 107 feet west of
the west line of East Street between 6:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday
Front Street, on the north side, from 43 feet east to 80 feet east of
the east line of Madison Street between 6:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday
Front, on both sides from Lee to Mason. Vehicles displaying permits
issued pursuant to § 29-2204 of this chapter are exempt from towing.
Front Street, 300 block west, south side, on dates when vehicles for
hire may legally operate as provided in Section 1002 of Chapter 40 of
the Bloomington City Code, commencing at 10:00 p.m. and ending at
3:00 a.m.
Gill on the south side from turn around area west of Airport Road to
Airport Road
Graham on the south side from 30 feet west of the west line of East to
20 feet east of the east line of East
Graham on the south side from the east line of Main to a point 20 feet
east
Grove Street, on the south side, from 20 feet to 40 feet east of the
east line of East Street
§ 29-2203 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-2203
1:1137
Location
Grove, on the south side from Lee to Mason. Vehicles displaying
permits issued pursuant to § 29-2204 of this chapter are exempt from
towing.
IWU Area - See Exhibit "D"
Jackson Street, on the south side, from 20 feet to 120 feet west of the
west line of Mason Street between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday
Jefferson Street, on the north side, from 51 feet west to 98 feet west
of the west line of Center Street
Jefferson Street, on the south side, from 20 feet to 170 feet west of
the west line of Evans Street
Jefferson Street, on the south side from 30 feet to 52 feet east of the
east line of Main Street between 6:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday
Jefferson Street, on the south side, from 45 feet west to 64 feet west
of the west line of East Street between 6:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday
Lee, on the west side, from Front to Grove in the south half of the
block. Vehicles displaying permits issued pursuant to § 29-2204 of
this chapter are exempt from towing.
Lee Street, 500 block between Market and Mulberry, east and west
side, 24 hours a day, seven days a week, except for the east side of
Lee Street from Mulberry Street to a point 80 feet south between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. which continues to have a 2-hour
time limit. Vehicles displaying permits issued pursuant to § 29-2204
of this chapter are exempt from towing.
Lee on the east side from Mulberry to a point 36 feet south
Lee on the west side from Mulberry to a point 36 feet south
Lee on the west side from Mulberry to a point 36 feet north
Lee on the east side from Mulberry to a point 54 feet north
Livingston Street, on the west side, from 20 feet to 120 feet north of
the north line of Walnut Street
MacArthur Street, on the north side, from 170 feet to 205 feet west of
the west line of Bunn Street
Madison Street, on the west side, from 250 feet to 310 feet north of
the north line of Wood Street
Madison Street, on the west side, from MacArthur Avenue to 130 feet
south of the south line of MacArthur Avenue between 8:00 a.m. and
5:00 p.m.
Main Street, on the east side, from 20 feet north to 68 feet north of
the north line of Chestnut Street
§ 29-2203 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-2203
1:1138
Location
Main Street on the east side from 40 feet south of the south line of
Graham to 42 feet north of the north line of Graham
Main, on the east, from 30 feet south to 68 feet south of the south
line of West Mulberry extended east to the east line of Main Street
between 6:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday
Main on the east side, from 50 feet south to 98 feet south of the south
line of Market between 6:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday through
Friday
Main on the east side, from 35 feet to 80 feet south of the south line
of Union
Main Street, 500 block north, on the east side, the seven regular
parking spaces North of the handicapped parking space and the two
"freight loading" spaces north of those seven spaces on dates when
vehicles for hire may legally operate as provided in Section 1002 of
Chapter 40 of the Bloomington City Code, commencing at 10:00 p.m.
and ending at 3:00 a.m.
Market, on the north side, from 30 feet to 50 feet east of the east line
of Center
Market, on the north side, from 69 feet west to 92 feet west of the
west line of East between 6:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday through
Friday
Market, on the north side, from 65 feet to 85 feet west of the west
line of East
Mason, on the west side, from 75 feet to 155 feet south of the south
line of Chestnut between 6:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday through
Friday
Mason, on both sides, from Front to Grove. Vehicles displaying
permits issued pursuant to § 29-2204 of this chapter are exempt from
towing.
Mason, in the cul-de-sac south of Division
Monroe, on the north side, from 30 feet east to 50 feet east of the
east line of Main between 6:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday through
Friday
Monroe, on the south side, from 75 feet east to 94 feet east of the
east line of Main between 6:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday through
Friday
Monroe, on the north side, from 30 feet east to 48 feet east of the
east line of Center between 6:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday through
Friday
Oak Street, on both sides, from Stewart to Bissell between 6:00 a.m.
and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday [Added 7-8-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-51]
§ 29-2203 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-2203
1:1139
Location
Olive, on the south side, from 88 feet to 158 feet west of the west line
of Prairie Parking Lot on southeast corner of Hinshaw at Market
between 6:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m.
Prairie, on the west side, from 30 feet to 80 feet north of the north
line of Grove in the parkway
Roosevelt, on the west side from 100 feet to 200 feet north of the
north line of Walnut
Roosevelt, on the east side, from Locust to a point 175 feet north
between 2:30 p.m. and 3:30 p.m.
Roosevelt on the west side from Grove to a point 110 feet south from
7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. seven days a week. Vehicles displaying permits
issued pursuant to § 29-2204 of this chapter are exempt from towing.
Sale Barn - Main to Timberlake
State, on the east side, from Washington to a point 200 feet south
Truckers Lane, on both sides, Market to the north end
Valley View on both sides, from Wylie to west end
Washington on the south side from 20 feet to 45 feet east of the east
line of Allin between 11:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.
Washington, on the north side, from 20 feet to 61 feet west of the
west line of Madison, between 8:30 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
Washington, on the east side, from 20 feet to 64 feet west of the west
line of Mason, between 8:00 a.m. and Noon and 6:00 p.m. - 9:00 p.m.
Washington, on the south side, from 30 feet west to 77 feet west of
the west line of Madison between 6:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday
Washington Street, 100 block west, on the south side, on dates when
vehicles for hire may legally operate as provided in Section 1002 of
Chapter 40 of the Bloomington City Code, commencing at 10:00 p.m.
and ending at 3:00 a.m.
Wood, on the south side, from 110 feet to 190 feet west of the west
line of Gridley
Woodhill Towers as indicated in Exhibit A
B. When necessary to accommodate special events on City streets, the
City Traffic Engineer and the Chief of Police may designate certain
portions of any street as a tow-away zone. Any vehicles parked on a
portion of a street so designated may be towed away, with the cost of
towing and storage to be paid by the owner, provided that signs
designating the area as a tow-away zone are posted at least 24 hours
prior to the date and time the tow-away zone designation is to take
effect. [Ord. No. 1987-134]
§ 29-2203 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-2204
1:1140
§ 29-2204. [Ch. 29, Sec. 192.2] Permit parking.
§ 29-2205. [Ch. 29, Sec. 193] Towing from on-street and off-street
public parking after 24 hours' notice.
A. A maximum of two parking permits will be issued to each address
annually. [Ord. No. 2017-62]
B. A parking permit may be obtained upon proof of the following:
(1) Current address; and
(2) Valid driver's license or State ID with current address.
C. Parking permits are not transferable.
D. A $25 replacement fee will be charged for any lost, stolen, or misplaced
parking permits.
E. When renewing the parking permits, the old permit must be turned in
before a new permit will be issued. [Ord. No. 2017-62]
F. Misuse of parking permits, or willfully providing false information to
the City to obtain parking permits shall be punished by a minimum fine
of $50 and a maximum fine of $500.
G. Any vehicle towed for violating this section shall pay $50 release fee to
the City of Bloomington Police Department upon proof of ownership or
proof of the right to possession of the vehicle. [Ord. No. 2003-90]
H. Parking permits will be issued only for passenger cars as defined by 625
ILCS 5/1-157. [Ord. No. 2004-8]
I. Parking permits must be prominently displayed from the rear view
mirror. [Ord. No. 2017-62]
A. All members of the City's Police Department are hereby granted
authority to authorize the towing removal and storage to a private
garage or exterior place of safety:
(1) Any vehicle left for a period of 24 hours in any on-street or offstreet
public parking location or in any location in a lot or facility
maintained or owned by the City;
(2) Any motor vehicle or trailer parked in any on-street or off-street
public parking location or in any location in a lot or facility
maintained or owned by the City that lacks current, legal
registration; or
(3) Any motor vehicle or trailer parked in any on-street or off-street
public parking location or in any location in a lot or facility
maintained or owned by the City that is registered as an antique
vehicle pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/3-804. [Ord. No. 2008-77]
§ 29-2204 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-2205
1:1141
§ 29-2206. [Ch. 29, Sec. 194] Parking restriction on private
property.
B. Vehicles may be towed by any City employee or by any person or
persons or corporation with which the City has a towing and/or storage
agreement, provided that a written notice of the pending towing has
been placed on the motor vehicle not less than 24 hours in advance of
the towing removal and storage. [Ord. No. 2008-77]
C. Any motor vehicle or trailer for which a notice of tow is issued for the
reasons stated in Subsection A(2) or (3) will be towed regardless of
whether the vehicle has been moved from its original location as long as
the reason for the tow still exists. Any such vehicle or trailer found in
any on-street or off-street public parking location 24 hours after notice
has been placed on the vehicle will be towed without additional notice.
[Ord. No. 2008-77]
A. On any property in residential use or on any property zoned for
residential use, all motor vehicles and trailers that lack current, legal
registration, uninspected motor vehicles or trailers and all inoperable
motor vehicles and trailers must be parked in a garage or other fully
enclosed structure meeting Code requirements. At no time shall any
vehicle or trailer of any type undergo a disassembly of parts, commonly
called stripping, or a major overhaul, including body work, on such
property outside of a garage or other structure meeting Code
requirements. [Ord. No. 2008-77]
B. On any property within an R1-A, R1-B, R1-C, R-2 or GAP 1, 2, 3, or 4
zoning district there may be no more than four operable motor vehicles
or trailers with current, legal registration and one camping or
recreational vehicle parked outside of a garage or carport meeting
Code requirements. All vehicles allowed to be parked on such property
must be parked in a legal accessory off street parking space as provided
in Chapter 44-7-2 of the Bloomington City Code. [Ord. No. 2008-77]
C. On any property in business, commercial or industrial use or zoned for
such use, any motor vehicles or trailers that lack current, legal
registration must be parked in a garage or other structure meeting
Code requirements unless the vehicle or trailer is able to be repaired to
operate and is in the current process of being repaired at and by
employee(s) or owner(s) of an automobile service business or an
automobile new or used car dealer. At no time shall any vehicle of any
type undergo a disassembly of parts, commonly called stripping or
major overhaul, including body work, on such property outside of a
garage or other structure meeting code requirements. [Ord. No.
2008-77]
D. The City may apply to the court for an order giving it the authority to
have any vehicle parked on private property in violation of Subsection
A, B or C removed from such property and placed in storage at a private
§ 29-2205 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-2206
1:1142
§ 29-2207. [Ch. 29, Sec. 194A] Authority to tow and store vehicles.
§ 29-2208. [Ch. 29, Sec. 194B] Vehicle seizure and impoundment.
garage or exterior place of safety in addition to any other remedy
provided for violations of this chapter 29. [Ord. No. 2008-77]
E. It is illegal for the owner and/or occupant of the involved real property
or the owner or user of the involved motor vehicle or trailer and/or the
person entitled to possession of and/or the person doing work on the
involved motor vehicle or trailer to fail to comply with the requirements
of this section or to permit any of the prohibited activities contained in
this section to occur. [Ord. No. 1987-99]
A. All members of the Bloomington Police Department are hereby granted
authority to authorize the towing removal and storage by any person or
persons or corporation with which the City has a towing and/or storage
agreement of any vehicle from a street or highway to the storage facility
under any of the following circumstances: [Ord. No. 2005-31]
(1) When any vehicle is left unattended upon any bridge, viaduct or
causeway or in any tube or tunnel where such vehicle constitutes
an obstruction to traffic. [Ord. No. 2005-31]
(2) When a vehicle upon a street or highway is so disabled as to
constitute an obstruction to traffic and the person or persons in
charge of the vehicle are by reason of physical injury incapacitated
to such an extent as to be unable to provide for its removal. [Ord.
No. 2005-31]
(3) When any vehicle is left unattended upon a street and is so parked
illegally as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the
normal movement of traffic or is left unattended for over 24 hours.
[Ord. No. 2005-31]
(4) When any vehicle is a nuisance as defined by § 29-1105 of this
chapter. [Ord. No. 2005-31]
A. Fee, seizure and impoundment. Vehicles used in the offenses listed in
Section 11-208.7(b) of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-208.7(b)
or in any other misdemeanor or felony offense in violation of the
Criminal Code of 1961 or the Criminal Code of 2012 are hereby
declared contraband and subject to seizure and impoundment. The
impoundment of any vehicle used in the commission of any of the
foregoing offenses shall subject the owner to an administrative fee of
$400 plus costs of towing and storage. [Ord. No. 2014-107]
B. Removal and seizure.
(1) Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a
vehicle is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this
section, the police officer may cause the vehicle to be removed and
§ 29-2206 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-2208
1:1143
relocated to a secure location. The officer shall inform any person
in control of the vehicle of the seizure and the right to a prompt
probable cause hearing and an administrative impoundment
hearing as provided in this section.
(2) At the time the vehicle is towed, the officer shall notify or make a
reasonable attempt to notify the owner, lessee, or person
identifying himself or herself as the owner or lessee of the vehicle,
or any person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time
of the alleged offense, of the fact of the seizure and of the right of
the vehicle owner or lessee to an administrative hearing. The police
officer shall also provide notice that the motor vehicle will remain
impounded pending the completion of an administrative hearing,
unless the owner or lessee of the vehicle, or a lienholder, posts with
the municipality a bond equal to the administrative fee as provided
by this section and pays for all towing and storage charges.
C. Notice. The City will provide the registered owner or lessee of the
vehicle and any lienholder of record with a notice of hearing. The notice
shall:
(1) Be served upon the owner, lessee, and any lienholder of record
either by personal service or by first class mail to the interested
party's address as registered with the Secretary of State;
(2) Be served upon interested parties within 10 days after a vehicle is
impounded by the City; and
(3) Contain the date, time, and location of the administrative hearing.
An initial hearing shall be scheduled and convened no later than 45
days after the date of the mailing of the notice of hearing.
D. Prompt probable cause hearing. At any time prior to an administrative
impoundment hearing, at the request of the owner of a vehicle or a
person with authority from an owner, the Police Chief or his designee
shall hold a prompt probable cause hearing. Said hearing shall occur
within 24 hours of the request, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and
holidays. At the hearing, any interested person shall be given a
reasonable opportunity to be heard and present evidence. Formal rules
of evidence shall not apply, and hearsay evidence shall be admissible. At
the prompt probable cause hearing, the Police Chief or his designee
shall determine whether probable cause exists for the seizure and
impoundment of the vehicle pursuant to this section and, if asserted by
the owner, whether the vehicle was stolen from the owner. If the Police
Chief or his designee determines that probable cause exists for the
continued impoundment of the vehicle, the Police Chief or his designee
shall order the vehicle held pending an impoundment hearing or
payment of the bond and any towing and storage fees due. If the Police
Chief or his designee determines that probable cause for impoundment
does not exist or that the vehicle was stolen from the owner, the Police
§ 29-2208 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-2208
1:1144
Chief or his designee shall order the immediate release of the vehicle
without payment of any penalties, fees or costs.
E. Administrative impoundment hearing. A hearing officer designated by
the City Manager shall hold an administrative impoundment hearing
within 45 days of the notice of impoundment hearing sent pursuant to
Subsection C of this section. A person seeking the hearing may waive
the foregoing time restraint. At the impoundment hearing, any
interested person shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard.
Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, and hearsay evidence shall be
admissible. The impoundment hearing shall comply with the
requirements set forth in Section 11-208.7 of the Illinois Vehicle Code,
625 ILCS 5/11-208.7. At the impoundment hearing, the hearing officer
shall determine by a preponderance of the evidence whether the
vehicle was used in violation of a listed offense or whether the vehicle
was stolen from the owner. If the hearing officer determines that the
vehicle was not utilized in violation of any offense listed in Section
11-208.7(b) of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-208.7(b), or that
the vehicle was stolen from the owner, the hearing officer shall order
the immediate release of the vehicle without payment of any
administrative fee and the expeditious return of any bond or fee already
paid by the vehicle owner or his agent. Any bond or fee returned shall
be to the person who paid the bond or fee, unless directed otherwise by
that person. Any person claiming a vehicle ordered released under this
subsection shall have seven days from the date of the order of release
within which to claim the vehicle without accruing additional storage
charges; thereafter, the person claiming the vehicle shall be responsible
for paying any and all storage charges that accrue. If the hearing officer
determines the vehicle was used in the commission of a listed offense,
the hearing officer shall order the vehicle held pending payment of the
fee and any towing and storage fees which may be due.
F. Innocent defendant.
(1) In the event that a person is acquitted of all charges stemming from
the incident for which the vehicle was impounded or is not charged
within six months for any offense stemming from the incident for
which the vehicle was impounded, that person may apply to the
Police Chief for a full refund of any bond or administrative fee paid
to release the vehicle. A disposition of court supervision will be
considered as a conviction and not an acquittal. Participation in a
diversion program or similar program to avoid judicial
consequences shall not be considered an acquittal for purposes of
this section. A plea agreement which calls for the dismissal of the
charge for which the vehicle was impounded in exchange for a
guilty plea to any other charge shall not be considered an acquittal
for purposes of this section.
(2) The Police Chief shall refund any bond or administrative fee paid, if
an acquittal occurs or if charges are not likely to be brought within
six months. Any fee or bond returned shall be to the person who
§ 29-2208 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-2208
1:1145
§ 29-2209. [Ch. 29, Sec. 195] Release necessary to obtain a towed
vehicle.
paid the bond or fee, unless directed otherwise by that person. Any
person claiming a vehicle ordered released under this subsection
shall have seven days from the date of the order of release within
which to claim the vehicle without accruing additional storage
charges; thereafter, the person claiming the vehicle shall be
responsible for paying any and all storage charges that accrue.
G. Release of vehicle. A vehicle seized and impounded under this section
shall be released to the owner or the owner's agent upon payment of
the bond or administrative fee and all towing and storage fees accrued.
Payment of the bond or administrative fee and towing and storage fees
does not waive an owner's right to an impoundment hearing.
H. Unclaimed vehicle. Any vehicle not claimed by its owner or other
interested party within 35 days after the impoundment hearing shall be
considered abandoned and sold pursuant to State law. An owner or
interested party may claim his/her vehicle by paying the administrative
fee, towing and storage fees any time prior to sale of the vehicle.
I. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the holding,
forfeiture or impoundment of any vehicle pursuant to any other law or
statute. [Ord. No. 2014-59]
A. To obtain a vehicle which has been towed pursuant to any provisions of
the Bloomington City Code, the owner or the person having the right to
possession of the vehicle must first obtain a Release from the
Bloomington Police Department.
B. A Release may be obtained by showing proof of ownership or proof of
the right to possession of the vehicle.
C. A Release Fee, in an amount set forth in the Schedule of Fees, must be
paid plus any amounts which are required to be paid pursuant to
Chapter 29, § 29-2208, Vehicle Seizure and Impoundment of the City
Code.
D. Any vehicle owner who has a second vehicle towed for a violation of
§ 29-2207, Authority to Tow and Store Vehicles, whether the same
vehicle or another vehicle owned by him or her, shall pay a release fee
in an amount set forth in the Schedule of Fees, and proof of insurance
must be provided.
E. Any vehicle owner who has a second vehicle towed for a violation of
§ 29-2205, Towing After Parking for 24 hours, whether the same vehicle
or another vehicle owned by him or her, shall pay a release fee in an
amount set forth in the Schedule of Fees, and proof of insurance must
be provided.
§ 29-2208 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-2209
1:1146
§ 29-2210. [Ch. 29, Sec. 196] Notice to vehicle owners.
§ 29-2211. [Ch. 29, Sec. 197] Towing of vehicles having more than
five unpaid parking tickets.
F. After a person has obtained a Release, the person may take it to the
storage facility during regular business hours and provide it to the
owner or manager thereof to obtain the vehicle. After all costs of the
towing removal and storage have been paid, unless they have already
been paid at the Police Station, the vehicle may be obtained from the
storage facility. All such removal and storage costs must be paid by the
owner of the vehicle or the person having the right to possession of the
vehicle and if they are not so paid within a reasonable time, they may be
paid by the sale of the vehicle in accordance with existing law. [Ord.
No. 2018-89]
A. Whenever a Police Officer has authorized the removal of a vehicle from
public or private property as authorized by any provision of the
Bloomington City Code and the officer knows or is able to ascertain
from the registration records of the vehicle the name and address of the
owner thereof, such officer or another member of the Police
Department shall as soon as practical give or cause to be given notice in
writing by first class mail to the owner and lien holder and other legally
entitled persons, if known, of the fact of such removal, the reasons
therefor, and the place to which the vehicle has been removed. [Ord.
No. 1985-62]
B. Whenever an officer removes or causes the removal of a vehicle from
public or private property pursuant to any provisions of the
Bloomington City Code and does not know and is not able to ascertain
the name of the owner or for any other reason is unable to give notice to
the owner as hereinabove provided, and in the event the vehicle is not
obtained from storage by the owner or by a person entitled to
possession of it within a period of five days, then the officer shall
promptly send or cause to be sent a written report of such removal by
mail to the State Department whose duty it is to register motor vehicles
and shall file a copy of such notice with the proprietor of any private
garage or exterior place of safe storage where the vehicle may be
stored. Such notice shall include a complete description of the vehicle,
the date, time and place from which removed, the reasons for such
removal, and the name of the garage or exterior place of storage where
the vehicle is stored. [Ord. No. 1985-62]
A. Notice to owner. Whenever it is determined that any motor vehicle has
been involved in the issuance of five or more unpaid parking tickets as a
result of parking violations identified on the tickets and such condition
has existed for a period of 40 days after the issuance of the 5th unpaid
ticket, any such vehicle shall be deemed to be a public nuisance. The
City Manager or his or her designee shall cause to be personally served
upon the owner of record of said motor vehicle a notice describing the
§ 29-2209 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-2211
1:1147
violations stating that said vehicle will be subject to being picked up,
towed, stored and possibly sold at a later date by an authorized agent
of the City of Bloomington all at the expense of the owner whenever it
is found on any public street, public parking lot, or other public rightof-
way if said unpaid tickets are not paid or otherwise disposed of with
the City by the owner or the owner's agent within 10 days after the date
of the service of said notice. The notice may be served by any member
of the Bloomington Police Department or in any other manner provided
by law for the personal service of summons in civil cases. [Ord. No.
2011-12]
B. Meeting with owner. The vehicle owner may obtain a review of the
unpaid tickets by requesting in writing a meeting with the City
Manager or his or her designee, which meeting shall be scheduled at
the City Hall as soon as possible, at a time mutually convenient for the
parties, but not more than 20 days from the date of service of the abovedescribed
notice. The City Manager at such meeting shall have full
authority to make binding agreements relating to the amounts due, if
any, and may agree to any payment terms which he determines are in
the best interests of the City. [Ord. No. 2011-12]
C. Impoundment. If the vehicle owner:
(1) Fails to give written notice requesting a meeting with the City
Manager or his or her designee; or
(2) Does not appear at such meeting and does not ask, in writing, for a
short delay of the meeting date because of unanticipated personal
problems; or
(3) Cannot agree with the City Manager or his or her designee on the
amount due or arrange an acceptable method of payment; or
(4) Having so agreed on a method of payment, fails to make any
payment when due; or
(5) Has not instituted legal action to have his responsibilities and
rights with respect to said tickets judicially determined, then the
City Manager or his or her designee shall make a written finding of
such facts. Thereafter, whenever such vehicle is found parked and
unattended on a public right-of-way in the City of Bloomington, it
shall be subject to being immediately towed and stored.
Bloomington Police authorities shall have the power and are hereby
authorized to remove or have the vehicle removed by either private
or government equipment to a City or private storage facility as
may be deemed advisable. The towing and storage of the vehicle
shall not be delayed or prohibited by the fact that a friend, relative,
lessee, agent or employee of the owner may have been operating
the vehicle just prior to the impoundment. [Ord. No. 2011-12]
D. Notice to owner. Whenever a vehicle has been towed or stored, a notice
of such removal and the location of storage shall be served on the
§ 29-2211 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-2211
1:1148
§ 29-2212. [Ch. 29, Sec. 198] Severability. [Ord. No. 1985-62]
If any section or provision of this Ordinance shall be adjudged to be invalid
or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not affect the validity of the
Ordinance as a whole nor any section, provision, or part thereof not
adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
§ 29-2213. [Ch. 29, Sec. 199] General purposes.
The provisions of Divisions 4 and 5 of this article shall be construed in
accordance with the general purposes to:
registered owner of the vehicle if his name and address is known or
can be ascertained with reasonable diligence. The notice shall state
that if a release of the vehicle is not promptly obtained, it shall be
treated as an abandoned vehicle and sold as such under Chapter 95 1/
2, Illinois Revised Statutes.69 The notice may be served by any member
of the Bloomington Police Department or by certified mail. [Ord. No.
1985-62]
E. Release of vehicle. Impounded vehicles will be released to their lawful
owners or their agents upon a showing of adequate evidence of a right
to possession and the payment by certified check to the City of
Bloomington of all accrued fines, penalties, incurred costs, towing,
storage, and related charges. The person to whom the vehicle is
released must sign a receipt for the vehicle and thereon state the
capacity under which he is obtaining possession of the vehicle. [Ord.
No. 1985-62]
F. Funds from sale. The funds from the sale of any vehicle hereunder shall
first be applied to the payment of all accrued fines, incurred costs,
towing, storage and related charges, and the remainder shall be
disposed of as provided by law. [Ord. No. 1985-62]
G. Rules and regulations. The City Council is hereby authorized to adopt
by Resolution, such Rules and Regulations as are necessary to carry out
the provisions of this Ordinance. [Ord. No. 1985-62]
A. Control and regulate traffic and parking within the City of Bloomington
for the benefit and convenience of the citizens of and visitors to the City
of Bloomington;
B. Forbid and prevent the parking of vehicles at locations, at times and in
manners which are prohibited herein or in other ordinances of the City
of Bloomington;
C. Provide a means for the effective and efficient prosecution of violators
of the parking ordinances of the City of Bloomington with the intent to
deter such violations;
69.Editor's Note: See 625 ILCS 5/4-201 et seq.
§ 29-2211 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-2213
1:1149
D. Secure simplicity in procedure; and
E. Insure fairness of administration. [Ord. No. 1985-62]
§ 29-2213 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-2213
1:1150
ARTICLE XXIII
[OrTdr.u Ncok. T1r9a7ffi8c-73]
§ 29-2301. [Ch. 29, Sec. 2] Definitions.
§ 29-2302. [Ch. 29, Sec. 2] Through traffic prohibited.
A. All definitions contained in §§ 29-101 through 29-104 of this chapter
shall apply to the words used in this article, except as they may be
otherwise defined in this section. [Ord. No. 1977-145]
B. For all purposes under this article, any and all references to a "truck" or
"trucks" shall be deemed to refer to any and all motor vehicles which
are licensed or, if they were to be licensed in Illinois, would be licensed
as a truck(s) under the Illinois Compiled Statutes, with a registered
weight, GVWR, or actual gross weight, or GCWR exceeding 10,000
pounds. [Ord. No. 2008-64]
A. It shall be illegal for any person to drive a truck on the streets,
highways, roadways, or alleys in the City of Bloomington described in
Subsection D of this section except for the purpose of making business
deliveries or pick up of personal property, or performing contractual
services for hire, or of going to one's home as not otherwise prohibited
by law. Any person driving a truck for one of the purposes enumerated
in this Subsection A on streets where through truck traffic is prohibited
shall limit the distance traveled on such streets by entering and leaving
the prohibited streets at the nearest intersections with streets suitable
for truck traffic to the destination of the vehicle. [Ord. No. 2003-82]
B. Every person found driving a truck on the streets, highways, roadways
or alleys described in Subsection D of this section shall be presumed to
be driving said truck in violation of Subsection A and shall be issued a
traffic citation therefor. Proof that a person was driving a truck on said
streets, highways, roadways, or alleys shall constitute a prima facie
case and as a defense to such citations the person receiving the citation
shall have the burden of proof to show that at the time the citation was
issued the person was driving the truck to or from a location on said
streets, highways, roadways or alleys for one of the purposes and in the
manner allowed in Subsection A of this section. [Ord. No. 2003-82]
C. It shall be illegal for any person to drive any motor vehicle including
trucks on the following streets, highways, roadways or alleys in the City
of Bloomington: [Ord. No. 1977-145]
Location
Alley between Taylor and Olive Streets in the block bounded by Allin,
Olive, Morris and Taylor Streets
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a truck on the following
streets, highways, roadways or alleys in the City of Bloomington: [Ord.
No. 2017-114]
§ 29-2301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-2302
1:1151
Location
Allin Street - Macarthur to Wood Street
Allin Street - Oakland Avenue to Macarthur Street
Baker Street - Wright to Evans
Berenz Place - Lafayette to Stewart
Brad - Truckers Lane north to Dead End
Broadmoor Drive - Oakland to Lincoln
Chestnut Street - White Oak to Morris
Chestnut Street - Eugene Street to Colton Avenue
Chestnut Street - Linden Street to Eugene Street
Chestnut Street - Mason Street to Oak Street
Chestnut - Oak Street to Lee Street
Circle - Brown to Darrah
Clearwater Avenue - Veteran's to Hershey
Clinton Boulevard - Empire Street to Division Street
Cottage - Seminary to Blackstone
Country Club Place - Towanda to Mercer
Darrah - Washington to Circle
Davis - Washington to Monroe
Davis Avenue - Jefferson Street to Washington Street
Division Street - Main Street to East Street
East Street - Chestnut Street to Locust Street
East Street - Division Street to Kelsey Street
East Street - Emerson Street to Beecher Street
East Street - Kelsey Street to Emerson Street
East Street - Locust Street to Mulberry Street
East Street - Lincoln to Stewart
Elm Street - Madison Street to Center Street
Evans Street - Chestnut Street to Locust Street
Evans Street - Empire Street to Walnut Street
Evans Street - Graham Street to Empire Street
Evans Street - University Avenue to Graham Street
Evans Street - Walnut Street to Chestnut Street
Front - Gridley to Clinton
Graham - White Oak to Hinshaw
§ 29-2302 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-2302
1:1152
Location
Gill from Turn Around to Vladimir
Grove - McClun to Mercer
Grove - East to Clinton
Hinshaw - Forrest to Locust
Jefferson - Towanda to Perrin
Jefferson Street - Clinton Street to Robinson Street
Jefferson Street - Colton Avenue to Towanda Avenue
Jefferson Street - Davis Avenue to Colton Avenue
Jefferson Street - Robinson Street to Davis Avenue
Linden - Locust to Monroe
Locust - White Oak to west end
Maple Hill Road - Wylie Drive to Enterprise Drive
McClun - Bell to Oakland
Mercer - Washington to Country Club
Monroe Street - Clayton Street to Clinton Street
Monroe Street - Clinton Street to Robinson Street
Monroe Street - Evans Street to Clayton Street
Monroe Street - McLean Street to Evans Street
Morris, northbound - North of Chestnut
Mulberry - Morris to Western
Olive - Morris to Euclid
Perrin - Washington to Country Club
Scott Street - Center Street to Main Street
Scott Street - Madison Street to Center Street
Stewart - Evans to Main
Summit Street - Macarthur Avenue to Wood Street
Taylor Street - Moore Street to Mercer Avenue
Taylor Street - Willard Avenue to Kreitzer Avenue
Thompson Avenue - Center Street to Main Street
University Avenue - Clinton Boulevard to White Place
Walnut Street - Center Street to Main Street
Washington - Mercer to State
White Place - Emerson Street to University Avenue
White Place - University Avenue to Empire Street
§ 29-2302 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-2302
1:1153
Location
White Place - Emerson to Towanda
Wilson Street - Lafayette to Stewart
Wright Street - Lincoln to Stewart
E. Every person convicted of a violation of this article shall be punished by
fine of not less than $25 and not more than $500. [Ord. No. 2008-64]
§ 29-2302 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-2302
1:1154
ARTICLE XXIV
(Reserved)
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-2302
1:1155

ARTICLE XXV
Commercial Towing Of Motor Vehicles
§ 29-2501. [Ch. 29, Sec. 220] Definitions.
As used in this article:
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE RELOCATOR or RELOCATOR — Any person or
entity engaged in the business of removing, trespassing vehicles from
private property by means of towing or otherwise, and thereafter relocating
and storing such vehicles.
COMMISSION — The Illinois Commerce Commission.
LAW — The Illinois Commercial Relocation of Trespassing Vehicles Law, (Ill.
Rev. Stat. Ch. 95 112, Sec. 18a).70
OPERATOR — Any person who, as an employee or agent of a commercial
vehicle relocator, removes trespassing vehicles from private property by
means of towing or otherwise.
OPERATOR'S LICENSE — A license issued to an operator in accordance
with Sections 18a-403 or 18a-405 of the Illinois Vehicle Code.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, corporation, association, or
entity of any type and description.
RELOCATOR'S LICENSE — A license issued to a commercial vehicle
relocator in accordance with Section 18a-400 or 18a-401 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code.[Ord. No. 1979-102]
§ 29-2502. [Ch. 29, Sec. 221] Premises from and circumstances
under which unauthorized vehicles may or may not be towed.
A. No motor vehicle may be towed by a relocator from any public street or
way, public alley, or other public property except pursuant to explicit
authorization from a peace officer, law enforcement officer, a person (or
his/her authorized representative) having managerial control of the
parking area (hereinafter "manager"), the owner of said vehicle, or a
duly authorized driver of said vehicle. [Ord. No. 1982-30]
B. No motor vehicle may be towed by a relocator if it is parked in the space
in which it is authorized to park. [Ord. No. 1982-30]
C. Before a relocator may remove any unauthorized vehicle from public or
private property, he must first have a request from the property owner,
the lessee, or the manager of the property, or the Bloomington Police
Department to remove the specific vehicle in question, unless he has
been given authorization to remove all unauthorized vehicles from said
property. [Ord. No. 1982-30]
70.Editor's Note: See 625 ILCS 5/18a-100 et seq.
§ 29-2501 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-2502
1:1157
§ 29-2503. [Ch. 29, Sec. 222] Release of motor vehicles from
custody of relocators.
D. When any owner, the lessee, or manager of public or private property
gives authorization to a relocator to remove any or all unauthorized
vehicles from a public or private parking area, signs shall be posted
pursuant to § 29-2504. [Ord. No. 1982-30]
E. No vehicle may be towed, pursuant to §§ 29-2501 through 29-2511
hereof, by any person from public or private property if the owner or
other person entitled to possession of the vehicle is present, or arrives
at the scene prior to the vehicle's removal from such property, exhibits
the ignition key of said vehicle, and offers to remove such vehicle
voluntarily prior to the time such person attempting to tow actually
removes such vehicle from the property in question, provided that such
owner or such other person so removes such vehicle immediately.
However, the owner of the vehicle or such other person must pay half of
the towing fee. If the owner refuses to pay half the fee for responding to
the request, the relocator may proceed to tow the vehicle. [Ord. No.
1982-30]
F. The terms "owner," "lessee" and "manager" when used in §§ 29-2501
through 29-2511 hereof shall, include the authorized agent and public
or private manager for the owner or lessee as the facts may indicate in
each situation. [Ord. No. 1982-30]
G. Sections 29-2501 through 29-2511 hereof shall not supersede other
applicable towing provisions of City or State law. Some of the other
towing provisions are found in Chapter 16, Section 99; Chapter 29,
§ 29-2207; and Chapter 45, Section 310.6 of the Bloomington City Code.
[Ord. No. 1982-30]
A. Prior to release of towed motor vehicles, the relocator shall permit the
owner or his authorized agent of the vehicle towed to inspect the
interior and exterior of said vehicle and its contents. [Ord. No.
1979-102]
B. The owner or authorized agent of the owner of the towed vehicle may
be identified by a valid driver's license or valid driver's license for the
state of issuance of the license plates of the vehicle towed, and an
ignition key which operates the vehicle towed; or in the instance of
rented vehicles, identification may be accomplished by presentation of
a rental contract and the driver's license of the renting party named in
the rental contract. This subsection does not prohibit a relocator from
reasonably requiring additional means of proving ownership of the
motor vehicle. [Ord. No. 1979-102]
C. Should the relocator claim fees and charges for towing, it shall base the
fees and charges on rates as stated in § 29-2511. [Ord. No. 1979-102]
§ 29-2502 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-2503
1:1158
§ 29-2504. [Ch. 29, Sec. 2] Construction, erection, placement,
design and illumination of signs.
D. The relocator shall accept any of the following methods of payment for
such fees and charges:
(1) United States currency;
(2) Regularly recognized traveler's checks;
(3) Money order;
(4) Cashier's or Certified Check. [Ord. No. 1979-102]
E. The relocator may accept any regularly recognized credit cards or a
personal check or similar means of payment for fees and charges. [Ord.
No. 1979-102]
A. When any owner, lessee, or manager of public or private property gives
authorization to a relocator to remove any or all unauthorized vehicles
from a public or private parking area, signs shall be posted no less than
24 hours prior to the time when any tow is made. Said sign(s) should be
prominently visible from all entrances to and exits from the parking
area and in clear view free from interference from any natural or manmade
objects and shall be visible at night. The portions of these signs
informing that unauthorized vehicles will be towed shall be in letters
not less than three inches in height and in a color vividly contrasting to
the background color of the sign. In cases where said sign(s) are absent
or are not clearly visible, for whatever reason, at the time the vehicle is
parked without authorization, towing shall not be permitted. The signs
shall contain the following information:
(1) A general statement indicating who is allowed to park in the area.
Said statement may use classes of persons as well as individuals.
(2) A warning that unauthorized vehicles will be towed.
(3) The exact fee, if any, charged by the relocator to recover the vehicle
and the acceptable methods of payment of such fee. [Ord. No.
1982-30]
B. The sign required by Subsection A shall not be required prior to when
vehicles are towed:
(1) From nonresidential parking areas which serve three cars or fewer
provided the circumstances of the area indicates the spaces are
reserved or intended exclusively for the use or occupation of
specific persons or their vehicles and there is an indication that
towing may occur; or
(2) From all driveways; or
§ 29-2503 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-2504
1:1159
§ 29-2505. [Ch. 29, Sec. 224] Notification to law enforcement
agencies. [Ord. No. 1982-30]
Whenever an unauthorized vehicle is towed from public or private property,
the relocator, or his agent or employee, shall notify the Bloomington Police
Department, except when a representative of the Police Department
authorizes the vehicle to be towed. Such notification shall be by telephone
no later than one hour after the tow is made and shall include the name of
the relocator, an accurate description of the vehicle, and the location it was
towed to and from.
§ 29-2506. [Ch. 29, Sec. 225] Illegal parking.
§ 29-2507. [Ch. 29, Sec. 226] Post tow hearing.
(3) From residential properties exempt from the signing requirements
of Section 18a-302 of the Illinois Vehicle Code. [Ord. No.
1986-92]
A. It shall be unlawful for a vehicle owner or operator to park a vehicle:
(1) In an off-street parking place where signs are posted pursuant to
§ 29-2504 of this article where the owner has not received
permission to park in that space; or
(2) On a street in such a manner as to block a driveway; or
(3) On any residential property for which a sign need not be posted
pursuant to Section 18a-302 of the Illinois Vehicle Code. [Ord. No.
1979-102]
B. The penalty for conviction of this section is $25. [Ord. No. 1979-102]
A. Any vehicle owner or operator whose vehicle is towed pursuant to this
Ordinance may, within 30 days of the towing, in lieu of paying the
relocator for storage and towing, post a bond equal to the storage and
towing fees with the City Clerk. Upon posting said bond, the relocator
shall release the vehicle towed. [Ord. No. 1979-102]
B. Within 96 hours of the posting of the bond, the City Manager or his
designee shall preside over an administrative hearing at which time the
vehicle owner or operator may plead facts indicating by a
preponderance of the evidence that:
(1) The signs, if required in § 29-2504, were not posted or were not
readable at the time the owner left the vehicle; or
(2) The vehicle was mistakenly towed, i.e. the owner or operator had
the permission of the property owner to park; or
(3) Other circumstances indicating that the owner or operator was
without fault in parking the vehicle in the location from which it
was towed. [Ord. No. 1979-102]
§ 29-2504 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-2507
1:1160
§ 29-2508. [Ch. 29, Sec. 227] Investigations, hearings and
proceedings. [Ord. No. 1979-102]
The rules governing investigations, hearings, and proceedings pursuant
to the authority vested in the City Manager by this Ordinance shall be
the same as contained in the Rules of Practice of the Illinois Commerce
Commission, as amended, with the exception of Rule XII.
§ 29-2509. [Ch. 29, Sec. 228] Applications for relocator's licenses.
§ 29-2510. [Ch. 29, Sec. 229] Application for renewal of relocator's
license. [Ord. No. 1979-102]
Application for renewal of relocator's licenses shall be on forms supplied by
the City Clerk.
§ 29-2511. [Ch. 29, Sec. 230] Posting of rates and charges. [Ord.
No. 1979-102]
The rates and charges of commercial vehicle relocators shall be posted and
the contents thereof filed with the City Clerk.
§ 29-2512. [Ch. 29, Sec. 231] Vehicle identification.
C. Notice of said hearing shall be given to the property owner and
relocator as well as to the vehicle owner or operator. [Ord. No.
1979-102]
D. If the City Manager or his designee determine that the vehicle owner or
operator has met the burden of proof, then he shall order the bond to be
returned to the vehicle owner or operator. [Ord. No. 1979-102]
E. If the City Manager or his designee determine that the vehicle owner or
operator has not met the burden of proof, then he shall order the bond
to be sent to the towing company. [Ord. No. 1979-102]
F. If no claim is made upon the vehicle within 30 days of the towing, and
an attempt has been made to contact the owner of the vehicle, the
vehicle may be considered an abandoned vehicle and disposed of as
provided in the Illinois Vehicle Code. [Ord. No. 1979-102]
A. No person shall engage in the business of a commercial vehicle
relocator without a license to do so from the City of Bloomington. The
method of application for relocator's licenses shall be in conformity
with forms provided in the Office of the City Clerk. The annual license
fee shall be as set forth in the Schedule of Fees. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
B. Should any relocator or his employee(s), officers or managers be
convicted of a criminal offense, such information shall be reported to
the City Manager within 30 days. [Ord. No. 1979-102]
§ 29-2507 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-2512
1:1161
§ 29-2513. [Ch. 29, Sec. 232] Ownership and management.
§ 29-2514. [Ch. 29, Sec. 233] Prohibited financial transactions.
§ 29-2515. [Ch. 29, Sec. 234] License - revocation or suspension.
§ 29-2516. [Ch. 29, Sec. 235] Security requirements.
A. The relocator shall identify his vehicles in a color or colors vividly
contrasting to the color of the unit, his name, address and telephone
number, using letters and figures not less than two inches in height.
[Ord. No. 1979-102]
B. The above requirement shall be waived where the vehicle has painted
or otherwise firmly affixed to it a seal or trademark which clearly
identifies the relocator. [Ord. No. 1979-102]
A. A relocator must within 10 days' notice the office of the City Manager of
any change in the names and telephone numbers of officers and
managers of this company. [Ord. No. 1979-102]
B. A relocator must within 48 hours notify the office of the City Manager of
any change in locations and telephone numbers of the places where his
company transacts business. [Ord. No. 1979-102]
A. Any payment of any kind from a relocator to a property owner, lessee, or
property manager for permission to tow any vehicle is prohibited. [Ord.
No. 1979-102]
B. Any payment from a relocator of any kind or for any purposes to any
peace officer or law enforcement official is prohibited. [Ord. No.
1979-102]
A. Basis for revocation or suspension of a relocator license. The City
Manager may revoke or suspend a relocator license for any one or more
of the following reasons:
(1) If the holder thereof has obtained said license by fraud or
misrepresentation; or
(2) If the holder has committed substantial or repeated violations of
this Ordinance. [Ord. No. 1979-102]
B. The procedure provided in the Illinois Commerce Commission's Rules of
Practice, with the exception of Rule XII, concerning complaints,
hearings, etc., shall govern all proceedings wherein a relocator license
may be suspended or revoked. [Ord. No. 1979-102]
A. Relocators shall comply with the requirements of Section 18a-301 of
the Illinois Vehicle Code by having bond or insurance coverage to meet
the liability security requirements specified therein. Each relocator
shall maintain on file with the. City Clerk an indemnity bond or
§ 29-2512 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-2516
1:1162
§ 29-2517. [Ch. 29, Sec. 236] Severability. [Ord. No. 1979-102]
It is the intention of the City Council of the City of Bloomington, Illinois
that the several provisions of this article XXV on commercial relocation of
vehicles are separable. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge
any provision of this article to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any
other provisions of this article not specifically included in such judgment
order.
insurance policy or certificates of bond(s) or insurance in lieu thereof
which show that at all times each relocator has the required security.
A relocator's license may be suspended for failing to meet the
requirements of this section. [Ord. No. 1984-6]
B. In the event any relocator's license has been suspended by reason of
failure to meet the security requirements of this section, and should he
thereafter file a bond or insurance policy or certificates in lieu thereof
with the City of Bloomington within 20 days after the suspension, the
City Manager is authorized and hereby directed to reinstate the license
of such relocator and shall by notice to such relocator certify such
reinstatement. Upon good cause shown, the City of Bloomington may
reinstate any license which has been in suspension for more than 20
days. [Ord. No. 1979-102]
C. In the event any relocator's license shall be in suspension for 30 days by
reason of failure to have satisfactory security on file, the City Manager
will institute a proceeding against such relocator to show cause why the
suspension should not be permanent and his license revoked. [Ord. No.
1979-102]
§ 29-2516 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-2517
1:1163

ARTICLE XXVI
School Crossing Guards
§ 29-2601. [Ch. 29, Sec. 237] Appointment, removal and rules and
regulations. [Ord. No. 1984-121]
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized and directed to appoint and to
administer the removal of persons to be known as School Crossing Guards,
in such numbers as he may deem necessary to perform traffic and
pedestrian control duties under the direction of and in compliance with any
rules and regulations as the Chief of Police may promulgate. All references
to the Chief of Police in this article include his authorized representative.
§ 29-2602. [Ch. 29, Sec. 238] Insignia and dress. [Ord. No.
1984-121]
School Crossing Guards shall wear such insignia, dress, and badges as the
Chief of Police shall direct, and shall be equipped in the manner which he
deems necessary for the proper discharge of their duties. It shall be illegal
for any School Grossing Guard to exercise his/her authority or to wear any
uniform or insignia, or to display any badge except during the performance
of authorized duties or for other authorized purposes.
§ 29-2603. [Ch. 29, Sec. 239] Traffic and pedestrian control. [Ord.
No. 1984-121]
It shall be illegal for any person to fail to comply with the traffic and
pedestrian control directions of any School Crossing Guard. This
requirement shall include, but is not limited to, every driver stopping when
a School Crossing Guard indicates that traffic shall stop and such stopping
shall occur before entering any marked or unmarked crosswalk area, or if
there is not a crosswalk, before entering any area or intersection under the
control of the School Crossing Guard. It shall be illegal for any driver to turn
at an intersection while a School Crossing Guard is stopping traffic at the
intersection.
§ 29-2604. [Ch. 29, Sec. 240] Traffic tickets, citations and/or
complaints. [Ord. No. 1984-121]
Any Bloomington Police Officer may issue a traffic ticket or other citation or
complaint for the violation of any law based on information obtained from
any School Crossing Guard.
§ 29-2605. [Ch. 29, Sec. 241] Penalty. [Ord. No. 1984-121]
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance
shall, upon conviction, he subject to a fine of not less than $10 nor more
than $500.
§ 29-2601 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-2605
1:1165

ARTICLE XXVII
Overweight Permit Movements On City Streets
DIVISION 1
General Regulation
§ 29-2701. [Ch. 29, Sec. 250] Legal authority. [Ord. No. 2004-5]
The City of Bloomington is authorized by the Illinois Size and Weight Law
[625 ILCS 5/Ch. 15] to issue special permits. These special permits allow
the operation of vehicles or loads that exceed the legal maximum weights.
The permits are valid only for those streets under City of Bloomington
jurisdiction. This Ordinance shall supersede all policies previously
established and published by the City of Bloomington pertaining to
overweight permit movements.
§ 29-2702. [Ch. 29, Sec. 251] Partial invalidity. [Ord. No. 2004-5]
The provisions of this Ordinance are severable, and if any of the provisions
shall be held unlawful by any court of competent jurisdiction, the decision
of such court shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions.
§ 29-2703. [Ch. 29, Sec. 252] Scope.
§ 29-2704. [Ch. 29, Sec. 253] When a permit is required. [Ord. No.
2004-5]
A permit is required when a vehicle or load that exceeds legal weights is to
be moved upon or across a street for which the City is responsible.
A. All applications for permits are given full consideration. Permits for
proposed moves may be issued.
(1) When the highways and bridges will not be unduly damaged; and
(2) When the safety of the traveling public will be adequately
protected.
B. A permit may also be issued when substantial benefits will be realized
by a large segment of the public, and the potential damage and safety
problems can be resolved.
C. This publication is the official detailed policy reflecting these
guidelines. It is written to provide a uniform system for issuing excess
size and weight permits. This policy is authorized by The Illinois Vehicle
Code and in addition to the statutes, governs the issuance of special
permits. All the terms, conditions, and informational requirements
contained in this Ordinance, constitute the City's official policy.
D. Questions regarding permits or permit policy should be directed to the
City of Bloomington Public Works Department, 115E. Washington
Street, Bloomington IL 61701 (309) 434-2225. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
§ 29-2701 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-2705
1:1167
§ 29-2705. [Ch. 29, Sec. 254] To whom permits are issued. [Ord. No.
2004-5]
Special permits are issued only in the names of those persons, firms, or
corporations that own and operate the transporting vehicle or that operate
the vehicle under a bona fide lease agreement.
§ 29-2706. [Ch. 29, Sec. 255] A permit is a legal document.
§ 29-2707. [Ch. 29, Sec. 256] Penalties. [Ord. No. 2004-5]
Penalties for violating a permit are listed in Sections 15-112, 15-113,
15-113.1, 15-113.2, 15-113.3, and 15-301 of the Illinois Size and Weight Law
and Chapter 16 of the Illinois Vehicle Code [625 ILCS 5/Ch. 16].
§ 29-2708. [Ch. 29, Sec. 257] Insurance.
Proof of financial responsibility does not need to be on file with the City of
Bloomington as a prerequisite to obtain a routine permit.
A. A permit is a legal document authorizing the grantee to move an
overweight vehicle or load upon or across City streets. It is issued as a
result of an agreement between the grantee and the City of
Bloomington. The agreement is based upon the information contained
in the application, upon the applicant being legally competent, upon the
conditions and restrictions stated in the permit, and upon the
applicable provisions of this policy and Illinois statutes.
B. Acceptance of the permit by the grantee will be deemed prima facie
evidence of an unequivocal allegation by the grantee that:
(1) He is in compliance with all operational requirements;
(2) All dimension and weight limitations specified in the permit will not
be exceeded;
(3) All operation, registration, and license requirements have been
met;
(4) All financial responsibility obligations and other legal requirements
have been met; and
(5) He assumes all responsibility for injury to persons or damage to
public or private property, including his own, or to the object being
transported, caused directly or indirectly by the transportation of
vehicles and objects authorized under the permit. He agrees to
hold the City of Bloomington harmless from all suits, claims,
damages, or proceedings of any kind and to indemnify the City of
Bloomington for any claim it may be required to pay arising from
the movement.
C. Undertaking the move is deemed prima facie evidence of acceptance of
the permit. [Ord. No. 2004-5]
§ 29-2705 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-2708
1:1168
§ 29-2709. through § 29-2710. (Reserved)
A. Owners and/or operators of escort vehicles or vehicles with overweight
loads must have in effect or be self-insured in the minimum amount of
$500,000 per occurrence combined bodily injury and property damage.
Additional coverage may be required consistent with regulations of the
United States Department of Transportation Bureau of Motor Carrier
Safety and the Illinois Commerce Commission. For instance, a move
made "for hire" will have to meet the insurance requirements
established by the Illinois Commerce Commission.
B. Owners and/or operators of vehicles with exceptionally large or heavy
loads that require closing a highway, traveling at a slow speed on
structures, or other maneuvers unexpected by the other motorists, may
be required to have higher insurance limits, based upon an estimate of
potential damages. The potential damages will be calculated by
preparing an engineer's estimate of the repaving of the highway or
repairing, replacing or strengthening structures, utilizing current City
contract costs. When such insurance is required, proof of coverage
must be on file with the Public Works Department.
C. In the event City facilities are damaged directly or indirectly due to the
transportation of vehicles or objects authorized under the permit, the
City shall be reimbursed based upon the repair cost rather than
depreciated value.
D. The limits of insurance coverage herein stated do not relieve the
grantee of the requirements of § 29-2706. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
§ 29-2708 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-2709
1:1169

DIVISION 2
Types of Permits
§ 29-2711. [Ch. 29, Sec. 258] Permits for single trip movements.
§ 29-2712. [Ch. 29, Sec. 259] Permits for round trips.
§ 29-2713. [Ch. 29, Sec. 260] Extended term permits.
Extended Term Permits for limited continuous operation are available for
the movement of over legal weight pieces of construction equipment. These
permits are valid for a period of three months or as otherwise indicated. The
following items are pertinent:
A. Permits for single trip movements are issued for one-way movement.
These permits are valid for seven calendar days with the restrictions
described in Subsection B of this section. [Ord. No. 2004-110]
B. Unless stated otherwise on the permit:
(1) Permit movements may be made only from a half hour before
sunrise to a half hour after sunset on weekdays and from a half
hour before sunrise to noon on Saturday;
(2) Permit movements are prohibited on Sunday and on New Year's
Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving
Day, and Christmas Day.
(3) Extended Term Permit moves shall be allowed to move with no time
restrictions. [Ord. No. 2004-5]
A. Permits for round trip moves may be issued provided:
(1) The same or "like" object is to be moved in both directions,
(2) The same vehicle is to be utilized.
(3) The same route is to be traveled in the reverse direction.
B. A description, including make and model, of the equipment being
transported must be furnished to the Public Works Department.
C. Applications for round trip moves will be the same as for a single trip
move, except the words "and return" may be added. Round trip permits
over a circular or roundabout route will not routinely be issued. For
example, when a routing on a divided highway is adequate for the size
or weight in one direction, but due to a lower clearance or a deficiency
in a structure in the opposite direction, it is necessary to route the
movement over different highways on the return trip. A single trip
permit will not be revised to include "round trip" after the permit has
been issued. Round trip permits are subject to the restrictions
contained in § 29-2711B except such permits are valid for a period of 10
calendar days and one round trip move. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
§ 29-2711 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-2713
1:1171
§ 29-2714. [Ch. 29, Sec. 261] Supplemental permits. [Ord. No.
2018-93]
Supplemental permits may be issued by the Public Works Department to
extend, revise, or correct permits that are still valid. Documents authorizing
corrections, extensions, and revisions must accompany the original permit
and be presented upon request to any police officer or authorized employee
of the City.
§ 29-2715. [Ch. 29, Sec. 262] Scope: duty of permittee to read
permit upon receipt. [Ord. No. 2004-5]
Permits are issued insofar as practical in conformance with data contained
in an application. Errors in the application, in the permit, or in the
transmission of a permit must be corrected before the move. The Permittee
must check the permit upon receipt or before starting a move. If upon
checking a permit the permittee finds that the permit does not cover the
move, that it is incorrect, or that it is otherwise in error, he must contact the
Public Works Department for correction. The issuance of any supplemental
permits will be held to a minimum.
§ 29-2716. [Ch. 29, Sec. 263] Extension of permits.
A. Extended Term Permits may be issued for the movement of overweight
construction equipment or vehicles, provided:
(1) The following weights are not exceeded:
(a) Gross weight: 110,000.
(b) Front tandem: 44,000; no axle exceeds 23,000.
(c) Rear tandem: 54,000; no axle exceeds 20,000.
(2) No single axle weights exceed 23,000.
(3) Movements are restricted to streets indicated in blue on the most
recent version of the Bloomington/Normal Weight Limit Map
published and available from the City of Bloomington Public Works
Dept. Streets indicated in blue shall not be used in lieu of State
routes to transport overweight loads throughout the City.
(4) Moves on local streets are limited to 2,500 feet from the nearest
street indicated in blue or from the nearest State route. [Ord. No.
2007-45]
A. Single Trip Permits and Round Trip Permits will be extended for a
period of five working days, provided the Public Works Department is
notified no later than the expiration of the original permit and good
cause is shown.
B. Extensions will be granted upon good cause with an effective date
sometime after the expiration date of the original permit if the Public
§ 29-2713 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-2716
1:1172
§ 29-2717. [Ch. 29, Sec. 264] Revision of permits.
A permit shall not be altered or revised except by the Public Works
Department.
§ 29-2718. [Ch. 29, Sec. 265] Fraudulent permit.
Works Department is notified prior to the expiration date and the time
between the expiration and the effective date of the extension does not
exceed 30 days.
C. Second extensions will not normally be issued.
D. The Public Works Department will not issue extensions for Extended
Term Permits. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
A. The Public Works Department may issue revisions to permits:
(1) To correct an error attributed to the issuing office;
(2) At the request of the applicant before the move has been started;
(a) To correct an applicant error;
(b) To alter routes or destinations;
(c) To correct or increase sizes or weights;
(d) To substitute a vehicle used to transport a load;
(3) Due to emergency or exceptional conditions beyond the control of
or outside the normal scope of knowledge of the applicant.
B. It is the responsibility of the applicant to ensure accuracy of the
application. Second revisions will not normally be issued.
C. Consistent with the provisions of this section, revisions will not be
issued:
(1) For extended term permits;
(2) To change the name of the permittee;
(3) To alter the description of the load;
(4) To revise a permit that has been violated. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
A. A permit shall be deemed fraudulent if it is used in a manner or altered
to facilitate use in a manner contrary to the Illinois Size and Weight
Law, contrary to this Ordinance, contrary to the terms and conditions of
the permit as issued, or to otherwise conduct an unpermitted move. A
fraudulent permit is void and any move thereunder is considered an
unpermitted move.
§ 29-2716 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-2718
1:1173
§ 29-2719. through § 29-2720. (Reserved)
B. An unpermitted move under a fraudulent permit would include, but
would not be limited to:
(1) Operation of multiple movements under provision of a single trip
permit.
(2) Movement of a load not as described on the presented permit.
(3) Movement with an issued permit that, without authorization from
the City of Bloomington Public Works Department, has had the
original specifications or restrictions altered.
(4) Movement when the axle spacing of the hauling unit does not
conform to those indicated on the permit application. [Ord. No.
2018-93]
§ 29-2718 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-2719
1:1174
DIVISION 3
Overweight Vehicles and Loads
§ 29-2721. [Ch. 29, Sec. 266] Scope.
§ 29-2722. [Ch. 29, Sec. 267] Legal weights. [Ord. No. 2004-5]
See Section 15-111 of The Illinois Size and Weight Law.
§ 29-2723. [Ch. 29, Sec. 268] Exceptions to legal weights. [Ord. No.
2004-5]
Fire apparatus or equipment designed for snow and ice removal owned or
operated by governmental agencies, implements of husbandry temporarily
operated or towed upon a highway, and vehicles and loads operated by a
public utility when transporting equipment required for emergency repairs
are exempt from weight limitations.
§ 29-2724. [Ch. 29, Sec. 269] Practical maximum weights.
All requests for overweight moves are considered. However, due to the
physical capacity of the highways and bridges, practical maximum weights
have been established. Although many bridges will not carry these weights,
routes are generally available to most destinations. The Practical Maximum
Weights are:
A. Permits may be issued for overweight vehicles and objects if they have
been reasonably disassembled [625 ILCS 5/15-301] and the street
system can carry the weight. Overweight moves may consist of only a
single object. Overweight equipment may be moved with normal
components attached.
B. The Public Works Department may require verification of the weight of
the vehicle and load prior to issuing a permit when there is reason to
believe the requested weight is incorrect. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
A. Six or more axle tractor semitrailer combination 120,000 pounds gross;
48,000 pounds on drive tandem; 60,000 pounds on semitrailer three or
more axle tandem.
B. Five-axle tractor semitrailer combination 100,000 pounds gross;
maximum of 48,000 pounds on either tandem.
C. Four-or-more-axle vehicle (axle spacing 23 feet or more): 76,000
pounds gross; maximum of 44,000 pounds on one tandem and 44,000
pounds on the other.
D. Three-or-more-axle vehicle (axle spacing 18 feet or more): maximum
68,000 pounds gross; 21,000 pounds on one axle and 48,000 pounds on
the tandem.
§ 29-2721 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-2724
1:1175
§ 29-2725. [Ch. 29, Sec. 270] Moves in excess of practical
maximums. [Ord. No. 2004-5]
Overweight moves in excess of the practical maximums or on nonstandard
vehicles or with nonstandard axle configurations may be authorized if
allowable pavement and bridge stresses are not exceeded. These moves
normally require additional time for analyses.
§ 29-2726. [Ch. 29, Sec. 271] Movement to a designated scale.
Sections 15-301(b) and (f) of The Illinois Size and Weight Law allow the
permittee to travel to a certified scale to verify the axle and gross weights
of an overweight load when he is uncertain of the correct weights. The
following conditions apply.
§ 29-2727. [Ch. 29, Sec. 272] Status of permittee while enroute to
the scale.
E. Two-axle vehicle: maximum 48,000 pounds, neither axle exceeds
25,000 pounds. [Ord. No. 2004-5]
A. The permittee must, on his application, request that he be routed to a
certified scale, the location of which he has designated on the
application.
B. The scale must be the nearest scale to the permittee's origin that has
been certified by the Illinois Department of Agriculture (State weigh
stations included). "Nearest scale" for permit loads with weights not
exceeding practical maximums is defined as a scale within 25 miles of
the permitted load's origin.
C. The permittee must indicate the requested routing.
D. Due to the volume of permits handled, the Public Works Department
cannot assist the permittee in determining the closest certified scale.
By approving the routing to the scale as requested by the applicant and
indicating the weight of the load is to be checked at a designated scale,
the Public Works Department in no way implies that it is the closest
certified scale to the permittee's origin. If a police officer finds there is a
closer certified scale, he may require the driver to travel to that scale;
however, it is that officer's responsibility to verify the routes can
accommodate the load. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
A. When the permittee has requested travel to a designated scale and the
routing and scale have been specified in the permit by the Public Works
Department the permittee shall be deemed in compliance with the
weight provisions of the permit provided the axle or gross weights do
not exceed any of the permitted limits by more than the following
amounts:
§ 29-2724 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-2727
1:1176
§ 29-2728. through § 29-2730. (Reserved)
Type
Limit
(pounds)
Single axle 2,000
Tandem axle 3,000
Gross 5,000
B. If the permittee is stopped by a police officer while enroute to the scale
specified in the permit, the police officer may accompany the permittee
to the designated scale and witness the weighing, or the officer may
direct the permittee to a closer certified scale. However, the officer
assumes responsibility for ensuring the route he selects to the alternate
scale can safely accommodate the load. The officer may contact the
Public Works Department if he is unsure of the capacity of the route.
C. If after checking the weights at the scale, the permittee finds the
weights are within the limits indicated on the permit, he may proceed to
his destination by the routes indicated in the permit. However, the
permittee is subject to all normal enforcement action.
D. If the permittee finds the load exceeds one or more of the limits
specified in the permit, but is within the tolerances indicated in
Subsection A he must contact the Public Works Department and either
obtain a revised permit as provided in § 29-2717 of this Ordinance, or
reduce his weights to those specified in his permit before proceeding.
Under the provisions of Section 15-301(f) of The Illinois Size and Weight
Law, he is not subject to arrest for being overweight while at or enroute
to the designated scale unless he is found to be in excess of his permit
limits by more than the weight tolerance in Subsection A.
E. If the load exceeds one or more of the limits specified in the permit by
an amount in excess of the tolerances indicated in Subsection A, the
permittee is subject to arrest if a police officer witnesses the weighing
or if the permittee moves the load from the scale premises without
either first adjusting the load to within the limits specified in the permit
or obtaining a new permit that covers the movement. There shall be no
refund of fees for any permit so exceeded, nor will there be any
reduction in the fee for the new permit. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
§ 29-2727 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-2728
1:1177

DIVISION 4
Issuance of Permits
§ 29-2731. [Ch. 29, Sec. 273] When permits are issued. [Ord. No.
2004-5]
Permits are issued only during regular working hours, 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
Monday through Friday, excluding holidays.
§ 29-2732. [Ch. 29, Sec. 274] Permit office. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
All types of special permits are issued by the City of Bloomington Public
Works Department, 115 East Washington Street, Bloomington IL 61701
§ 29-2733. [Ch. 29, Sec. 275] Method of application. [Ord. No.
2018-93]
Application must be made in writing. Written applications may be submitted
in person, by mail, or by any of the various types of electronic
communications equipment maintained in the Public Works Department.
§ 29-2734. [Ch. 29, Sec. 276] Data needed on application. [Ord. No.
2018-93]
Much of the data required on an application is specified by law. Forms have
been developed to aid in applying for all types of permits. Any necessary
forms may be obtained from the City of Bloomington Public Works
Department.
§ 29-2735. [Ch. 29, Sec. 277] Definition of violation of permit.
A. When operating under authority of an overweight permit issued by the
City of Bloomington, the following list of offenses shall be considered a
violation of permit and will not render the entire permit null and void:
(1) Incorrect license number or state,
(2) Incorrect make, model, description or serial number,
(3) Incorrect numbers of axles,
(4) Gross, tandem or single axle weights that are in excess of those
permitted. In this case, the violator may be fined for the excess
weight in addition to the violation of permit,
(5) Failure to comply with the general conditions, specific provisions,
and notes listed on the permit,
(6) Movement of the permit load within one day before or one day after
the effective or expiration dates.
B. This list is not comprehensive, but reflects the most prevalent instances
of Violation of Permit. Under a violation of permit, the permittee must
§ 29-2731 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-2735
1:1179
§ 29-2736. [Ch. 29, Sec. 278] Procedure following arrest for
violation.
§ 29-2737. [Ch. 29, Sec. 279] Subsequent permits following a
violation.
The permit to continue a move following a violation will be withheld until:
§ 29-2738. through § 29-2740. (Reserved)
either bring the permit load into conformance with the conditions of the
permit or purchase a new permit before continuing. [Ord. No. 2004-5]
A. Following an arrest for violation of a permit, if the load can be shifted to
comply with the provisions of the permit, the driver or owner may make
the shift and then proceed. If the load cannot be shifted or otherwise
adjusted to comply with the permit, a new permit must be secured
following the same procedures as for an original permit.
B. Once a permit is violated for weights above tolerance limits, a revision
will not be issued even though weights can be adjusted to be within
tolerance limits.
C. The fact that a new permit may be issued to continue the move carries
no assumption of intent, error, mistake, or mitigating circumstances
concerning the limitations, conditions, or provisions contained in the
original permit that may affect its status subsequent to arrest.
D. In the event that a permit load is found moving either one day before
the effective date or one day after the expiration date of the permit, the
incident will be considered a violation of permit; however, the permit
remains valid. [625 ILCS 5/15-301(h)] Outside of these limitations (two
or more days before or after the effective date or expiration date), the
officer shall proceed with violations of 625 ILCS 5/15-111 as no valid
permit exists. [Ord. No. 2004-5]
A. The Public Works Department has received clearance from the Police
Department that the load may proceed.
B. All fees or fee adjustments have been paid or charged to the
appropriate account.
C. Following a conviction for a third offense within a one-year period, the
Public Works Department shall not issue permits to the person, firm, or
corporation for a period of one year after the date of the conviction for
such third offense. [625 ILCS 5/15-301(j)] [Ord. No. 2018-93]
§ 29-2735 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-2738
1:1180
DIVISION 5
Fees
§ 29-2741. [Ch. 29, Sec. 280] Remittance.
§ 29-2742. [Ch. 29, Sec. 281] Exemptions to the requirement of
payment of fees. [Ord. No. 2004-5]
The requirement for payment of fees shall not apply to vehicles owned and
operated by the United States, this State, or any political subdivision or
municipality of this State.
§ 29-2743. [Ch. 29, Sec. 282] Accounts. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
An applicant may establish an account with the Public Works Department in
lieu of paying for each permit before it is issued. Application forms may be
obtained from the City for establishing an account.
§ 29-2744. [Ch. 29, Sec. 283] Refunds.
A. Payment for permit fees may be in the form of a certified, cashier's,
traveler's, company or personal check or postal or telegraphic money
order made payable to the "City of Bloomington" Payments in currency
must be made in person. Permit fees must be paid in advance unless the
applicant has an approved account with the City of Bloomington or has
made other satisfactory arrangements for payment.
B. The City of Bloomington will charge a service fee of $25 for a check
returned for any reason. [Ord. No. 2004-5]
A. Refunds may be made under the following circumstances:
(1) The Public Works Department has received an amount in excess of
the required permit fee;
(2) The application for permit has not been approved by the Public
Works Department;
(3) The applicant has canceled the application before the permit has
been issued by the Public Works Department or before the effective
date of the permit;
(4) The Public Works Department has been notified, prior to the
expiration date of the permit, that unusual circumstances, which
render a proposed move impractical or impossible, have developed.
This must be substantiated, in writing, to the satisfaction of the
Public Works Department;
(5) The applicant has notified the Public Works Department of a valid
overcharge on a permit; or
(6) The customer has closed his escrow account. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
§ 29-2741 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-2745
1:1181
§ 29-2745. [Ch. 29, Sec. 284] Security requirements. [Ord. No.
2018-93]
If requested by the Public Works Department before a permit is issued, the
applicant will be required to secure an Irrevocable Letter of Credit or other
designated form of security in favor of the City of Bloomington in an amount
sufficient to cover any damages to the street system that may be caused by
the proposed movement. The security will be retained until the damages are
determined and repairs completed.
§ 29-2746. [Ch. 29, Sec. 285] Basis for fees. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
Permit fees will be based upon the overall dimensions and weights of the
vehicle or, combination of vehicles. Fees for Standard Loads and Loads
Exceeding Maximum Practical Weights are specified in the Schedule of
Fees.
§ 29-2747. [Ch. 29, Sec. 286] Extended term permits. [Ord. No.
2018-89]
All three-month Extended Term Permits will have a permit fee as set forth
in the Schedule of Fees.
§ 29-2748. [Ch. 29, Sec. 287] Supplemental permit fees. [Ord. No.
2018-93]
The Public Works Department shall collect a fee, as set forth in the Schedule
of Fees, for each supplemental permit. In addition, if the supplemental
permit provides for an increase in size, those additional fees will be
charged. However, no credit can be given for fees paid if dimensions or
weights are reduced.
§ 29-2749. [Ch. 29, Sec. 288] Fees for loads exceeding maximum
practical weights. [Ord. No. 2004-5]
Fees for Loads Exceeding Maximum Practical Weights are specified in Table
2.
§ 29-2750. [Ch. 29, Sec. 289] Fee for engineering inspections and
investigations.
A. For normal engineering inspection and investigations, additional fees
shall be charged as set forth on the Schedule of Fees.
B. For unusually large movements that may require extensive analyses,
inspections, and investigations by Public Works Department personnel,
a written agreement will be executed by the applicant and the Public
Works Department as to the extent of special charges. The rates will be
as set forth in the Schedule of Fees.
§ 29-2745 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-2750
1:1182
C. Fees for engineering services performed by personnel outside the
Department shall be paid directly by the applicant. [Ord. No.
2018-93]
SINGLE TRIP MOVEMENT
OVERWEIGHT LOAD FEES [Ord. No. 2004-110]
Table 1
Standard Loads
Category f g h i j k l m n o p
Total Axles 6 or
more
6 or
more
6 or
more
6 or
more
5 5 4 or
more
4 or
more
3 or
more
3 or
more
2
Gross
Weight
(Max)
88,000 100,000 110,000 120,000 88,000 100,000 72,000 76,000 60,000 68,000 48,000
Front
tandem or
axle
(max)/axles
34,000/
2
44,000/
2
44,000/
2
48,000/
2
44,000/
2
48,000/
2
34,000/
2
44,000/
2
21,000/
1
21,000/
1
25,000/
1
Rear
tandem or
axle
(max)/axles
48,000/
3
54,000/
3
54,000/
3
60,000/
3
44,000/
2
48,000/
2
40,000/
2
44,000/
2
40,000/
2
48,000/
2
Fee $20 $25 $30 $40 $30 $40 $25 $40 $22.50 $30 $25
Table 2
Loads Exceeding Maximum Practical Weights
Gross Weight Total Axles
No Axle
Exceeds Fee
120,001 -
129,999
7 or more 25,000 $150
130,000 -
139,999
7 or more 25,000 $160
140,000 or more 8 or more 25,000 $170
ROUND TRIP MOVEMENT
Fees for Round Trip Movements will be calculated at 1.5 times the
Single Trip Movement fees listed in Table 1 and Table 2.
§ 29-2750 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-2750
1:1183

ARTICLE XXVIII
Transportation Commission
§ 29-2801. [Ch. 29, Sec. 300] Purpose and creation. [Ord. No.
2017-49]
There is hereby established a Transportation Commission to assist, inform
and advise the administrative and elected officials of the City on matters
pertaining to the transportation of people and materials within the City.
The primary areas of focus of the Transportation Commission shall consist
of advising on policy level matters involving: (1) streets and highways,
including all streets, alleyways, roadways, on street parking, recreational
drives, bridges and grade separations located within the City; (2) pedestrian
ways, including sidewalks, grade separations, shopping areas, and
recreational pathways within the City; (3) bikeways, including on- and offstreet
routes for transportation and recreational uses within the City; (4)
multi-use trails, including off-street trails for non-motorized uses within the
City; and (5) materials and handling, including truck routes, truck terminals
and materials loading trucks and other facilities. In conducting its review,
the Commission shall also consider the historic nature and value of the area
being served.
§ 29-2802. [Ch. 29, Sec. 301] Membership and meetings.
A. The Commission shall consist of seven members, appointed by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of City Council. The appointments to
the Commission should represent as broadly as possible geographic
and/or social elements within the City, each with a demonstrated
interest, knowledge, or experience in traffic management or
transportation, including that four members must have a specific
demonstrated interest, background or experience in one of the
following: [Amended 6-24-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-49]
(1) Regional public transportation, such as transit or bus service;
(2) Accessibility and ADA compliance;
(3) Bicycle transportation; and
(4) Either living with a disability or serving the City's disabled
population.
B. The Commission shall establish an annual meeting schedule, which
shall include at least one meeting per month to be held at a regular time
and place. All meetings shall be open to the public and must comply
with the Illinois Open Meetings Act. All meetings shall provide
opportunity for public comment pursuant to local ordinances. Meeting
minutes shall be prepared and maintained in accordance with local and
state law.
§ 29-2801 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-2802
1:1185
§ 29-2803. [Ch. 29, Sec. 302] Preliminary transportation reviews.
C. A Chairman and Vice Chairman of the Commission shall be selected to
preside over meetings in accordance with the procedure set forth for
the City's boards and commissions.
D. Items shall be placed on the Commission agenda by appropriate City
staff including the Traffic Engineer, Public Works Director, City
Engineer, Community Development Director, the City Manager, or the
Mayor. City Council members may also request items be referred to the
Commission by utilizing the agenda request process, which shall
include formal approval and referral by the City Council. [Ord. No.
2018-106]
A. Any citizen requesting that an item, within the powers and duties of the
Transportation Commission, be reviewed or considered by the
Transportation Commission shall make a written request to the City
Traffic Engineer or his/her designee chosen by the City Traffic
Engineer, who shall determine whether to place any matter on a
meeting agenda of the Transportation Commission. The Transportation
Commission may, by majority vote, direct that an issue be placed on a
future agenda.
B. Where appropriate or necessary for the Transportation Commission to
consider an item or matter placed on its meeting agenda, the City
Traffic Engineer shall prepare a report which includes (i) sufficient
technical data and information for the Transportation Commission to
consider the respective item or matter; and (ii) a recommendation
concerning any proposed action to be taken by the Transportation
Commission which may include, but not necessarily be limited to,
making recommendations to the City Council.
C. All such reviews and recommendations shall be non-binding and made
in consideration with applicable law and safety standards and
consideration of the recommendation of the Traffic Engineer. After
consideration by the Transportation Commission, the transportation
matter shall be forwarded to other City Commissions as needed and
then to the City Council for final consideration, evaluation and
approval.
D. No item or matter being considered by the Transportation Commission
shall impede the City's ability to act independently to address
immediate matters of public safety.
E. Routine matters that do not involve setting policy, such as the
placement of a handicap parking sign, will be handled by staff. [Ord.
No. 2017-49]
§ 29-2802 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-2804
1:1186
§ 29-2804. [Ch. 29, Sec. 303] Powers and duties.
In addition to the reviews set forth in § 29-2803, the Transportation
Commission shall also have the general authority to:
A. Make recommendations to improve transportation conditions on policy
level matters, including but not limited to:
(1) The implementation plan of complete streets policies and practices;
(2) Parking management;
(3) Traffic circulation;
(4) Vehicle speed;
(5) Traffic calming practices;
(6) Crosswalk identification;
(7) Intersection configuration;
(8) Streetscape design;
(9) Directional signage; and
(10) The Manual of Practice for the Designed of Public Improvements;
B. Review and make recommendations regarding matters of
transportation on the following plans:
(1) Complete Streets Implementation Plan;
(2) Transportation Improvement Plan;
(3) Street Widening;
(4) Brick Streets;
(5) Downtown Master Plan;
(6) Bicycle Master Plan;
(7) Streets Master Plan; and
(8) Sidewalk Master Plan;
C. Receive concerns via the City Traffic Engineer having to do with
transportation matters and make recommendations on same;
D. Conduct public hearings on proposed policies and plans when
considered necessary by the Commission, the City Council, or as
required by City, State, or Federal law or regulation, except where a
hearing on the same subject is planned or required to be conducted by
another body and where the Board finds that said hearing will be an
unnecessary duplication; and
§ 29-2804 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-2804
1:1187
§ 29-2805. [Ch. 29, Sec. 304] Assistance and cooperation from City
officers.
E. To review, suggest and coordinate policies, programs, outreach and
strategies for pedestrian and bicycle facilities, including, but not
limited to, bicycle routes, multi-use trails, bicycle parking, the sidewalk
network, and safe routes to school. [Ord. No. 2017-49]
A. In the conduct of the work of the Transportation Commission, it is
anticipated that certain City employees will be required to advise and
otherwise support the activities of the Commission in carrying out the
obligations as provided herein. To that end, the City Manager shall
designate staff to provide technical support and recommendations to
the Commission. Based on the subject matter of the issue before the
Transportation Commission, the City Manager shall designate
representatives from the appropriate City department including, but
not limited to, Community Development, Economic Development,
Public Works, Police and Fire. In addition, the City's Traffic Engineer
shall serve as the staff liaison to the Commission and be responsible for
OMA compliance.
B. The Traffic Engineer and other City staff, as designated by the City
Manager, shall be entitled to attend and participate in all Commission
meetings. In addition, the Traffic Engineer and designated City staff
shall provide recommendations to the Commission on the matters
before it and shall be entitled to make recommendations separate and
apart from the Commission to the City Manager and City Council on
final action items.
C. The Traffic Engineer and City staff designated by the City Manager
shall assist and cooperate with the Transportation Commission and,
upon request of the Commission, shall furnish information and advice
on subject matters as the Commission may reasonably require in order
to fulfill its functions as set forth herein. The City shall provide clerical
services to the Commission where possible. [Ord. No. 2017-49]
§ 29-2804 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 29-2805
1:1188
Chapter 30
NURSING AND SHELTERED CARE HOMES, HOMES FOR
AGED, NURSERIES AND CONVALESCENT HOMES AND
ROOMING HOUSES
§ 29-2805 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-2805
1:1189

ARTICLE I
Homes For Ill, Aged, or Physically Infirm Persons
§ 30-101. [Ch. 30, Sec. 1] Short title.
This article may be cited as the "Nursing homes, sheltered care homes, and
homes for the aged" Article.
§ 30-102. [Ch. 30, Sec. 2] Definition of terms.
For the purpose of this article, unless the context otherwise requires:
APPLICANT — Any person making application for a license.
DEPARTMENT — The State Department of Public Health.
HOME FOR THE AGED — Any home operated not for profit under the
auspices of a religious, fraternal, charitable, or other nonprofit
organization, or operated not for profit under an endowment, which through
its ownership or management, and as its principal objective, provides
maintenance and personal care, nursing, or sheltered care to aged persons,
and in the conduct of which provides such service or services to not less
than three persons over 60 years of age who are not related to the applicant
or owner by blood or marriage. Such terms shall not include the following:
MAINTENANCE — Food, shelter, and laundry.
NURSING — Professional nursing or practical nursing, as these terms are
defined in Section 4 of "The Illinois Nursing Act," approved June 14, 1951,
as the same is now or may hereafter be amended, for sick or infirm persons
who are under the care and supervision of licensed medical practitioners.
NURSING HOME — A private home, institution, building, residence, or
other place, whether operated for profit or not, which provides through
its ownership or management, maintenance, personal care, or nursing for
three or more persons, not related to the applicant or owner by blood or
marriage, who by reason of illness or physical infirmity, are receiving such
care.
A home, institution, or other place operated by the Federal Government
or agency thereof, or by the State, political subdivision thereof, or a
municipal corporation therein.
A.
A hospital, sanatorium, or other institution whose principal activity or
business is the care and treatment of persons suffering from mental or
nervous diseases.
B.
A hospital, sanatorium, or other institution whose principal activity
is the diagnosis, care, and treatment of human illness through the
maintenance and operation of organized facilities thereof.
C.
Any child welfare agency, maternity hospital, or lying-in home required
to be licensed by the State.
D.
§ 30-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-102
1:1191
OWNER — In the case of a firm, partnership, or association licensee means
each member thereof.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, firm, corporation,
trust, or estate, or any other entity whatsoever.
PERSONAL CARE — Assistance with meals, dressing, transportation, and
movement and such other general oversight of the physical well-being of
the residents of the home, exclusive of nursing, as may be required by their
condition.
RESIDENT — Shall include both resident and patient.
RESTRAINT — The application of a mechanical device to a person to
limit movements for therapeutic or protective reasons. It shall include
anklets, wristlets, or restraining sheets for non-invalid persons. Drugs,
hydro-therapeutic measures, crib beds, side rails, and restraining sheets for
invalids shall not be considered to be restraints.
SECLUSION — The retention of a resident in an enclosed locked room.
SHELTERED CARE — Maintenance and personal care.
SHELTERED CARE HOME — A private boarding home, institution, building,
residence, or other place operated for profit which, through its ownership
or management, provides sheltered care to three or more adults who are
not related to the applicant or owner by blood or marriage.
§ 30-103. [Ch. 30, Sec. 3] License required.
No person shall open, conduct, manage, or maintain a nursing home,
sheltered care home, or home for the aged, or advertise as such, without a
license from the City.
§ 30-104. [Ch. 30, Sec. 4] Application to conduct and operate home
- form and contents.
Application to conduct and operate a nursing home, sheltered care home,
or home for the aged, shall be made to the City Manager on form blanks
furnished by the City Clerk. All applications shall be accompanied by a
license fee of $40. The application shall be under oath and shall contain:
A. The name and address of the applicant if an individual, and if a firm,
partnership or association, of every member thereof, and in the case of
a corporation, the name and address thereof and of its officers;
B. The location of the home for which a license is sought;
C. The name of the person or persons under whose management or
supervision the home will be conducted;
D. An applicant for a license to operate a nursing home or home for the
aged shall also present:
§ 30-102 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 30-104
1:1192
§ 30-105. [Ch. 30, Sec. 5] Minimum standards.
Every licensed nursing home, sheltered care home, or home for the aged
shall fully comply with the minimum standards and the rules and
regulations relating to the operation and conduct thereof adopted,
prescribed, promulgated, and published by the Department of Public Health
of the State of Illinois for such homes as to:
§ 30-106. [Ch. 30, Sec. 6] Adoption of standards and rules and
regulations of Department of Public Health.
(1) A valid current state license to operate a sheltered care or nursing
home or home for the aged, if the particular care or nursing home
or home for the aged comes within the definition of a care or
nursing home or home for the aged under the State Statute;
(2) A statement of the number, experience, and training of the
proposed supervisors and employees of the nursing home,
sheltered care home or home for the aged;
(3) A statement as to the number of persons for whom care is to be
provided;
(4) Each application shall be accompanied by a statement relative to
the financial status of the applicant. [Ord. No. 1981-22]
A. Location and construction of the home, including plumbing, heating,
lighting, ventilation, and other housing conditions which shall ensure
the health, safety, and comfort of residents and protection from fire
hazard;
B. Number and qualifications of all personnel, including management and
nursing personnel having responsibility for any part of the care given to
residents;
C. All sanitary conditions within the home and its surroundings, including
water supply, sewage disposal, food handling, and general hygiene,
which shall ensure the health and comfort of residents;
D. Diet related to the needs of each resident based on good nutritional
practice and on recommendations which may be made by the physician
attending the resident; and
E. Equipment essential to the health and welfare of the residents;
F. The rules and regulations relating to the operation and conduct of
nursing homes, sheltered care homes, and homes for the aged, and the
care, treatment, rehabilitation, recreation, and maintenance of the
residents thereof.
A. The minimum standards, together with the rules and regulations
relating to the operation and conduct of nursing homes adopted,
prescribed, promulgated, and published by the Department of Public
§ 30-104 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-106
1:1193
§ 30-107. [Ch. 30, Sec. 7] Additional requirements.
§ 30-108. [Ch. 30, Sec. 8] Investigations - term of license. [Ord. No.
2018-89]
Upon receipt of an application for a license hereunder, the City Manager
shall cause a thorough investigation to be made of the premises proposed
to be licensed, and of the application, and if satisfied that the minimum
standards prescribed are met, and if the applicant is otherwise qualified, he
shall issue a license for the remainder of the year and annually thereafter.
The full fee, in an amount set forth in the Schedule of Fees, shall be payable
Health by authority of the State of Illinois, October 15, 1956, as
amended April 12, 1957, and the whole thereof.
B. The minimum standards, together with the rules and regulations
relating to the operation and control of sheltered care homes adopted,
prescribed, promulgated, and published by the Department of Health
by authority of the State of Illinois, December 3, 1957, and the whole
thereof.
C. The minimum standards, together with the rules and regulations
relating to the operation and conduct of homes for the aged adopted,
prescribed, promulgated, and published by the Department of Public
Health by authority of the State of Illinois, June 15, 1958, and the whole
thereof.
D. Each of such minimum standards, together with the rules and
regulations, of which at least three copies have been and now are filed
in the office of the City Clerk, and of which of each said minimum
standards, together with the rules and regulations at least three copies
have been and now are filed in the office of the Health Department of
the City, and the same and each of them are hereby adopted and
incorporated in this article as fully as if set out at length therein shall,
unless otherwise provided in this article, be controlling within the limits
of the City of Bloomington.
A. Smokescreens. Hereinafter all buildings used for the purpose
mentioned in § 30-102 shall have smokescreens installed in compliance
with the recommendation of the Bureau of Fire Prevention.
B. Combustible materials. The use of attics or basements for the storage of
unnecessary combustible materials shall be prohibited.
C. Fire extinguishers. At least one fire extinguisher of type suitable for use
on Class "A" fires shall be provided in each story and in the basement
and in the kitchen so that not over 100 feet travel is required to reach
the nearest unit, unless upon inspection of premises by the Bureau of
Fire Prevention such inspection establishes the necessity that
additional extinguishers be installed to give proper and sufficient
coverage.
§ 30-106 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 30-108
1:1194
for a license even though said license be issued for only a fractional part
of a year. The City Manager may, either before or after the issuance of a
license, designate the Bureau of Fire Prevention or the Building Inspector
and Health Department to make investigations relating to the minimum
standards prescribed by the State Department of Public Health, and all
such agencies shall cooperate with and comply with requests of the City
Manager hereunder. The report and recommendations of any such agency
shall be in writing and shall state with particularity its findings with respect
to compliance or noncompliance with such minimum standards and whether
or not the proposed location violates any provision of the Zoning Code.
§ 30-109. [Ch. 30, Sec. 9] Denial of application.
An application for a license may be denied for any of the following reasons:
§ 30-110. [Ch. 30, Sec. 10] Compliance with chapter prerequisite to
granting of license; revocation; appeal.
Unless all of the requirements of this chapter shall have been complied
with, the City Manager shall refuse to grant the license required by this
article; and if any of the requirements of this chapter are not continued
to be complied with, the City Manager may forthwith revoke any license
issued hereunder without rebate of the license fee; provided, however, that
the City Manager's action in granting or refusing to grant or in revoking
or in refusing to revoke a license hereunder may be appealed by any
party aggrieved to the City Council, which after a hearing with notice, may
A. Failure to meet any of the minimum standards prescribed by the State
Department of Public Health as adopted herein.
B. Conviction of the applicant, or if the applicant is a firm, partnership, or
association, of any of its members, or if a corporation, of any of its
officers or directors or of the person designated to manage or supervise
the home, of a felony, or of two or more misdemeanors involving moral
turpitude, as shown by a certified copy of the record of the court of
conviction, or in the case of the conviction of a misdemeanor by a court
not of record, as shown by other evidence, or other satisfactory
evidence that the moral character of the applicant or manager or
supervisor of the home is not reputable.
C. Personnel insufficient in number or unqualified by training or
experience properly to care for the proposed number and type of
residents.
D. Insufficient financial or other resources to operate and conduct the
home in accordance with the requirements of an act of the General
Assembly of the State of Illinois, entitled "An Act in Relation to the
Licensing and Regulation of Homes for the Maintenance, Care, or
Nursing of Persons Who Are III, Aged, or Physically Infirm, being
Section 33.15 et seq. of Chapter 1171/2 of Illinois Revised Statutes
1959.
§ 30-108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-110
1:1195
reverse the City Managers action hereunder by a vote of at least three
members of the Council to do so.
§ 30-111. [Ch. 30, Sec. 11] Same - transferability, etc.; license to
state capacity.
No license issued under the provisions of this chapter for a sheltered care
home, nursing home, or home for the aged shall be transferable. All licenses
are issued to a specific person, partnership, or corporation and for a specific
location. The current license shall specify the maximum resident capacity.
The license shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the hall or near the
main entrance inside the home.
§ 30-112. [Ch. 30, Sec. 12] Return of license or renewal certificate
to the Department.
When the business or pursuit referred to in this chapter is sold, leased, or
discontinued or the license has been revoked or has expired, the annual
renewal certificate as well as the original license shall immediately become
void and shall be returned to the City Manager by registered mail.
§ 30-113. [Ch. 30, Sec. 13] Name.
No nursing home, sheltered care home or home for the aged licensed for the
first time after the effective date of this Code, shall use in its title the words
"rest," "hospital," "sanatorium," or "sanitarium." Such titles are reserved for
other types of facilities.
§ 30-114. [Ch. 30, Sec. 14] Advertising.
It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise a home as a nursing home,
sheltered care home, or home for the aged until after a license has been
secured.
§ 30-115. [Ch. 30, Sec. 15] Annual report.
An annual report of the nursing home, sheltered care home, or home for
the aged shall be submitted with the application for a renewal of license.
Blanks for the report shall be provided by the City Manager. This report
shall include:
A. Total admissions during the year;
B. Total discharges during the year;
C. Total deaths in the home during the year;
D. Bed capacity;
E. Average percentage of bed occupancy;
F. Highest daily census during the year;
§ 30-110 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 30-115
1:1196
§ 30-116. [Ch. 30, Sec. 16] Chronically ill children under 16 years of
age.
Nursing homes or sheltered care homes, buildings, or department for
chronically ill children under 16 years of age shall be used exclusively
for such children. Such children may not be cared for in buildings or
departments used for adults.
§ 30-117. [Ch. 30, Sec. 17] Safety devices, etc.
§ 30-118. [Ch. 30, Sec. 18] Expiration of license - renewal. [Ord. No.
1974-124]
A license shall expire at midnight of December 31st of each year unless
renewed. All applications for renewal shall be accompanied by a $25
renewal fee.
§ 30-119. [Ch. 30, Sec. 19] Revocation of license - denial of renewal
of license.
A license may be revoked, or a renewal thereof denied for any of the
following reasons:
G. Changes in structure or major equipment during the year;
H. Contemplated changes in structure or major equipment for the coming
year;
I. Number of state registered professional nurses employed;
J. Number of state licensed practical nurses;
K. Number of nursing aides and orderlies employed.
A. Every licensed nursing home, sheltered care home, or home for the
aged shall provide all necessary safety devices such as metal bedside
rails, safety gates at stairs, etc. All doors shall remain unlocked from
the outside of a resident's room when such resident is inside the room.
B. Interior vertical openings. Hereinafter any dwelling or other building
occupied and used as a nursing home, sheltered care home or home for
the aged shall have all interior vertical openings enclosed with fire
resistive type material and construction.
C. Heating. The heating of buildings occupied for the purposes regulated
by this article shall be restricted to steam, hot water, and hot air
systems employing central heating plants with installation such as to
safeguard the inherent fire hazard. The use of portable heaters of any
kind is hereby prohibited. Lighting shall be restricted to electricity.
Radiant type heating may be used upon approval of the Bureau of Fire
Prevention.
A. Cruelty or indifference to the welfare of a resident;
§ 30-115 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-119
1:1197
§ 30-120. [Ch. 30, Sec. 20] Denial, refusal to renew, revocation of
license - notice and hearing.
§ 30-121. [Ch. 30, Sec. 21] Home to be open for inspection.
B. Misappropriation of the property of a resident;
C. Conversion of the property of a resident;
D. Violation of any provision of this article or of the minimum standards,
rules, regulations, or orders of Department of Public Health of the State
of Illinois promulgated and published;
E. Any ground upon which an application for a license may be denied as
prescribed in § 30-109 of this article.
A. The City Manager may, upon his own motion, and shall upon the verified
complaint in writing of any person setting forth facts which if proven
would constitute grounds for the denial of an application for a license or
refusal to renew license or revocation of a license, investigate the
applicant or licensee. Before denying an application or refusing to
renew a license or revoking a license, the City Manager shall notify the
applicant in writing of a hearing to be held thereon. The notice shall
specify the date, time, and place of the hearing which shall be held not
less than 10 days after the notice is mailed or delivered. The notice shall
designate the charges or reasons for his contemplated action of denial,
refusal to renew, or revocation. The notice may be served by delivery of
the same personally to the applicant or licensee or by mailing the same
by registered mail to the address specified in the application or in the
case of a licensee to the address of the home designated in the license.
B. The City Manager shall permit the applicant or licensee to appear in
person to be represented by counsel at the hearing at which time the
applicant or licensee shall be afforded an opportunity to present all
relevant matter in support of his application for license or renewal of
license or in resisting the revocation thereof.
C. The City Manager shall not be bound by common law or statutory rules
of evidence or by technical or formal rules of procedure, but shall
conduct hearings in such manner as seems best calculated to result in
substantial justice.
A. Every home conducted by a licensee hereunder and any premises
proposed to be conducted by an applicant for a license shall be open at
all reasonable times to inspection by the City Manager and by any
agency designated by him as provided in § 30-108 of this article.
B. Every home conducted by a licensee hereunder shall be inspected by
the Health Department, Building Inspector, and Fire Inspector of the
City at least once during each one-year period for which a license is
granted to determine whether the home is complying with minimum
standards or with the rules and, regulations relating to the operation
§ 30-119 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 30-121
1:1198
§ 30-122. [Ch. 30, Sec. 22] Records and reports - inspection.
Every licensee shall keep such records and make reports as required in
§ 30-115 of this article and all such records shall be open to inspection by
the persons or agency mentioned in the above section.
and conduct thereof established by the State Department of Public
Health or with the rules and regulations of the Department of Public
Safety of the State of Illinois.
§ 30-121 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-122
1:1199

ARTICLE II
Nurseries and Convalescent Homes
§ 30-201. [Ch. 30, Sec. 23] Definitions.
CONVALESCENT HOME — Shall be deemed to mean a privately operated
establishment devoted to the care of persons during the recuperative stage
of an illness, or in which persons may be cared for during an illness. This
definition shall not be construed to imply or permit the practice of general
hospital functions such as major surgical operations or the rendering of
service beyond nursing care of the operation of nursing homes or sheltered
care home or homes for the aged as defined in "An Act in Relation to the
Licensing and Regulation of Homes for the Maintenance, Care, or Nursing
of Persons Who Are Ill, Aged, or Physically Infirm," approved July 1, 1953.
NURSERY or DAY-CARE CENTER — Shall be deemed to mean an
establishment where nine or more children 12 years of age and under
are kept during the day while parent or parents are at work or otherwise
engaged or when nine or more children 12 years of age and under are
lodged at a stipulated rate of pay. Such an establishment may be privately
operated and supported by fees charged from the service, or it may be an
establishment owned and operated by a public agency.[Ord. No. 1975-21]
§ 30-202. [Ch. 30, Sec. 24] Interior vertical openings.
Hereinafter any dwelling or other building occupied and used as a nursery
or convalescent home shall have all interior vertical openings enclosed with
fire resistive type material and construction.
§ 30-203. [Ch. 30, Sec. 25] Smokescreens.
Hereinafter all buildings used for the purpose mentioned in § 30-202 shall
have smokescreens installed in compliance with the recommendation of the
Bureau of Fire Prevention.
§ 30-204. [Ch. 30, Sec. 26] Heating.
The heating of buildings occupied for the purposes regulated by Division
II shall be restricted to steam, hot water, and hot air systems employing
central heating plants with installation such as to safeguard the inherent
fire hazard. The use of portable heaters of any kind is hereby prohibited.
Lighting shall be restricted to electricity. Radiant type heating may be used
upon approval of the Bureau of Fire Prevention.
§ 30-205. [Ch. 30, Sec. 27] Combustible materials.
The use of attics or basements for the storage of unnecessary combustible
materials shall be prohibited.
§ 30-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-206
1:1201
§ 30-206. [Ch. 30, Sec. 28] Fire extinguishers.
At least one fire extinguisher type suitable for use on Class "A" fires shall
be provided in each story and in the basement and kitchen so that not
over 100 feet of travel is required to reach the nearest unit, unless upon
inspection of premises by the Bureau of Fire Prevention such Bureau deems
it necessary that additional extinguishers be installed to give proper and
sufficient coverage.
§ 30-207. [Ch. 30, Sec. 28.5] Space standards for day-care centers.
All establishments operated as day-care centers shall provide the following
indoor and outdoor play space:
§ 30-208. [Ch. 30, Sec. 29] License required. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
No building shall be used for any of the purposes mentioned in this article
without first securing a license so to do. The annual license fee for all
licenses required by this article shall be as set forth in the Schedule of Fees
and the first of such annual charges shall be payable on or before January
1, 1960, and annually thereafter. The full fee shall be payable for a license
even though said license is issued for only a fractional part of a year.
§ 30-209. [Ch. 30, Sec. 30] Application to conduct and operate a
nursery or convalescent home.
Application to conduct and operate a nursery or convalescent home shall
be made to the City Manager on blanks furnished by the City Clerk. All
applications shall be accompanied by a license fee in an amount set forth in
the Schedule of Fees. The application shall contain:
A. A minimum of 25 square feet of indoor space per child under two years
of age.
B. A minimum of 35 square feet of indoor space per child under two years
of age or older.
C. At least 45 square feet of indoor space per handicapped child if
ambulatory or over two years of age.
D. Generally 75 square feet of outdoor activity area per child with play
space enclosed or otherwise protected from traffic and other hazards
(nearby parks or playgrounds may be utilized. Groups of children may
also be rotated for playtime activities). [Ord. No. 1975-21]
A. The name and address of the applicant, if an individual, and if a firm,
partnership, or association, of each member thereof; and in case of a
corporation the names and addresses of its officers;
B. The location of the nursery or home for which a license is sought;
§ 30-206 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 30-209
1:1202
§ 30-210. [Ch. 30, Sec. 31] Investigation.
Upon receipt of the application for a license hereunder, the City Manager
shall cause an investigation to be made of the premises to be licensed
and of the applicant, and if the applicant is otherwise qualified, he shall
issue a license. The City Manager may, before issuing a license, designate
the Bureau of Fire Prevention, the Building Inspector, and the Health
Department of the City to make an investigation and inspection of the
proposed nursery or convalescent home to ascertain if the premises comply
with the Building Code and that the premises are safe and habitable and
are provided with adequate facilities for heat, light, and ventilation, and
that the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code have been complied with
and that all fire hazards have been eliminated from the premises and
that the occupants of such building have adequate fire protection; and
that the rules and regulations of the Health Department of the City and
of the State Department of Public Health pertaining to sanitation and
to the preservation of the health of the occupants have been complied
with. The report and recommendations of the investigation agencies shall
be in writing and state its findings with relation to the compliance or
noncompliance with said Codes and rules and regulations and whether or
not the proposed location violates any provisions of the Zoning Code of the
City.
§ 30-211. [Ch. 30, Sec. 32] Inspection.
At least once a year after such license has been issued as herein provided,
or more often if deemed necessary, and before the renewal of any such
license to conduct, keep, or operate any such nursery or convalescent home,
shall be the duty of the Building Official, the Chief of the Fire Department,
and the Health Department to authorize the inspection of said premises and
determine that the provisions of the Code of the City and the terms and
conditions of this article are being complied with.
§ 30-212. [Ch. 30, Sec. 33] Penalty.
Any person, firm, or corporation who shall keep or operate a nursing home
or convalescent home without first having obtained a license therefor as
herein provided or any person or persons who shall violate, disregard,
neglect, or refuse to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall
upon conviction be subject to a fine not to exceed $100 for each day of
violation.
§ 30-213. [Ch. 30, Sec. 34] Ownership change.
No license as referred to in the above section will be transferred upon
change of ownership or management.
C. The name of the person or persons under whose management or
supervision the nursery or home will be conducted. [Ord. No.
2018-89]
§ 30-209 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-213
1:1203
Chapter 30.5
NUISANCES
§ 30.5-101. [Ch. 30.5, Sec. 1] Violation of chapter.
§ 30.5-102. [Ch. 30.5, Sec. 2] Definitions.
AGGRAVATED CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY — Property upon which
two or more of the behaviors listed below have occurred during any 365-day
period, as a result of any two separate factual events that have been
independently investigated by any law enforcement agency.
CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY — Property upon which three or more
of the behaviors listed below have occurred during any 180-day period, as
a result of any three separate factual events that have been independently
investigated by any law enforcement agency or Code Enforcement
Officer.[Ord. No. 2009-34]
A. Any certain property within the City of Bloomington which becomes a
Chronic Nuisance Property or an Aggravated Chronic Nuisance
Property is in violation of this chapter and is subject to its remedies.
[Ord. No. 1998-102]
B. Any owner who permits property under his or her ownership or control
to be a Chronic Nuisance Property or an Aggravated Chronic Nuisance
Property shall be in violation of this chapter and subject to its remedies.
[Ord. No. 1998-102]
A. First degree murder as defined in 720 ILCS 5/9-1;
B. Any kidnapping offense as defined in 720 ILCS 5/10-1 et seq.;
C. Criminal Housing Management as defined in 720 ILCS 5/12-5.1;
Possession of Explosives or Incendiary Devices as defined in 720 ILCS
5/20-2;
D.
Any offense involving Deadly Weapons as defined in 720 ILCS 5/24 et
seq.;
E.
F. Mob Action as defined in 720 ILCS 5/25-1;
Possession, Manufacture or Delivery of Controlled Substances as
defined in 720 ILCS 570/401 et seq.;
G.
Sexual Abuse or Related Offenses as defined in 720 ILCS 5/12-15 et
seq.;
H.
Possession, Cultivation, Manufacture or Delivery of Cannabis as defined
in 720 ILCS 550/1 et seq.; [Ord. No. 1998-102]
I.
A. First degree murder as defined in 720 ILCS 5/9-1;
§ 30-213 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 30.5-102
1:1204
CONTROL — The ability to regulate, restrain, dominate, counteract or
govern conduct that occurs on that property.[Ord. No. 1998-102]
OWNER — Any person, partnership, land trust, or corporation having any
legal or equitable interest in the property. Owner includes, but is not limited
to:
B. Any kidnapping offense as defined in 720 ILCS 5/10-1 et seq.;
C. Criminal Housing Management as defined in 720 ILCS 5/12-5.1;
Possession of Explosives or Incendiary Devices as defined in 720 ILCS
5/20-2;
D.
Any offense involving Deadly Weapons as defined in 720 ILCS 5/24 et
seq.;
E.
F. Mob Action as defined in 720 ILCS 5/25-1;
Possession, Manufacture or Delivery of Controlled Substances as
defined in 720 ILCS 570/401 et seq.;
G.
Sexual Abuse or Related Offenses as defined in 720 ILCS 5/12-15 et
seq.;
H.
Possession, Cultivation, Manufacture or Delivery of Cannabis as defined
in 720 ILCS 550/1 et seq.;
I.
J. Disorderly Conduct as defined in 720 ILCS 5/26-1;
K. Gambling as defined in 720 ILCS 5/28-1;
Assault or Battery or Any Related Offense as defined in 720 ILCS 5/12-1
et seq.;
L.
M. Public Indecency as defined in 720 ILCS 5/11-9;71
N. Prostitution as defined in 720 ILCS 5/11-14 et seq.;
Disorderly House as defined in Chapter 28, § 28-161, of the
Bloomington City Code. [Ord. No. 2009-34]
O.
Illegal Consumption or Possession of Alcohol as defined in 235 ILCS 5/
1-1 et seq. or Chapter 6 of the Bloomington City Code;
P.
Violation of Chapter 21 of the Bloomington City Code (Refuse) relating
to Refuse Preparation and Storage Violations. [Ord. No. 1998-102]
Q.
Violation of any part of Chapter 8, § 8-108, of the Bloomington City
Code. [Ord. No. 2003-09]
R.
A mortgagee in possession in whom is vested.
(1) All or part of the legal title to the property; or
A.
71.Editor's Note: See now 720 ILCS 5/11-30.
§ 30.5-102 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30.5-102
1:1205
PERMIT — To suffer, allow, consent to, acquiesce by failure to prevent, or
expressly assent or agree to the doing of an act.[Ord. No. 1998-102]
PERSON — Any natural person, association, partnership or corporation
capable of owning or using property in the City of Bloomington.
PROPERTY —
§ 30.5-103. [Ch. 30.5, Sec. 3] Remedies.
All or part of the beneficial ownership and the right to the present
use and enjoyment of the premises; or
(2)
B. An occupant who can control what occurs on the property; or
Any person acting as an agent of an owner as defined herein. [Ord. No.
1998-102]
C.
Any real property, including that which is affixed, incidental or
pertinent to land, including but not limited to any premises, room,
house, building, structure, apartment, condominium or any separate
part or portion thereof, whether permitted or not. [Ord. No. 2009-34]
A.
Any two or more buildings, premises or building complexes under
common ownership that are contiguous, or whose property lines are
within 250 feet of each other may be considered a single property.
[Ord. No. 2009-34]
B.
A. In the event a court determines property to be a Chronic Nuisance
Property or an Aggravated Chronic Nuisance Property, the court may
order that the property be closed and secured against all use and
occupancy for a period of not less than 30 days, but not more than 180
days, or the court may employ any other remedy deemed by it to be
appropriate to abate the nuisance. [Ord. No. 1998-102]
B. In addition to the remedy provided in Subsection A above, the court
may impose upon the owner of the property a civil penalty in the
amount of up to $100 per day, payable to the City of Bloomington, for
each day the owner had actual knowledge that the property was a
chronic nuisance property or an aggravated chronic nuisance property
and permitted the property to remain a chronic nuisance property or an
aggravated chronic nuisance property. [Ord. No. 1998-102]
C. In determining what remedy or remedies shall be employed, the court
may consider evidence of other conduct which has occurred on the
property, including, but not limited to:
(1) The actions or lack of action taken by the owner to mitigate or
correct the problem at the property;
(2) Whether the problem at the property was repeated or continuous;
(3) The magnitude or gravity of the problem;
§ 30.5-102 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 30.5-103
1:1206
(4) The cooperation of the person in charge with the City;
(5) The existence and frequency of violations of the Property
Maintenance Code (Chapter 45 of the Bloomington City Code);
(6) The cost of the City investigating and correcting or attempting to
correct the condition;
(7) The disturbance of neighbors;
(8) The recurrence of loud and obnoxious noises; and/or
(9) Repeated consumption of alcohol in public. [Ord. No. 1999-126]
D. The court may authorize the City of Bloomington to physically secure
the property against use or occupancy in the event the owner fails to do
so within the time specified by the court or to take other steps
necessary to abate a chronic public nuisance or an aggravated chronic
nuisance. [Ord. No. 1998-102]
E. In the event that the City is authorized to secure the property or
otherwise abate a chronic public nuisance or an aggravated chronic
nuisance, all costs reasonably incurred by the City to effect a closure or
abate the nuisance shall be assessed against the owner. The City of
Bloomington shall submit a statement of costs to the court for its
review. If no objection of the statement is made within the period
described by the court, or if the court, after objection is made,
determines that the statement of costs is accurate, the court shall
approve such costs. [Ord. No. 1998-102]
F. Any person who is assessed the cost of abatement and/or civil penalty
by the court shall be personally liable for the payment thereof to the
City. If payment is not made, the City may pursue all available collection
procedures, including but not limited to the filing of a lien on the
property found to be a chronic public nuisance or an aggravated
chronic nuisance, a civil collection action, or requesting a court to find
the owner in contempt of court for nonpayment of such costs. [Ord. No.
1998-102]
G. A tenant is entitled to his or her reasonable relocation costs from the
owner, as those are determined by the court if, without actual notice,
the tenant moved into the property, after the owner received notice as
described herein of the Police Chief's determination as described
above. [Ord. No. 1998-102]
H. The City, in addition to any other remedies set forth herein, may, at its
discretion, charge an owner of a chronic public nuisance or an
aggravated chronic public nuisance with a violation of this chapter
which shall be processed and prosecuted as an ordinance violation.
[Ord. No. 1998-102]
§ 30.5-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30.5-104
1:1207
§ 30.5-104. [Ch. 30.5, Sec. 4] Notification procedure.
When the Chief of Police of the City of Bloomington receives two or more
police reports documenting the occurrence of nuisance activity on or within
a property, the Chief of Police shall independently review such reports to
determine whether they describe acts set forth in the definition of "chronic
nuisance property" in § 30.5-102 of this chapter. Upon such findings, the
Chief may:
A. Notify the owner in writing that the property is in danger of becoming a
chronic nuisance property. The notice shall contain the following
information:
(1) The street address or a legal description sufficient for identification
of the property.
(2) A statement that the Chief of Police has information that the
property may be chronic nuisance property, with a concise
description of the nuisance activities that may exist, or that have
occurred. The Chief of Police shall offer the person in charge an
opportunity to propose a course of action that the Chief of Police
agrees will abate the nuisance activities giving rise to the violation.
(3) Demand that the owner respond to the Chief of Police within 10
days to discuss the nuisance activities. [Ord. No. 1998-102]
B. After complying with the notification procedures described herein when
the Chief of Police receives a police report documenting the occurrence
of a third nuisance activity at or within a property and determines that
the property has become a chronic nuisance property, the Chief of
Police shall:
(1) Notify the owner in writing that the property has been determined
to be a chronic nuisance property. The notice shall contain the
following information:
(a) The street address or legal description sufficient for
identification of the property.
(b) A statement that the Chief of Police has determined the
property to be chronic nuisance property with a concise
description of the nuisance activities leading to his/her
findings.
(c) Demand that the owner respond within 10 days to the Chief of
Police and propose a course of action that the Chief of Police
agrees will abate the nuisance activities giving rise to the
violation.
(d) Service shall be made either personally or by first class mail,
postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the
owner at the address of the property believed to be a chronic
nuisance property, or such other place which is likely to give
§ 30.5-104 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 30.5-104
1:1208
§ 30.5-105. [Ch. 30.5, Sec. 5] Commencement of action, burden of
proof.
the person in charge notice of the determination by the Chief
of Police.
(e) A copy of the notice shall be served on the owner at such
address as shown on the tax rolls of the county in which the
property is located, and/or the occupant, at the address of the
property, if these persons are different than the owner, and
shall be made either personally or by first class mail, postage
prepaid.
(f) A copy of the notice shall also be posted at the property after
10 days has elapsed from the service or mailing of the notice to
the owner and the owner has not contacted the Chief of Police.
(2) The failure of any person to receive notice that the property may be
a chronic nuisance property shall not invalidate or otherwise affect
the proceedings under this chapter. The notification procedures set
forth in this § 30.5-104 need not be followed in cases of aggravated
chronic public nuisances.
(3) After the notification, but prior to the commencement of legal
proceedings by the City pursuant to this chapter, an owner may
stipulate with the Chief of Police that the owner will pursue a
course of action the parties agree will abate the nuisance activities
giving rise to the violation. In addition to the abatement of the
conditions leading to a designation of the property as a chronic
nuisance or an aggravated chronic nuisance, the owner may also be
required to stipulate to the abatement of violations of the Property
Maintenance Code (Chapter 45 of the Bloomington City Code). If
the agreed course of action does not result in the abatement of the
nuisance activity or if no agreement concerning abatement is
reached within 30 days, the Chief of Police shall request
authorization for the Corporation Counsel to commence a legal
proceeding to abate the nuisance. [Ord. No. 2009-34]
(4) Concurrent with the notification procedures set forth herein, the
Chief of Police shall send copies of the notice, as well as, any other
documentation which supports legal proceedings to the
Corporation Counsel. [Ord. No. 1999-126]
A. The Corporation Counsel of the City of Bloomington may commence an
action to abate a chronic nuisance or an aggravated chronic nuisance
as described in § 30.5-102. [Ord. No. 1998-102]
B. In an action seeking abatement of a chronic nuisance property, the City
shall have the initial burden of showing by preponderance of the
evidence that the property is a chronic nuisance property or an
aggravated chronic nuisance property. [Ord. No. 1998-102]
§ 30.5-104 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30.5-105
1:1209
§ 30.5-106. [Ch. 30.5, Sec. 6] Emergency closing procedures.
§ 30.5-107. [Ch. 30.5, Sec. 7] Severability. [Ord. No. 1998-102]
If any provision of this Ordinance or its application, or any person or
circumstances held to be invalid for any reason, the remainder of said
application of its provisions to the other persons or circumstances shall not
be in any way affected.
Chapter 31
PARKS AND CEMETERIES
C. It is a defense to an action seeking the closure of chronic nuisance
property or an aggravated chronic nuisance property that the owner of
the property at the time in question could not, in the exercise of
reasonable care or diligence, determine that the property had become a
chronic nuisance property or an aggravated chronic nuisance property,
or could not, in spite of the exercise of reasonable care and diligence,
control the conduct leading to the findings that the property is a chronic
nuisance property or an aggravated chronic nuisance property. [Ord.
No. 1998-102]
A. In the event that it is determined that the property is an immediate
threat to the public safety and welfare, the City may apply to the court
for such interim relief, as is deemed by the Chief of Police to be
appropriate. In such an event, the notification provision set forth in
§ 30.5-105 above need not be complied with, however, the City shall
make a diligent effort to notify the person in charge prior to a court
hearing. [Ord. No. 1998-102]
B. In the event that the court finds the property constitutes a chronic
nuisance property or an aggravated chronic nuisance property, and
finds that the property is an immediate threat to the public safety and
welfare, the court may order the remedies set forth in § 30.5-103 of this
chapter. In addition, in the event that it also finds the person in charge
had knowledge of activities or conditions of the property constituting or
violating this chapter and permitted the activities to occur, the court
may assess a civil fine as provided above. [Ord. No. 1998-102]
§ 30.5-105 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 30.5-107
1:1210
ARTICLE I
Definitions and Scope and Construction
§ 31-101. [Ch. 31, Sec. 100] Definitions.
For the purposes of this Ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words,
and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not
inconsistent with the contest, words used in the present tense include the
future, words in the plural number include the singular number, words in
the singular number include the plural number. Any term in the masculine
shall include the feminine and neuter. No provision hereof shall make
unlawful any act necessarily performed by any officers or employee of the
park in the line of duty or work as such, or by any person, his agents
or employees, in the proper and necessary execution of the terms of any
agreement with the Council. This Ordinance is in addition to and
supplemental to all municipal, state, and federal laws and ordinances. The
meaning of any term not otherwise defined in this Ordinance shall be
construed and interpreted to mean the same as said term is otherwise
construed or interpreted in any other applicable municipal, state, and
federal law and ordinance.
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR — Shall be as defined in the Illinois Liquor Control
Act (111. Rev. Stat. ch. 43), as same is amended from time to time.72
CITY — The City of Bloomington.
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE — Shall be as defined in the Illinois Controlled
Substances Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. ch. 56 1/2), as same is amended from time to
time.73
DIRECTOR — The Director of the Parks, Recreation and Cultural Arts
Department of the City of Bloomington or his authorized representative. He
shall act on behalf of the City of Bloomington, enforce the laws, maintain
law enforcement, and maintain good order within the parks.[Ord. No.
2018-93]
GROUP — An assemblage of two or more persons.
PARK — A park, reservation, playground, beach, swimming pool, golf
course, recreation trail, recreation center or any other area in the City
owned or used, leased or controlled by the City and devoted to active or
passive recreation. It shall include public rights-of-way not part of the road
surface.
PERMIT AND RESERVATION — Includes any authorization issued by the
Director pursuant to the authority of the City for a specified park privilege,
activity or event or permitting the performance of a specified act or acts in
any park or any designated portion of a park.
72.Editor's Note: See 235 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.
73.Editor's Note: See 720 ILCS 570/100 et seq.
§ 31-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 31-101
1:1211
PERSON — Individual, company, partnership, corporation, incorporated
or unincorporated association, or any combination of individuals, or any
employee, agent or officer thereof.
RULES AND REGULATIONS — Includes any City ordinance, or regulation
or policy written or unwritten adopted by the Director as authorized by the
City Council.
VEHICLE — Any device, conveyance, or combination of conveyances,
wheeled or without wheels (but excepting motor boats) propelled, towed,
unpropelled or animal drawn, that in, around, or on which a person or thing
is or may be carried and shall include without limitation bicycles, scooters,
mini bikes, motorcycles, snowmobiles, any trailer in tow of any size, kind,
or description.[Ord. No. 1988-125]
§ 31-101 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 31-101
1:1212
ARTICLE II
Administration
§ 31-201. [Ch. 31, Sec. 200] Office of Director of Parks, Recreation
and Cultural Arts. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
There is hereby created the Office of Director of Parks, Recreation and
Cultural Arts who shall be appointed by the City Manager. The City
Manager shall serve as ex officio Director of Parks, Recreation and Cultural
Arts until this office is filled by appointment. The Director shall have control
and supervision over all officers and employees, including Park Security
Officers assigned to the Department, subject to the control of the City
Manager.
§ 31-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 31-201
1:1213

ARTICLE III
Park Property
§ 31-301. [Ch. 31, Sec. 301] Buildings and other property.
No person in a park shall:
§ 31-302. [Ch. 31, Sec. 302] Trees, shrubbery, lawns.
No person in a park shall:
A. Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, or displace or
remove, any building, bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces, railings,
paving or paving material, water lines or other public utilities or parts
or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards whether temporary
or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts, or other boundary markers,
or other structures or equipment, facilities or park property or
appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal;
B. Fail to cooperate in maintaining rest rooms and washrooms in a neat
and sanitary condition. No person over the age of four years shall use
the rest rooms and washrooms designated for the opposite sex;
C. Dig or remove any beach sand, whether submerged or not, or any soil,
rock, stones, trees, shrubs or plans, down-timber or other wood or
materials, or make any excavation by tool, equipment, blasting, or other
means or agency;
D. Possess or use metal detectors without written permission of the
Director;
E. Construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind, whether
permanent or temporary in character, or run or string any public
service utility into, upon, or across such lands, except on permit to do so
by the Director as provided for in this chapter. [Ord. No. 1980-23]
A. Damage, cut, carve, transplant, or remove any tree or plant, or injure
the bark, or pick the flowers or seeds of any tree or plant;
B. Attach any rope, wire, or other contrivance to any tree or plant;
C. Dig in or otherwise disturb grass areas, or in any other way injure or
impair the natural beauty or usefulness of any area;
D. Climb any tree or walk-stand or light pole, or climb or sit upon
monuments, vases, fountains, railing, fences, or gun carriages, or upon
any other property not designated or customarily used for such
purposes;
E. Tie or hitch a horse or other animal to any tree or plant.
§ 31-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 31-303
1:1215
§ 31-303. [Ch. 31, Sec. 303] Wild animals, birds, etc.
No person in a park shall:
A. Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease, shoot, or throw
missiles at any animal, reptile, fish or bird; nor shall be remove or have
in his possession the young of any wild animal, or the eggs or nest, or
young of any reptile or bird; nor shall be collect, remove, have in his
possession, give away, sell or offer to sell, or buy or offer to buy, or
accept as a gift, any specimen alive or dead of any of the group of
animals, reptiles, fish or birds being kept in said parks or belonging
thereto. This section does not prohibit fishing in such lakes and ponds
at such times as are designated by the Director;
B. Give or offer, attempt to give to any animal or bird any tobacco, alcohol,
rocks, wood, paper or other noxious substances or items which might
be harmful or injurious to them. [Ord. No. 1980-23]
§ 31-303 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 31-303
1:1216
ARTICLE IV
Sanitation
§ 31-401. [Ch. 31, Sec. 401] Pollution of waters. [Ord. No. 1980-23]
No person in a park shall throw, discharge, or otherwise place or cause to
be placed in the waters of any fountain, spring, drinking fountain or branch
thereof, pond, lake stream, bay or other body of water in or adjacent to any
park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer, or drain flowing into such water,
any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid such as stones, rubbish, or
refuse, etc. which will or may result in the pollution of said waters.
§ 31-402. [Ch. 31, Sec. 402] Refuse and/or trash.
A. No person in the park shall:
(1) Bring or cause to be brought in any bottles, broken glass, ashes,
paper boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, or refuse, or other
trash;
(2) Except as provided in this section, dump, deposit or leave any
bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish,
waste, garbage, or refuse, or other trash;
(3) Place or allow to be placed any refuse or trash in any waters in or
contiguous to any park or left anywhere on the grounds thereof.
B. All trash, garbage and refuse shall be placed in the proper receptacles
where these are provided; where receptacles are not so provided, all
such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the
person responsible for its presence, and property disposed of
elsewhere. [Ord. No. 1980-23]
§ 31-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 31-402
1:1217

ARTICLE V
Traffic Regulation
§ 31-501. [Ch. 31, Sec. 501] State motor vehicle laws apply. [Ord.
No. 1980-23]
No person in a park shall fail to comply with all applicable provisions of
the Illinois Vehicle Code and City Code to the same extent as if all park
roadways were public highways as defined in the Illinois Vehicle Code with
such regulations as are contained in this and other ordinances.
§ 31-502. [Ch. 31, Sec. 502] Enforcement of traffic regulations.
[Ord. No. 1980-23]
No person in a park shall fail to obey all police officers and park security
officers and park employees, such persons being hereby authorized and
instructed to direct traffic whenever and where ever needed in the parks
and on the highways, streets or roads immediately adjacent thereto in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter and such supplementary
regulations as may be issued subsequently by the Director.
§ 31-503. [Ch. 31, Sec. 503] Obey traffic signs. [Ord. No. 1980-23]
No person in a park shall fail to observe all traffic signs relating to speed,
direction, caution, stopping, or parking, and all others posted for proper
control and to safeguard life and property.
§ 31-504. [Ch. 31, Sec. 504] Speed of vehicles. [Ord. No. 1980-23]
No person in a park shall ride or drive a vehicle at a rate of exceeding 15
m.p.h., except upon such roads as the Director may designate by posted
signs for speedier travel.
§ 31-505. [Ch. 31, Sec. 505] Operation confined to roads. [Ord. No.
1980-23]
No person in a park shall drive any vehicle on any area except the paved
park roads or parking areas, or such other areas as may on occasion be
specifically designated as temporary traffic areas by the Director.
§ 31-506. [Ch. 31, Sec. 506] Parking in designated areas. [Ord. No.
1980-23]
No person in a park shall park a vehicle in other than an established or
designated parking area, and such use shall be in accordance with the
posted directions there, subject to instructions by any park staff who may
be present.
§ 31-501 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 31-507
1:1219
§ 31-507. [Ch. 31, Sec. 507] Night parking. [Ord. No. 1980-23]
No person in a park shall leave a vehicle standing or parked at night after
park closing hours.
§ 31-508. [Ch. 31, Sec. 508] Emergency procedure. [Ord. No.
1980-23]
No person in a park shall fail to immediately notify a park employee or
police officer of an emergency in the nature of a vehicular breakdown
requiring the assistance of a tow truck, mechanic or other person.
§ 31-509. [Ch. 31, Sec. 509] Bicycles.
§ 31-510. [Ch. 31, Sec. 510] No motorized equipment on
Constitution Trail. [Ord. No. 1988-125]
No person shall drive or ride upon any motor vehicle, motorcycle, motor
drawn cycle or motorized pedal cycle at any location on Constitution Trail.
A. Location. No person in a park shall ride a bicycle on other than a paved
roadway or path designated for that purpose. A bicyclist shall be
permitted to wheel or push a bicycle by hand over any grassy area or
wooded trail or on any paved area reserved for pedestrian use. [Ord.
No. 1980-23]
B. Operation. No person in a park shall ride a bicycle other than on the
right-hand side of the road paving as close as conditions permit, and
bicycles shall be kept in single file when two or more are operating as a
group, except for special events such as bike-a-thons or races. Bicyclists
shall at all times operate their bicycles with reasonable regard to the
safety of others, signal all turns, pass to the right of any vehicle they are
overtaking, pass to the right of any vehicles they may be meeting, and
comply with all provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code as if on a public
highway. [Ord. No. 1980-23]
C. Designated racks. No person in a park shall leave a bicycle in a place
other than a bicycle rack when such is provided and there is a space
available. [Ord. No. 1980-23]
D. Immobilized bicycles. No person in a park shall leave a bicycle lying on
the ground or paving, or set against trees, or in any place or position
where other persons may trip over or be injured by them. [Ord. No.
1980-23]
§ 31-507 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 31-510
1:1220
ARTICLE VI
Park Recreational Activities
§ 31-601. [Ch. 31, Sec. 601] Bathing and swimming.
§ 31-602. [Ch. 31, Sec. 602] Boating.
A. Designated areas. No person in a park shall:
(1) Swim, bathe, or wade in any pools, waters or waterways in or
adjacent to any park, except in such waters and at such times and
places as are provided therefor, and in compliance with this
chapter and regulations established by the Director;
(2) Frequent or use any waters or places customarily designated for
the purpose of swimming or bathing, or congregate there at when
such activity is prohibited by the Director upon a finding that such
use of the water would be dangerous and otherwise inadvisable.
[Ord. No. 1980-23]
B. Certain hours. No person in a park shall frequent any waters or places
designated for the purpose of swimming or bathing or congregate there
at, except between such hours of the day as shall be designated by the
Director for such purposes for each individual area. [Ord. No.
1980-23]
C. Costume. No person in a park shall dress or undress himself or herself
so as to indecently expose his person. [Ord. No. 1980-23]
D. Bathhouse. No person in a park shall dress or undress on any beach, or
in any vehicle, toilet, or other place except in such bathing houses or
structures as may be provided for that purpose. [Ord. No. 1980-23]
A. Designated areas. No person in a park shall bring into or operate any
boat, raft, or other water craft, whether motor powered or not, upon
any waters except at places designated for boating by the Director.
Such activity shall be in accordance with regulations as are now or may
hereafter be adopted by the Director. [Ord. No. 1980-23]
B. Operation of boats and craft. No person in a park shall navigate, direct,
or handle any boat or other water craft in such a manner as to
unjustifiably or unnecessarily annoy or frighten or endanger the
occupants of any other boat or beach area. [Ord. No. 1980-23]
C. Safety of users. Employees of the Parks, Recreation and Cultural Arts
Department may prohibit use of boats or water craft by any person
when, in their discretion, they determine that such person, by reason of
age or disability, cannot safely use. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
D. Prohibition during closing hours. No person in a park shall launch,
dock, or operate any boat of any kind on any waters between the closing
hour of the park at night and opening hour the following morning, nor
§ 31-601 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 31-602
1:1221
§ 31-603. [Ch. 31, Sec. 6] Fishing. [Ord. No. 1980-23]
No person in a park shall engage in commercial fishing or the buying or
selling of fish caught in any park waters.
§ 31-604. [Ch. 31, Sec. 604] Picnic areas and use.
§ 31-605. [Ch. 31, Sec. 605] Camping. [Ord. No. 1980-23]
Unless specifically authorized by the Director, no person shall set up tents,
shacks, or any other temporary shelter for the purpose of overnight
camping, nor shall any person leave in a park after closing hours any
movable structure or special vehicle to be used or that could be bused for
such purposes, such as house trailer, camp trailer, camp wagon, or the like.
No person shall camp within any park except in camping areas as may
from time to time be designated or permitted upon written approval of the
Director.
§ 31-606. [Ch. 31, Sec. 606] Games.
shall any person be on or remain on or in any boat during the said
closed hours of the park. [Ord. No. 1980-23]
A. Location. No person in a park shall picnic or lunch in a place other than
those designated for that purpose. Park staff shall have the authority to
regulate the activities in such areas when necessary to prevent
congestion and to secure the maximum use for the comfort and
convenience of all. [Ord. No. 1980-23]
B. Priority of use. No person shall:
(1) Violate the principle that except as provided in this chapter, use of
grills together with tables and benches follows generally the rule of
"first come, first served";
(2) Use of any portion of the picnic areas or of any of the buildings or
structures therein for the purpose of holding picnics to the
exclusion of other persons reasonably entitled to such use;
(3) Use such area and facilities for an unreasonable length of time if
the facilities are crowded. [Ord. No. 1980-23]
C. Clean up. No person shall leave a picnic area unless and until any fire in
the area is completely extinguished and unless and until all trash is
placed in the disposal receptacles where provided. If no such trash
receptacles are available, then refuse and trash shall be carried away
from the park area by the picnicker to be properly disposed of
elsewhere. [Ord. No. 1980-23]
A. No person in a park shall take part in the playing of any games involving
thrown or otherwise propelled objects such as balls, stones, arrows,
horseshoes or engine powered model and toy airplanes, boats, cars or
§ 31-602 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 31-606
1:1222
§ 31-607. [Ch. 31, Sec. 607] Horseback riding. [Ord. No. 1980-23]
No person in any park shall ride a horse or any other animal.
sirens, except in areas set apart for such forms of recreation or by the
express written permit of the Director. [Ord. No. 1980-23]
B. No person shall play any rough or comparatively dangerous games such
a football, baseball, golf or horseshoes, except on the fields and courts
or areas provided therefor. [Ord. No. 1980-23]
§ 31-606 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 31-607
1:1223

ARTICLE VII
Behavior in Parks
§ 31-701. [Ch. 31, Sec. 701] Alcoholic liquor or controlled
substance - prohibition.
§ 31-702. [Ch. 31, Sec. 702] Firearms, fireworks, weapons,
explosives, missiles, etc.
A. No person in a park shall drink, sell, possess, make a gift, or offer for
sale any alcoholic liquor or controlled substance within the park. [Ord.
No. 1980-23]
B. No person under the influence of alcoholic liquor or controlled
substances shall enter or remain within the park, nor shall any person
within the park use, administer, receive, offer for sale, possess, or make
available to himself or any person or animal any alcoholic liquor or
controlled substance. [Ord. No. 1980-23]
C. No person shall use or possess any article which from a distance of 50
feet or more is confusingly similar to a container of an alcoholic
beverage. [Ord. No. 1980-23]
D. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsections A, B and C, the sale,
possession and consumption of beer and wine only is permitted at
Prairie Vista Golf Course, the Den at Fox Creek Golf Course and
Highland Golf Course under the following conditions:
(1) Beer and wine shall only be offered for sale by the City of
Bloomington as allowed under a RBS or EB liquor license issued for
each of the premises. [Ord. No. 2013-95]
(2) Beer and wine may be provided by a person holding a Class W
catering license at an approved event.
(3) No beer and wine other than that procured from sources
enumerated in Subsection D(1) and (2) shall be allowed.
(4) All state and local liquor control laws must be obeyed.
(5) All rules and regulations for the golf courses must be obeyed. [Ord.
No. 2013-95; Ord. No. 2014-02]
E. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsections A, B and C, the
possession and consumption of beer and wine may be permitted at
Miller Park Pavilion and Davis Lodge, pursuant to a permit issued by
the City Clerk under Chapter 6, § 6-133D. [Added 9-9-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-71]
A. No person shall bring into a park, have in his possession in a park, or
explode, discharge or burn in a park any firearm, of any description, air
or gas gun, pellet gun, slingshot or missile throwing or propelling
device, corrosive or volatile material or fireworks of any kind. As used
§ 31-701 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 31-702
1:1225
§ 31-703. [Ch. 31, Sec. 703] Domestic animals.
§ 31-704. [Ch. 31, Sec. 704] Alms.
in this section, "fireworks" shall include firecrackers; torpedoes; Roman
Candles; sky rockets; bombs; smoke devices; sparklers; trick
noisemakers known as "party poppers," "booby traps," "snappers,"
"trick matches," cigarette loads" and "auto burglar alarms" without the
written permission of the Director.
B. This section shall not apply to park staff, attendants or enforcement
officers of the City of other authorized law enforcement officers while in
the line of duty. [Ord. No. 1984-59]
A. No person in a park shall permit any dog to run at large. When any
domestic animal is found running at large, it shall be rebuttable
presumed that the owner thereof has consented to such animal running
at large. [Ord. No. 1980-23]
B. All persons having a domestic animal with them shall restrain such
animals at all times on adequate leashes not greater than six feet in
length. [Ord. No. 1980-23]
C. It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having control or custody
of any dog to permit the animal to defecate upon park property of this
City unless such person immediately removes the feces and disposes of
it by depositing it in a trash container or removing it from the park.
[Ord. No. 1980-23]
D. For purposes of enforcing the provisions of this section, tickets may be
issued by police officers, park security officers, Parks, Recreation and
Cultural Arts employees, and by any person authorized to issue tickets
for parking or other violations. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
E. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a guide dog
accompanying any blind person. [Ord. No. 1980-23]
F. Any domestic animal found loose in any park shall be taken up and
impounded as provided in Bloomington City Code Chapter 8. [Ord. No.
1980-23]
A. No person in a park shall solicit alms or contributions for any purpose,
whether public or private, without registering with the Director. The
Director shall determine and record:
(1) The identity of each person soliciting contributions;
(2) The address and home and business telephone number of the
person intending to solicit contributions and if the solicitor resides
outside of Bloomington or Normal, the place, if any, where the
solicitor is staying in Bloomington or Normal;
§ 31-702 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 31-704
1:1226
§ 31-705. [Ch. 31, Sec. 705] Fires.
§ 31-706. [Ch. 31, Sec. 706] Closed areas. [Ord. No. 1980-23]
No person in a park shall enter or remain in an area posted as "Closed to
the Public," nor shall any person use, or abet the use of any area in violation
of posted notices.
§ 31-707. [Ch. 31, Sec. 707] Games of chance. [Ord. No. 1980-23]
No person in a park shall gamble or participate in or abet any game of
chance.
(3) The organization or group for which such person is soliciting
contributions;
(4) The purpose of the solicitation;
(5) The name, address and home and business telephone numbers of
the solicitor's supervisor, if any;
(6) An acknowledgment of receipt of relevant regulations concerning
solicitation from the Director. [Ord. No. 1980-23]
B. Permit. Upon receipt of the information enumerated above, the Director
shall permit solicitation of contributions by such person as provided in
this chapter and in regulations issued by the Director. [Ord. No.
1980-23]
C. Receipt of contributions. The Director shall designate an area in each
park (designated as such) where contributions solicited may be
received. No person shall receive or accept or agree to accept any funds
in any park except in such designated area. [Ord. No. 1980-23]
D. Harassment. No solicitor, after being denied a contribution or asked to
leave the presence of any person shall persist in his or her attempt at
solicitation. [Ord. No. 1980-23]
A. No person in a park shall build or attempt to build a fire except in grills
provided and in such areas and under such regulations as may be
designated by the Director. Persons bringing grills from outside the
park shall insure that all fires are completely extinguished and such
material as coals are cooled and disposed of properly so as not to
damage any park property or area or injure any person. [Ord. No.
1980-23]
B. No person shall drop, throw, or otherwise scatter lighted matches,
burning cigarettes or cigars, tobacco paper or other inflammable
material within any park area or on any highway, road, or street
abutting or contiguous thereto. [Ord. No. 1980-23]
§ 31-704 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 31-708
1:1227
§ 31-708. [Ch. 31, Sec. 708] Going onto ice. [Ord. No. 1980-23]
No person in a park shall go onto the ice on any of the waters except such
areas as are designated as skating areas, and when posted as safe.
§ 31-709. [Ch. 31, Sec. 709] Snow activities. [Ord. No. 1980-23]
No person shall sled, ride or ski within the park except in areas designated
for such purposes.
§ 31-710. [Ch. 31, Sec. 710] Loitering and boisterousness.
§ 31-711. [Ch. 31, Sec. 711] Exhibit permits. [Ord. No. 1980-23]
No person in a park shall fail to produce and exhibit any permit from the
Director he claims to have, upon request of any authorized person who shall
decide to inspect the same for the purpose of enforcing compliance with any
ordinance or rule.
§ 31-712. [Ch. 31, Sec. 712] Obedience to Park Security Officer.
[Ord. No. 1990-15]
It shall be unlawful for any person in a park to refuse to obey any lawful
order of a Park Security Officer.
A. No person in a park shall sleep or lounge on seats or benches, or
engage in loud boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting, or indecent
language, or engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior tending to a
breach of the public peace. [Ord. No. 1980-23]
B. No person shall disturb any picnic or other park activity or intrude
himself or herself upon it without the consent of those participating in
it. [Ord. No. 1980-23]
§ 31-708 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 31-712
1:1228
ARTICLE VIII
Merchandising, Advertising and Signs
§ 31-801. [Ch. 31, Sec. 801] Vending and peddling. [Ord. No.
1980-23]
No person in a park shall expose or offer for sale any article or thing, nor
shall he station or place any stand, cart, or vehicle for the transportation,
sale, or display of any such article or thing, except for any regularly licensed
concessionaire acting by and under the authority and regulation of the
Director.
§ 31-802. [Ch. 31, Sec. 802] Advertising. [Ord. No. 1980-23]
No person in a park shall announce, advertise, distribute any circular or
handbill, or call the public attention in any way to any article or service for
sale or hire.
§ 31-803. [Ch. 31, Sec. 803] Signs. [Ord. No. 1980-23]
No person in a park shall paste, glue, tack, affix, inscribe, paint, or
otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement, or inscription whatever,
nor shall any person erect or cause to be erected any sign whatever on any
structure or property in or an any such park, park areas, highways or roads
adjacent to a park.
§ 31-804. [Ch. 31, Sec. 804] Decorations and displays. [Ord. No.
1980-23]
The Director may erect on City park property topically appropriate
decorations and displays designed to commemorate national or state
holidays where in his opinion such decorations will not obstruct the
functioning of the parks, constitute a visual obstruction of traffic, or distract
motorists. The Director may permit private persons to erect such
decorations and displays upon request to do so if an when he finds the
criteria of this section are met. No person shall erect decorations or displays
on park property without the permission of the Director.
§ 31-801 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 31-804
1:1229

ARTICLE IX
Park Operating Policy
§ 31-901. [Ch. 31, Sec. 901] Hours of parks - penalty.
A. As used in this section, the term "public parks" shall include Airport
Park, Bloomington High School Tennis Courts, Buck-Mann Park,
Evergreen Park, Ewing Parks I, II and III, Fell Avenue Park, Forest Park,
Franklin Park, Withers Park, Highland Park, Holiday Park, Miller Park,
Oakland School Park, O'Neil Park, Rollingbrook Park, Stevenson School
Park, Suburban East Park, Sunnyside Park, Constitution Trail,
Northpoint Park, Buckeye Park, Angler's Lake Nature Preserve,
Clearwater Park, Eagle Crest Park, Tipton Park, McGraw Park, Bittner
Park, Atwood Wayside, Lincoln Park, Dawes Place, Friendship Park,
Alton Depot, the Den at Fox Creek Golf Course, Lincoln Leisure Center,
P.J. Ervin Park, Pepper Ridge Park, Prairie Vista Golf Course, Sale Barn
Soccer Fields, Cedar Ridge Park, Emerson Park, Lincoln Oak Memorial
Park, Marie Litta Park, R.T. Dunn Fields, Brookridge Park, Gaelic Park,
Eagle View Park, The Grove Park and Hershey Road Community
Gardens. [Ord. No. 2013-47]
B. Constitution Trail shall be closed between one hour after sunset and
one hour before sunrise. Friendship Park shall be closed between the
hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. All other public parks in the City of
Bloomington shall be closed between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m. Except as provided in Subsection C, no person shall enter or
remain upon the premises of a public park in the City of Bloomington
during hours said park is closed. [Ord. No. 2013-47]
C. This section shall not apply to:
(1) Employees or agents of the City of Bloomington or any peace
officer when acting in the course of their duties; or
(2) Participants in or service workers connected with activities and
events conducted or sponsored by the City of Bloomington Parks,
Recreation and Cultural Arts Department or for which the
Department has issued a permit for use of the Miller Park Pavilion,
or persons taking participants to or from the parks but only for
such time as is necessary for such activities; or [Ord. No.
2018-93]
(3) The holder of any franchise of the City of Bloomington for sale of
food in such parks and his employees when acting in the course of
their duties; or
(4) Participants in activities conducted in facilities owned by the
Centrillio Council of the Girl Scouts of America. [Ord. No.
1980-23]
§ 31-901 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 31-902
1:1231
§ 31-902. [Ch. 31, Sec. 902] Closed areas. [Ord. No. 1980-23]
Any section or part of any park may be declared closed to the public by the
Director at any time and for any interval of time, either entirely or merely
to certain uses as the Director shall find reasonably necessary.
§ 31-903. [Ch. 31, Sec. 903] Vehicle type. [Ord. No. 1980-23]
No person shall drive any trailer trucks, farm vehicle, or delivery truck
except when servicing a park building or structure, or as needed for any
approved activity in a park.
§ 31-904. [Ch. 31, Sec. 904] Lost and found articles. [Ord. No.
1980-23]
The finding of lost articles by park employees shall be reported to the
Director who shall make every reasonable effort to locate the owner. The
Director shall make every reasonable effort to find any articles reported as
lost.
§ 31-905. [Ch. 31, Sec. 905] Permit. [Ord. No. 1980-23]
A permit shall be obtained from the Director or his designee before
participating in the following park activity: special events or organized
activities requiring use of a park building or structure, such as family
reunions, not to include private picnics utilizing not more than four picnic
tables.
§ 31-906. [Ch. 31, Sec. 906] Application.
A person seeking issuance of a permit hereunder shall file an application
with the Director. The application shall state:
§ 31-907. [Ch. 31, Sec. 907] Standards for issuance.
The Director shall issue a permit hereunder when he finds:
A. The name and address of the applicant;
B. The name and address of the person, persons, corporation, or
association sponsoring the activity, if any;
C. The day and hours for which the permit is desired; the park or portion
thereof for which such permit is desired;
D. An estimate of the anticipated attendance;
E. Any other information which the Director shall find reasonably
necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should be
issued hereunder. [Ord. No. 1980-23]
§ 31-902 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 31-907
1:1232
§ 31-908. [Ch. 31, Sec. 908] Appeal. [Ord. No. 1980-23]
Within 10 working days after receipt of an application, the Director shall
apprise an applicant in writing of his reasons for refusing a permit, and
any aggrieved person shall have the right to appeal in writing within five
working days to the City Manager, who shall consider the application under
the standards set forth in § 31-907 hereof and sustain or overrule the
Director's decision within five working days. The decision of the City
Manager shall be final.
§ 31-909. [Ch. 31, Sec. 909] Effect of permit. [Ord. No. 1980-23]
A permittee shall be bound by all park rules and regulations and all
applicable ordinances fully as though the same were inserted in said
permits.
§ 31-910. [Ch. 31, Sec. 910] Liability of permittee. [Ord. No.
1980-23]
The person or persons to whom a permit is issued shall be liable for any
loss, damage or injury sustained by any person whatever by reason of the
negligence of the person or persons to whom such permit shall have been
issued. A certificate of insurance or bond may be required for special group
activities as a condition of issuance of a permit. The amount of insurance
or bond required shall be at the discretion of the Director in light of the
anticipated attendance, length of time of use, facility to be used, and past
performance of the applicant or group seeking to obtain the permit, as a
permittee.
A. That the proposed activity or use of the park will not unreasonably
interfere with or detract from the general public enjoyment of the park;
and
B. That the proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere with
or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety and
recreation; and
C. That the proposed activity or use is not reasonably anticipated to incite
violence, crime, or disorderly conduct; and
D. That the proposed activity will not entail unusual extraordinary or
burdensome clean up or expense of police operation by the City; and
E. That the facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at the
day and hour required in the application; and
F. The applicant or group seeking to obtain the permit has complied with
this chapter in its park use of park facilities. [Ord. No. 1980-23]
§ 31-907 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 31-911
1:1233
§ 31-911. [Ch. 31, Sec. 911] Revocation. [Ord. No. 1980-23]
The Director shall have the authority to revoke a permit upon a finding of
violation of any rule or ordinance, or upon good cause shown, and evict from
park premises all persons on the premises in connection with the revoked
permit.
§ 31-911 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 31-911
1:1234
ARTICLE X
Enforcement
§ 31-1001. [Ch. 31, Sec. 1001] Officials.
§ 31-1002. [Ch. 31, Sec. 1002] Ejectment. [Ord. No. 1980-23]
The Director, any police officer, park security officer or park employee shall
have the authority to eject from the park or part thereof any person acting
in violation of this chapter. Any person so ejected shall not enter the park or
part thereof from which he or she was ejected for a period of 24 hours.
§ 31-1003. [Ch. 31, Sec. 1003] Seizure of property. [Ord. No.
1980-23]
The Director, any police officer, park security officer or park employee shall
have the authority to seize and confiscate any property, thing or device in
the park possessed or used, in violation of this chapter.
A. The Director, police officer, park security officer and Parks, Recreation
and Cultural Arts Department employees shall, in connection with their
duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this
Ordinance. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
B. Persons holding the position of park security officer and who have
completed the training required by the Illinois Police Training Act (50
ILCS 705/1 et seq.) and the Peace Officer Firearm Training Act (50 ILCS
710/1 et seq.) have the authority of a law enforcement officer, including
the power to make arrests and the right to carry a firearm in connection
with his/her official duties. The park security officer shall report to the
Director of Parks, Recreation and Cultural Arts or his/her designate.
[Ord. No. 2018-93]
§ 31-1001 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 31-1003
1:1235

ARTICLE XI
Penalties; Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 31-1101. [Ch. 31, Sec. 1101] Penalties.
§ 31-1102. [Ch. 31, Sec. 1111] Repeal of conflicting ordinances.
[Ord. No. 1988-23]
All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances in conflict or inconsistent with any of
the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed.
§ 31-1103. [Ch. 31, Sec. 1112] Severability. [Ord. No. 1980-23]
Provisions of this chapter shall be determined to be severable and the
validity of any part thereof shall not affect the validity of the remaining part
of this chapter.
A. Any person who shall violate § 31-510 of this chapter shall upon
conviction be fined not less than $250 for a first offense and not less
than $500 for a subsequent offense.
B. Any person who shall violate any other provisions or rules of this article
shall upon conviction be fined not less than $25 nor more than $100 for
a first offense; and not less than $50 nor more than $500 for a second
violation of any provision of this chapter. [Ord. No. 1988-125]
§ 31-1101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 31-1103
1:1237

ARTICLE XII
City Cemetery
§ 31-1201. [Ch. 31, Sec. 1201] City cemetery.
The tracts or lots of land purchased by the City of Joseph Ramsey and wife,
Benjamin DePew and wife, and Adeline Kimler, and particularly described
in the deeds from them to said City, recorded in the Recorder's Office of
McLean County, in Deed Book P., on page 308 and page 504, together with
the grounds used as a cemetery previous to said purchases, and such land
as since has been purchased for cemetery purposes and such land as in the
future may be purchased are hereby set apart and dedicated for cemetery
purposes and uses to be kept and controlled by the corporate authorities
of said City; and said premises shall be known and designated as the City
Cemetery and shall be under the supervision and control of the Department
of Parks.
§ 31-1202. [Ch. 31, Sec. 1202] Plat recorded.
Said tracts of land, any other that hereafter may be purchased for cemetery
purposes, or as an addition to said grounds, shall, as the Council may
determine, be laid off into lots of appropriate size; and survey and plats
of said lots shall be made under the direction of the City Manager, which
surveys and plats shall designate the lots by numbers and be filed and
recorded in the Recorder's Office of McLean County, which lots shall be sold
at such prices as the Council may from time to time direct: Provided, that
no part of said lands shall be sold or used for any other than burial purposes
and the same shall be taken subject to such regulations as the City may from
time to time establish touching the management of said cemetery.
§ 31-1203. [Ch. 31, Sec. 1203] Ground set apart from paupers -
digging grave on another's lot - penalty.
A portion of said grounds shall be laid off and designated as "commons," for
the burial of strangers and the friends of persons unable to purchase lots;
and whoever shall dig or cause to be dug any grave in said City cemetery
or other cemetery within said City upon any lot not the property of such
persons, unless the same be upon the stranger's grounds or "commons," or
be done by written consent of the owner of such lot, shall be fined not less
than $25 nor more than $50.
§ 31-1204. [Ch. 31, Sec. 1204] Lots shall be purchased from
Director of Finance - deeds - how executed.
A. Any person desiring to purchase any lot shall pay the price thereof to
the Director of Finance, who shall thereupon give the purchaser a
receipt for the amount paid, in which receipt shall be stated the number
of the lot proposed to be purchased, and on presentation of such receipt
to the City Clerk, it shall be the duty of said Clerk to prepare a deed for
such lot, which shall be signed by the Mayor of said City and
§ 31-1201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 31-1204
1:1239
§ 31-1205. [Ch. 31, Sec. 1205] Director of Finance to keep
accounts.
The Director of Finance shall keep a cemetery account in which all moneys
received on account of the City cemetery shall be entered.
§ 31-1206. [Ch. 31, Sec. 1206] Same - records to be kept by
Director of Finance.
The Director of Finance shall keep an accurate plat of the cemetery grounds
and also a record in numerical order of the blocks or squares in each
division, with separate columns ruled therein for the entry of the name of
the purchaser, the amount sold for and the date of sale. When any block or
square or part thereof shall be sold, the Director of Finance shall make an
entry of the name of the purchaser, the amount sold for and the date of sale
opposite the number of the block or square on the record.
§ 31-1207. [Ch. 31, Sec. 1207] Regulations regarding tombstones
and adornments.
The City Manager of the City may prescribe and regulate the manner of
enclosing, improving, or adorning the private blocks, squares, lots, and
graves in the City Cemetery, and the erection thereon of monuments,
countersigned by said Clerk, and shall be executed under the seal of
the City of Bloomington.
B. All deeds to cemetery lots may be in the following form:
"The City of Bloomington, in consideration of ____________________
Dollars to the said City paid by ____________________, doth hereby, in
conformity with the Code of the City in such case made and provided,
give, grant, bargain, sell, and convey to him, the said __________ lot
numbered __________ in the plat of the cemetery, as laid out and
recorded in the Office of the City Clerk, and in the Office of the
Recorder of the County of McLean. To have and to hold the same,
with its appurtenances, unto the said __________, his heirs and assigns
forever, for the purpose of burying therein his or their dead, and for no
other use, intent, or purpose whatever; subject, nevertheless, to such
general rules and regulations as the City Council of said City may from
time to time hereafter establish.
And the said City of Bloomington hereby covenants with the said
____________________, his heirs, and assigns, that the premises
designated as the cemetery aforesaid shall forever be kept and
preserved as a place for the burial of the dead of said City.
In witness whereof the Mayor of said City has hereunto set his
signature and caused the seal of the City of Bloomington to be affixed
this _____ day of __________ A.D. _____.
Countersigned:
____________________
____________________ Mayor"
§ 31-1204 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 31-1207
1:1240
tombstones, or other fixtures, and shall prevent and prohibit any division,
improvement, adornment, or other use of any block, lot, square, or other
part of said cemetery or the erection or placing of any tombstone,
monument, or other fixture therein, which he deems unsightly or improper;
and he may direct and cause the removal of all such unsightly dilapidated
stones and improper improvements, adornments, enclosures, monuments,
tombstones, or other fixtures.
§ 31-1208. [Ch. 31, Sec. 1208] Loitering in cemetery at night
forbidden.
Whoever shall go or remain upon the grounds of the City Cemetery, or any
other cemetery within said City after sunset in the evening or before sunrise
in the morning without permission of the sexton, or other person in charge
of such cemetery, shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $100.
§ 31-1209. [Ch. 31, Sec. 1209] Injury or defacing of property.
Whoever shall damage, destroy, or deface any monument, marker, or
headstone in said City Cemetery or shall remove same without permission
of the sexton shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $200.
§ 31-1210. [Ch. 31, Sec. 1210] Injuring property, plucking flowers,
maltreatment of graves, violation of rules and regulations, etc.
Any person who shall remove or carry away, or willfully, maliciously, or
negligently break, deface, destroy, or otherwise injure any property or
article placed or erected in the cemetery known as City Cemetery or
belonging to or placed in any cemetery or burying grounds within the City,
or within the jurisdiction of the Council, or whoever shall pluck flowers
thereon or trespass or maltreat any grave or violate any established rules
and regulations for the government of the cemetery shall be punished as
provided in § 1-106 of this Code.
§ 31-1211. [Ch. 31, Sec. 1211] Permit required for burial or
removal.
A. No burial, interment, or cremation shall be lawful in any cemetery
controlled by the City, nor shall any dead body be removed from any
cemetery controlled by the City until a permit for such burial,
interment, cremation, or removal shall have first been obtained from
the Department of Health.
B. For State law as to robbing graves, see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1959, ch. 38, Par.
354. As to injuring monuments, tombs, and other cemetery property,
see 111. Rev. Stat. 1959, ch. 38, Par. 355.
C. For State law as to burial permits, see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1959, ch. 111 1/2,
Par. 40.
§ 31-1207 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 31-1212
1:1241
§ 31-1212. [Ch. 31, Sec. 1212] Shooting in cemetery forbidden -
penalty.
Whoever within the City Cemetery or in any other cemetery or burying
ground within said City shall discharge any firearm or be found hunting or
trespassing or shall trespass upon any grave within said City or shall refuse
to obey any lawful order of the City Sexton or of any person having charge
of any cemetery or burying ground shall be fined not less than $10 nor more
than $100.
§ 31-1213. [Ch. 31, Sec. 1213] Cemetery not to be located in
corporate limits.
No cemetery or burying ground shall hereafter be established within the
corporate limits of the City, nor shall any cemetery or burying grounds
heretofore established within said City be extended or enlarged or used for
burial purposes, except by consent of the Council, under a penalty of not
less than $100 for each violation of this section and a like penalty for each
day such violation shall continue.
§ 31-1212 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 31-1213
1:1242
ARTICLE XIII
City Sexton
§ 31-1301. [Ch. 31, Sec. 1301] City Sexton - office created -
appointment - term.
There hereby is created the office of City Sexton who shall be appointed
by the City Manager. The Director of Parks shall serve as sexton until this
office is filled by appointment. He shall receive such compensation as may
be provided by ordinance.
§ 31-1302. [Ch. 31, Sec. 1302] Assignment - general duties.
He shall be under the supervision and control of the Department of Parks
and shall perform such duties as are imposed upon him by law or ordinance,
and in addition thereto such other duties as from time to time he may be
directed to perform by the Department of Parks.
§ 31-1303. [Ch. 31, Sec. 1303] Bond - oath.
Before entering upon the duties of his office, he shall take the oath
prescribed for all City officers and shall execute and deliver a bond payable
to the City in the penal sum of $1000, with sureties to be approved by the
Director of Finance, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties
of his office.
§ 31-1304. [Ch. 31, Sec. 1304] Record of lots.
The City Sexton shall keep a record in which shall be recorded the number
of every lot heretofore or hereafter surveyed in the cemetery, beginning
with number one, with columns ruled therein for the name of the purchaser,
price sold for, and date of sale.
§ 31-1305. [Ch. 31, Sec. 1305] Duties.
A. The City Sexton shall take charge of the City Cemetery and shall keep
the grounds, walks, and avenues of the same in good order and
condition and free from obstructions and shall be at readiness at all
reasonable times to perform all the duties required of him.
B. He shall enforce all Ordinances and regulations respecting said
cemetery, report violations of the same to the proper officers for
prosecution, and may arrest any person found hunting, discharging
firearms, or doing any unlawful act therein.
C. He shall prevent the burial of any body in any unsold lot or the lot of any
private individual without his consent; and he shall superintend all
burials in the commons and specify their manner and place and by night
keep the gates of said cemetery closed and locked, and he shall see that
all soldiers' graves in said cemetery are property kept and cared for. He
shall, under the direction of the Department of Parks, cause all bodies
§ 31-1301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 31-1305
1:1243
§ 31-1306. [Ch. 31, Sec. 1306] Digging graves, etc.; depth of graves.
The City Sexton shall dig, or cause to be dug, all graves, attend to the
interment of all dead bodies and fill up, trim, keep, and preserve the graves
in good order. Each grave for a full grown body shall not be less than 5 1/2
feet in depth and for any other body not less than five feet.
§ 31-1307. [Ch. 31, Sec. 1307] Keep records - report.
It shall be the duty of the City Sexton to keep books of record to be
furnished by the City, in which shall be recorded the name, age, sex,
nationality, and date of death of every person interred in the cemetery or
grounds for which such record is kept and also the number of the lot where
the person is buried, and at the end of each fiscal year to make a report to
the City Manager embracing all of the above particulars and covering the
year for which such report is made.
§ 31-1308. [Ch. 31, Sec. 1308] Shall keep buildings, etc., in repair -
police power.
He shall, under the direction of the Park Superintendent, keep in good
repair the fences or enclosures around said cemetery and all vaults and
buildings therein belonging to the City. He shall have all the powers of
Police Patrolman.
§ 31-1309. [Ch. 31, Sec. 1309] Monthly report.
On or before the first day of each month he shall make out and furnish to
the City Manager A statement in writing showing the number of interments
made in said cemetery the preceding month, with the name, sex, color, date
of burial, and location of burial of each person so interred.
§ 31-1310. [Ch. 31, Sec. 1310] Fees. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
The Sexton shall charge the fees, as set forth in the Schedule of Fees, for
service, all of which fees shall be the property of the City.
§ 31-1311. [Ch. 31, Sec. 1311] Account and report of fees.
The said Sexton shall report to the Director of Finance the amount of his
collections and turn over to the said Director all moneys collected at least
once every month.
buried in any lot without property authority to be removed to the
"commons," and any persons making or causing such unlawful
interment shall be liable to the City for all costs and expenses of such
removal.
§ 31-1305 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 31-1312
1:1244
§ 31-1312. [Ch. 31, Sec. 1312] Neglect of duty, etc.
If the City Sexton willfully neglects or refused to perform any duties
required by this Code or maltreats any dead body of any person or any grave
or shall be guilty of any improper conduct, he shall be subject to the penalty
provided for in § 1-106 of this Code.
§ 31-1313. [Ch. 31, Sec. 1313] Penalty.
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall upon conviction be punished as provided in § 1-106 of this
Code.
§ 31-1312 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 31-1313
1:1245

ARTICLE XIV
Golf Courses
§ 31-1401. [Ch. 31, Sec. 1401] Greens fees for Highland Park Golf
Course. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
The fees for Highland Park Golf Course shall be set by the Director of Parks,
Recreation and Cultural Arts.
§ 31-1402. [Ch. 31, Sec. 1401A] Greens fees for Prairie Vista Golf
Course. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
The fees for Prairie Vista Golf Course shall be set by the Director of Parks,
Recreation and Cultural Arts.
§ 31-1403. [Ch. 31, Sec. 1402] Persons under six years of age
prohibited. [Ord. No. 1986-2]
No person shall take, escort or permit any child under six years of age on
the golf course at Highland Park at any time the course is being used or
is available for golfing purposes. The Staff at Highland Park Golf Course is
authorized to prohibit from playing or to eject from the course any person
who violates or intends to violate this section.
§ 31-1404. [Ch. 31, Sec. 1403] Unlawful use of golf course.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to golf, or cause golf balls to land on
the grounds of any golf course or driving range owned by the City of
Bloomington unless such person has paid any appropriate fees or
otherwise obtained permission to be on the golf course or driving
range. [Ord. No. 1999-9]
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to hit any golf balls or to cause any
golf balls to be hit onto any City parks or golf courses except golf
courses or driving ranges where such activities are permitted when the
appropriate fees have been paid. [Ord. No. 1999-9]
C. Any person or persons found to be violating this section shall be
punished by a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $250. [Ord. No.
1999-9]
§ 31-1401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 31-1404
1:1247
Chapter 32
PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS
§ 31-1404 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 31-1404
1:1248
ARTICLE I
Definitions
§ 32-101. [Ch. 32, Sec. 1] Definitions.
For the purpose of this article the following terms shall mean:
ANTIQUES — Any article having an age of 50 years or more.[Ord. No.
1991-101]
CUSTOMER —
PAWNBROKER —
TRANSACTION —
Any person who as a part of his regular business deposits or pledges
any personal property or thing of value with a licensee, on condition of
obtaining or recovering the property back again at a stipulated price,
or any person who applies for sale of or sells any personal property or
thing of value to a licensee.
A.
Any person who shall be paid an advance on the consignment of any
merchandise to be sold by a licensee.
B.
Any person who shall sell pawn tickets to a licensee so that the licensee
may redeem and resell that merchandise.
C.
Any person who shall renegotiate, with a licensee, a pawn loan between
themselves and other licensee. [Ord. No. 1991-101]
D.
Any person who as a part of his regular business loans money on the
deposit or pledge of any personal property or thing of value, on the
condition of redelivering or selling the article back again at a stipulated
price.
A.
Any person who shall pay cash advances on the consignment of
merchandise to be sold.
B.
Any person who as a part of his regular business practice shall buy
pawn tickets from individuals so as to redeem and resell that
merchandise.
C.
Any person who shall as a part of his regular business renegotiate
pawn loans between individuals and other pawnbrokers. [Ord. No.
1991-101]
D.
Any sale, loan, pledge or deposit of any personal property or thing of
value between a customer and a licensee as a part of the licensee's
regular business.
A.
Any advance payment on the consignment of any merchandise between
a customer and a licensee.
B.
§ 32-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32-101
1:1249
WORKS OF ART —
Any sale of pawn tickets by a customer to a licensee for the purposes of
redemption and resale of the pawned merchandise.
C.
Any renegotiation of a pawn loan by a customer and a licensee of a
pawn loan between said customer and any other licensed pawnbroker.
[Ord. No. 1991-101]
D.
A visual rendition including, but not limited to, a painting, drawing,
sculpture, mosaic, videotape or photograph.
A.
B. A work of calligraphy.
A work of graphic art including, but not limited to, an etching,
lithograph, serigraph, or offset print.
C.
A craft work in materials including, but not limited to clay, textile, fiber,
wood, metal, plastic or glass.
D.
A work in mixed media including, but not limited to, a collage,
assemblage, or work consisting of any combination of Subsections A
through D. [Ord. No. 1991-101]
E.
§ 32-101 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 32-101
1:1250
ARTICLE II
Pawnbrokers
§ 32-201. [Ch. 32, Sec. 2] License required. [Ord. No. 1991-101]
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of pawnbroker
without first obtaining a license therefor from the City Clerk.
§ 32-202. [Ch. 32, Sec. 3] Application for license.
§ 32-203. [Ch. 32, Sec. 4] License fees - pawnbrokers. [Ord. No.
2018-89]
The annual fee for a pawnbroker license required by this article shall be as
set forth in the Schedule of Fees for each place of business. The business
shall also post a $5,000 surety bond, which shall be forfeited if a license
issued under the terms of this chapter is revoked.
§ 32-204. [Ch. 32, Sec. 5] Unlawful purchases. [Ord. No. 1991-101]
It shall be unlawful for any licensee under this article to receive any articles
in the course of his business from any person who is in an intoxicated
A. All applicants and employees for license shall provide the City Clerk
and the Police Department two separate forms of identification. The
applicant and employees will also submit to a mug shot and a complete
set of fingerprints. Applicants and employees will submit to a complete
criminal history check. Anyone who has been convicted of any felony
under the laws of the State of Illinois or any other state or federal laws
of the United States or of a misdemeanor for any of the offenses under
the category of theft, retail theft and deception as defined in the Illinois
Criminal Code or equivalent statutes in other jurisdictions, shall not be
employed or be the proprietor of a pawn shop unless such conviction
was five or more years prior to the date of application for a license and
such person has been sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant the public
trust. The City Manager shall review the application of such person and
make a determination of whether that person has been sufficiently
rehabilitated. The City Manager may consider the length of time that
has passed between the application and any such conviction, the
number of such convictions and the applicant's employment record in
making such determination.
B. All applicants shall, as a condition for the granting of a license and on a
portion of the application provided by the City Clerk, agree that in the
event the applicant as licensee receives merchandise of any kind which
is stolen, he claims no right, title or interest in or to said merchandise,
and that upon request by law enforcement officers having jurisdiction
over the location of his place of business, he will voluntarily surrender
said merchandise to the possession of that law enforcement agency
when given a receipt for same. [Ord. No. 1996-111]
§ 32-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32-204
1:1251
condition, a minor or who is known or suspected by him to have acquired
and be disposing of such articles unlawfully.
§ 32-205. [Ch. 32, Sec. 6] Record book to be kept.
§ 32-206. [Ch. 32, Sec. 7] Retention of acquired property. [Ord. No.
1991-101]
All property received by a licensee under this article shall be held intact
by the licensee for at least 72 hours after time of purchase. Whenever any
licensee receives written notice, either from the Police Department or from
any individual, that someone is maintaining claim of right to possession of
the property adverse to the licensee, the licensee shall keep the property
in his possession or turn it over to the Police if so required by the Chief of
Police.
§ 32-207. [Ch. 32, Sec. 8] Serial numbers required. [Ord. No.
1991-101]
No pawnbroker shall accept as collateral security or for purchase any
property of the type given manufacturer's serial numbers or other
identifying insignia unless such property shall have plainly visible thereon
the manufacturer's serial number or other identifying insignia.
§ 32-208. [Ch. 32, Sec. 9] Firearms. [Ord. No. 1991-101]
No licensee shall purchase, sell, trade or deal in any way with firearms of
any kind without first obtaining a federal firearms license for the proper
class in which they desire to deal.
A. Every licensee under this article shall keep and preserve a book or card
in which shall be legibly written in ink an accurate description in the
English language of all articles pawned and the amount of money
loaned thereon; the time of the transaction; the name, address,
telephone number, age, color, height, weight of the person pawning the
articles; and the number of the pawn ticket issued therefor. Prior to
completing the transaction, a valid Illinois Drivers License or two
separate and valid forms of identification of person pawning items will
be recorded along with above information. Every licensee under this
article shall keep, in addition to the ledger records required by this
section, records of each customer and each article pawned or
purchased by video taken of the person and of the article(s) pawned.
These records shall be accessible by name of the person pawning or
selling the article and by the article type. The video tapes shall be kept
by the licensee for a period of not less than 60 days. [Ord. No.
1991-101]
B. The record book required to be kept by Subsection A shall be open to
inspection at all reasonable times by the police or the City Clerk. [Ord.
No. 1991-101]
§ 32-204 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 32-209
1:1252
§ 32-209. [Ch. 32, Sec. 10] Violations, penalty. [Ord. No. 2000-160]
Any licensee under this chapter who violates one or more of the provisions
of this article shall be guilty of an ordinance violation, and upon conviction
shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $500 for each such violation.
The City Clerk shall have the power and authority to revoke any license
granted under this chapter for any violation by a licensee of any provision
or condition contained in this chapter. A revocation or suspension of any
license issued pursuant to 250 ILCS 510/0.01 et seq., Pawnbroker
Regulation Act, will revoke or suspend any license granted under this
chapter.
§ 32-210. [Ch. 32, Sec. 11] Severability. [Ord. No. 1991-101]
If any section, sentence, clause, word or other provision of this chapter, or
any ordinance amendatory thereof or supplemental thereto, shall be held
invalid such fact shall not affect the validity of any other section, sentence,
clause, word or other provision herein, which may be severable therefrom
and be valid and capable of reasonable effect and application without
such invalid portions, and to this end all such portions of this chapter are
declared severable and shall be so construed whenever possible to do so.
§ 32-211. [Ch. 32, Sec. 12] Confidentiality of photographs. [Ord. No.
1991-101]
All videos taken in accordance with the provisions of this article shall be
restricted, with respect to the access to such videos and the use thereof,
to law enforcement personnel for the purpose of investigation involving
wanted persons and stolen property. Any use of said videos by or for private
individuals or other commercial concerns is expressly prohibited.
§ 32-209 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32-211
1:1253

ARTICLE III
Secondhand Dealers
§ 32-301. [Ch. 32, Sec. 13] Secondhand goods dealers license
required; applicability. [Ord. No. 1991-101]
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of buying,
selling or in any way dealing with used goods of any kind without first
obtaining a secondhand dealer's license therefor from the City Clerk.
Provided that, this article not apply to retailers who primarily sell unused
goods who in the course of selling such unused goods occasionally receive
used goods as partial consideration for the sale of such unused goods,
and dispose of the same by sale or otherwise. A license is not required of
individuals or businesses transacting such business in the interest of a bona
fide charitable organization.
§ 32-302. [Ch. 32, Sec. 14] Application for license - secondhand
dealers.
All applications for licenses required by this article shall be submitted on
forms provided by the City Clerk and applicant shall provide all information
requested thereon.
§ 32-303. [Ch. 32, Sec. 15] License fees. [Ord. No. 2000-160]
The annual fee for a secondhand dealer license required by this article shall
be $100 for each place of business of the licensee.
§ 32-304. [Ch. 32, Sec. 16] Unlawful purchases. [Ord. No. 1991-101]
It shall be unlawful for any licensee under this article to receive any articles
in the course of his business from any person who is in an intoxicated
condition, a minor or who is known or suspected by him to have acquired
and be disposing of such articles unlawfully.
§ 32-305. [Ch. 32, Sec. 17] Record book to be kept.
A. A secondhand dealer's license may be granted to any person who sells
or intends to sell secondhand goods from a fixed location for a period
exceeding 15 consecutive days in a calendar year. [Ord. No.
1991-101]
B. Bona fide estate liquidators and estate executors, the sale of vehicles,
or parts thereof, mobile homes, boats, books, Trading cards, clothes,
coins or stamps, antiques, works of art, records, or tapes, refrigerators,
ranges and ovens, washers and dryers and furniture are exempt from
this ordinance. [Ord. No. 1991-101]
C. No licensee shall purchase, sell, trade or deal in any way with firearms
of any kind without first obtaining a federal firearms license for the
proper class in which they desire to deal. [Ord. No. 1991-101]
§ 32-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32-305
1:1255
§ 32-306. [Ch. 32, Sec. 18] Retention of acquired property. [Ord.
No. 1991-101]
All property received by a licensee under this article shall be held intact by
the licensee for at least 72 hours after the article is purchased. Whenever
any licensee receives written notice, either from the Police Department
or from an individual, that someone is maintaining a claim of right to
possession of the property adverse to the licensee, the licensee shall keep
the property in his possession or turn it over to the Police if so required by
the Chief of Police. Once notice of an adverse claim to property has been
given under this section, the property shall be held for a period of 20 days,
during which legal proceedings may be commenced to determine who is
entitled to the property. If the matter is not settled or legal proceedings
have not been commenced within 20 days, the property shall be returned to
the licensee by the Police if held by them, and the licensee may dispose of
the property as he sees fit.
§ 32-307. [Ch. 32, Sec. 19] Garage, patio and residence sales. [Ord.
No. 1991-101]
Garage, patio and residence sales are exempted from the terms of this
chapter and are regulated instead by the terms of Chapter 44, § 44-405A, of
the Bloomington City Code.
A. Every licensee under this article shall keep a record book or receipt
book in which shall be legibly written in ink in the English language at
the time of receiving any goods the following: An accurate description
of the article received; the amount of money paid for it; the name,
residence address, and a driver's license number and state of seller. If
no Driver's License is available then two valid forms of identification.
[Ord. No. 1991-101]
B. The record book required to be kept by Subsection A shall be open to
inspection at all reasonable times by the Police or the City Clerk. [Ord.
No. 1991-101]
§ 32-305 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 32-307
1:1256
Chapter 33
SOLICITORS AND TRESPASSES
§ 32-307 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32-307
1:1257

ARTICLE I
Solicitors
§ 33-101. [Ch. 33, Sec. 1] Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following words as used herein shall be
construed to have the meaning herein ascribed thereto, to-wit:
REGISTERED SOLICITOR — Includes any person who has obtained a valid
Certificate of Registration as hereinafter provided, and which Certificate
is in the possession of the solicitor on his or her person while engaged in
soliciting.
RESIDENCE — Includes every separate living unit occupied for residential
purposes by one or more persons, contained within any type of building or
structure.
SOLICITING —
§ 33-102. [Ch. 33, Sec. 2] Certificate of registration.
Every person desiring to engage in soliciting as herein defined from persons
in residences within this municipality, is hereby required to make written
application for a Certificate of Registration as hereinafter provided.
§ 33-103. [Ch. 33, Sec. 3] Application for certificate of registration.
Includes any one or more of the following activities:
Sale and delivery from place to place in said City any goods, wares,
merchandise, food stuffs, of any kind, character or description
whatever for any kind of consideration whatever; or
(1)
Seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares,
merchandise, food stuffs, services, of any kind, character or
description whatever, for any kind of consideration whatever; or
(2)
Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application or
purchase of insurance of any type, kind or character; or
(3)
Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals,
newspapers and every other type or kind of publication; or
(4)
Seeking to obtain gifts or contributions of money, clothing or any
other valuable thing for the support or benefit of any charitable or
nonprofit association, organization, corporation or project.
(5)
A.
Exceptions. The definition of "soliciting" herein shall not apply to
delivery of goods or to making any business call to any residence
or place of business which was pre-arranged with the consent of the
occupant.
B.
A. Application for a Certificate of Registration shall be made upon a form
provided by the City Clerk of this municipality and filed with such Clerk.
§ 33-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-103
1:1259
The applicant shall truthfully state in full the information requested on
the application, to-wit:
(1) Name and address of present place of residence and length of
residence at such address; also business address if other than
residence address; also Social Security number;
(2) Address of place of residence during the past three years if other
than present address;
(3) Age of applicant and marital status; and if married the name of
spouse;
(4) Physical description of the applicant;
(5) Name and address of the person, firm or corporation or association
whom the applicant is employed by or represents; and the length of
time of such employment or representation;
(6) Name and address of employer during the past three years if other
than the present employer;
(7) Description sufficient for identification of the subject matter of the
soliciting which the applicant will engage in;
(8) Period of time for which the Certificate is applied for;
(9) The dates or approximate dates, of the latest previous application
for Certificate under this article, if any;
(10) Has a Certificate of Registration issued to the applicant under this
article ever been revoked;
(11) Has the applicant ever been convicted of a violation of any of the
provisions of this article, or the Ordinance of any other Illinois
municipality regulating soliciting;
(12) Has the applicant ever been convicted of a felony under the laws of
the State of Illinois or any other State or Federal law of the United
States;
(13) Also such additional information as the Clerk may deem necessary
to process the application.
B. All statements made by the applicant upon the application or in
connection therewith shall be under oath.
C. Every applicant shall submit to fingerprinting by the Police Department
of this municipality in connection with the application for Certificate.
D. No Certificate of Registration or copy thereof issued to the applicant
shall be valid unless the seal of the City of Bloomington is placed on said
Certificate or copy.
§ 33-103 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 33-103
1:1260
§ 33-104. [Ch. 33, Sec. 4] Issuance and revocation of certificate.
[Ord. No. 1990-41; amended 7-8-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-52]
E. The Clerk shall cause to be kept in her office an accurate record of
every application received and acted upon together with all other
information and data pertaining thereto and all Certificates of
Registration issued under the provisions of this article, and of the denial
of applications. Applications for Certificates, shall be numbered in
consecutive order as filed, and every certificate issued, and any renewal
thereof, shall be identified with the duplicate number of the application
upon which it was issued.
F. No Certificate of Registration shall be issued to any person who has
been convicted of a felony under the laws of the State of Illinois or any
other State or Federal law of the United States, within five years of the
date of the application; nor to any person who has been convicted of a
violation of any of the provisions of this article, nor to any person whose
Certificate of Registration issued hereunder has previously been
revoked as herein provided.
G. Any charitable association group or corporation which makes
application for and complies with § 38-901 et seq. of Chapter 38
providing for the soliciting of funds on the streets shall be exempt from
application of individual certificates of registration herein. If any
organization, firm or corporation meeting the definition of § 38-901
aforesaid shall desire to have their solicitors go from door to door and
place to place which would require their compliance with the
registration of this article, the City Manager upon request of any such
organization having an office within Bloomington or Normal, Illinois
may make application to the City Manager setting forth the names,
addresses of its local solicitors authorized to represent said charitable
organization. The City Manager is authorized to waive the filing of the
individual applications for Certificate of Registration herein provided, if
in his opinion, such organization meets the definition of said § 38-901 of
Chapter 38 of the Bloomington City Code. [Ord. No. 1990-41]
A. The City Manager or his or her designee, after consideration of the
application and all information obtained relative thereto, shall deny the
application if the applicant does not possess the qualifications for such
Certificate as herein required, and that the issuance of a Certificate of
Registration to the applicant would not be in accord with the intent and
purpose of this article. Endorsement shall be made by the City Manager
or his or her designee upon the application of the denial of the
application. When the applicant is found to be fully qualified, the
Certificate of Registration shall be issued forthwith.
B. Any Certificate of Registration issued hereunder shall be revoked by the
City Manager if the holder of the Certificate is convicted of a violation
of any of the provisions of this article or has made a false material
statement in the application, or otherwise becomes disqualified for the
issuance of a Certificate of Registration under the terms of this article.
§ 33-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-104
1:1261
§ 33-105. [Ch. 33, Sec. 5] City policy on soliciting.
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the governing body of this
municipality that the occupant or occupants of the residences in this
municipality shall make the determination of whether solicitors shall be, or
shall not be, invited to their respective residence. If no determination is
made as is provided in § 33-106 thereof, then in that event, registration is
not required.
§ 33-106. [Ch. 33, Sec. 6] Notice regulating soliciting.
§ 33-107. [Ch. 33, Sec. 7] Duty of solicitors.
Immediately upon such revocation written notice thereof shall be given
by the City Manager to the holder of the Certificate in person or by
certified U.S. mail addressed to his or her residence address set forth
in the application.
C. Immediately upon the giving of such notice the Certificate of
Registration shall become null and void.
D. All Certificates of Registration shall expire six consecutive months from
the date of approval. Upon receipt of a Certificate, each individual
applicant shall pay a fee as set forth in the Schedule of Fees.
A. Every person desiring to secure the protection intended to be provided
by the regulations pertaining to soliciting contained in this article shall
comply with the following directions, to wit:
B. Notice of the determination by the occupant of giving invitation to
solicitors, or the refusal of invitation to solicitors, to any residence,
shall be given in the manner following:
C. A weatherproof card, approximately three inches by four inches in size,
shall be exhibited upon or near the main entrance door to the
residence, indicating the determination by the occupant, containing the
applicable words, as follows:
"ONLY SOLICITORS REGISTERED IN CITY OF BLOOMINGTON
INVITED"
OR
"NO SOLICITORS INVITED"
(1) The letters shall be at least 1/3 inch in height. For the purpose of
uniformity the cards shall be provided by the Chief of Police to
persons requesting at the cost thereof.
(2) Such card so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any
solicitor of the determination by the occupant of the residence of
the information contained thereon.
§ 33-104 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 33-107
1:1262
§ 33-108. [Ch. 33, Sec. 8] Uninvited soliciting prohibited.
It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any
person to go upon any premises and ring the door bell upon or near any
door, or created any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the
attention of the occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing
an audience with the occupant thereof and engage in soliciting as herein
defined, in defiance of the notice exhibited at the residence in accordance
with the provisions of § 33-106 of this article.
§ 33-109. [Ch. 33, Sec. 9] Time limit on soliciting.
It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for
any person whether registered under this article or not, to go upon any
premises and ring the door bell upon or near any door of a residence
located thereon, or rap or knock upon any door, or create any sound in
any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of
such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant
thereof and engage in soliciting as herein defined, prior to 9:00 a.m. or
after 9:00 p.m. of any weekday, or at anytime on a Sunday or on a State or
National Holiday.
§ 33-110. [Ch. 33, Sec. 10] Severance clause.
If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this article shall be held
invalid, the invalidity thereof shall not affect any of the other provisions of
this article.
§ 33-111. [Ch. 33, Sec. 11] Penalty.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $500 for each
offense.
A. It shall be the duty of every solicitor upon going onto any premises in
the municipality upon which a residence as herein defined is located to
first examine the Notice provided for in § 33-106 of this article, if any is
attached, and be governed by the statement contained on the notice. If
the notice states "ONLY SOLICITORS REGISTERED IN CITY OF
BLOOMINGTON INVITED," the solicitor not possessing a valid
Certificate of Registration as herein provided shall immediately and
peacefully depart from the premises; and if the notice states "NO
SOLICITORS INVITED," then the solicitor, whether registered or not,
shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises.
B. Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence, whether invited
or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when
requested to do so by the occupant.
§ 33-107 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-111
1:1263

ARTICLE II
Trespasses
§ 33-201. [Ch. 33, Sec. 21] Trespasses prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to commit a trespass
within this municipality upon either public or private property.
§ 33-202. [Ch. 33, Sec. 22] Specifically enumerated trespasses -
suppression.
Without constituting any limitation upon the provisions of § 33-201 hereof,
any of the following acts by any person, firm or corporation shall be deemed
included among those that constitute trespasses in violation of the
provisions of said § 33-201, and appropriate action may be taken hereunder
at any time, or from time to time, to prevent or suppress any violation or
violations of this Ordinance, the aforesaid enumerated acts so included,
being as follows, to-wit:
§ 33-203. [Ch. 33, Sec. 23] Severance clause.
If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this Ordinance shall be held
invalid, the invalidity thereof shall not affect any of the other provisions of
this Ordinance.
§ 33-204. [Ch. 33, Sec. 24] Penalties.
Any person, firm or cooperation violating any of the provisions of this
Ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined in an amount not
exceeding $500.
A. An entry upon the premises, or any part thereof, of another, including
any public property in violation of a notice posted or exhibited at the
main entrance to said premises or at any point of approach or entry or
in violation of any notice, warning or protest given orally or in writing,
by any owner or occupant thereof, or
B. The pursuit of a course of conduct or action incidental to the making of
an entry upon the land of another in violation of a notice posted or
exhibited at the main entrance to said premises or at any point of
approach or entry, or in violation of any notice, warning or protest given
orally or in writing by any owner or occupant thereof, or
C. A failure or refusal to depart from the premises of another in case of
being requested, either orally or in writing, to leave by any owner of
occupant thereof, or
D. An entry into or upon any vehicle, aircraft or watercraft made without
the consent of the person having the right to the possession or control
thereof, or a failure or refusal to leave any such vehicle, aircraft or
watercraft after being requested to leave by the person having such
right.
§ 33-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-204
1:1265
Chapter 34
PLUMBING CODE
§ 33-204 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 33-204
1:1266
ARTICLE I
General
[Ord. No. 2005-73]
§ 34-101. [Ch. 34, Sec. 1] Adoption of Illinois State Plumbing Code.
[Ord. No. 2013-03]
There is hereby adopted by the City for the purpose of establishing rules
and regulations for materials, construction, alteration, and inspection of all
plumbing placed in or in connection with any building that certain Plumbing
Code known as the Illinois State Code, being particularly the current edition
thereof, and the whole thereof, of which not less than one copy has been
and now is filed in the Office of the City Clerk; and the same are hereby
adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length in this chapter, the
provisions of which shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the
City and within the area of Lake Bloomington and other areas under the
jurisdiction of the City.
§ 34-102. [Ch. 34, Sec. 2] Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this chapter:
APPROVED BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES OR METHODS —
Approved by the Research Foundation for Cross-Connection Control of the
University of Southern California, Association of State Sanitary Engineers,
American Water Works Association, American National Standards Institute
or certified by the National Sanitation Foundation.
BACKFLOW — The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances
into the distribution pipes of a potable water system from any source other
than the intended source of the potable water supply.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE — Any device, method or type of
construction intended to prevent backflow into a potable water system. All
devices used for backflow prevention in Illinois must meet the standards
A. Illinois State Plumbing Code - administrative authority. Wherever the
words "administrative authority" are used in the Illinois State Plumbing
Code, adopted in the preceding section, it shall be held to mean the
Director of Community Development of the City of Bloomington or his
representative. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
B. Public Health Board. Wherever the words "public health board" are
used in the Illinois State Plumbing Code, it shall be held to mean the
McLean County Health Department. [Ord. No. 1984-102]
C. The Current Edition of the State of Illinois Department of Health Food
Service Sanitation Code Section 750.5., Water and Sewage Part 895,
Public Area Sanitary Practice Code Section 895.50 Rest rooms. [Ord.
No. 2013-03]
§ 34-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-102
1:1267
of the Illinois Plumbing Code and the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency.
CONTAMINATION — An impairment of the quality of the water by entrance
of any substance to a degree which could create a health hazard.
CROSS-CONNECTION — Any physical connection or arrangement between
two otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable water
and the other a substance of unknown or questionable safety or quality,
whereby there may be a flow from one system into the other.
CURB SHUTOFF VALVE — The valve normally located between the curb
and property line used to control the water service for a customer. Also
known as a curb stop or curb box.
CUSTOMER — The owner and/or person in possession or control of any
premises supplied by or in any manner connected to a public water system.
CUSTOMER'S WATER SYSTEM — Any water system located on the
customer's premises. A building plumbing system is considered to be a
customer's water system as is the water service line from the tap at the
water main to the plumbing within the building.
DIRECT CROSS-CONNECTION — A cross-connection formed when a water
system is physically joined to a source of unknown or unsafe substance.
DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY — An assembly composed of single,
independently acting check valves approved under ASSE Standard 1015. A
double check valve assembly must include tight shutoff valves located at
each end of the assembly and suitable connections for testing the watertightness
of each check valve.
FIXED PROPER AIR GAP — The unobstructed vertical distance through the
free atmosphere between the water discharge point and the flood level rim
of the receptacle.
HEALTH HAZARD — Any condition, device or practice in a water system or
its operation resulting from a real or potential danger to the health and wellbeing
of customers. The word "severe" as used to qualify "health hazard"
means a hazard to the health of the user that could be expected to result in
death or significant reduction in the quality of life.
INDIRECT CROSS-CONNECTION — A cross-connection through which an
unknown substance can be forced, drawn by vacuum or otherwise
introduced into a safe potable water system.
INSPECTION — A plumbing inspection to examine carefully and critically
all materials, fixtures, piping and appurtenances, appliances and
installations of a plumbing system for compliance with requirements of the
Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890.
PLUMBING — The actual installation, repair, maintenance, alteration or
extension of a plumbing system by any person. Plumbing includes all piping,
fixtures, appurtenances and appliances for a supply of water for all
purposes, including without limitation lawn sprinkler systems, from the
source of a private water supply on the premises or from the water-main in
§ 34-102 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 34-102
1:1268
the street, alley or at the curb to, within and about any building or buildings
where a person or persons live, work or assemble. Plumbing includes
all piping, from discharge of pumping units to and including pressure
tanks in water supply systems. Plumbing includes all piping, fixtures,
appurtenances, and appliances for a building drain and a sanitary drainage
and related ventilation system of any building or buildings where a person
or persons live, work or assemble from the point of connection of such
building drain to the building sewer or private sewage disposal system five
feet beyond the foundation walls.
REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPAL BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE —
A device containing a minimum of two independently acting check valves
together with an automatically operated pressure differential relief valve
located between the two check valves and approved under ASSE Standard
1013. During normal flow and at the cessation of normal flow, the pressure
between these two checks shall be less than the supply pressure. In case of
leakage of either check valve, the differential relief valve, by discharging to
the atmosphere, shall operate to maintain the pressure between the check
valves at less than the supply pressure. The unit must include tightly closing
shutoff valves located at each end of the device, and each device shall be
fitted with properly located test cocks.
SURVEY — The collection of information pertaining to a customer's piping
system regarding the location of all connections to the public water supply
system and must include the location, type and most recent inspection and
testing date of all cross-connection control devices and methods located
within that customer's piping system. The survey must be in written form
and should not be an actual plumbing inspection.
SYSTEM HAZARD — A condition through which an esthetically
objectionable or degrading material not dangerous to health may enter the
public water supply system or a customer's potable water system.
WATER PURVEYOR — The owner or official custodian of a public water
system.[Ord. No. 2005-73]
§ 34-102 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-102
1:1269

ARTICLE II
Contractor Registration and Licensing
[Ord. No. 2005-73]
§ 34-201. [Ch. 34, Sec. 5] Contractor administration permit fee
required. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
Every plumbing contractor engaging in the business of plumbing in the
City shall cause his name, residence and place of business to be recorded
with the City Clerk of the City. The City Clerk shall keep a record of such
business. An annual administration fee shall be required of any person,
firm, limited liability company or corporation engaging in the business of
plumbing contractor in the City. Said annual business shall be issued only
upon submission of a copy of the applicant's current Illinois State plumbers
contractor registration, and payment of the required fee as set forth in the
Schedule of Fees, and approval by the Plumbing Inspector. Contractors shall
obtain the business license on or before January 1 of each year. Should a
contractor not obtain the business license by February 1, an additional $25
will be required.
§ 34-202. [Ch. 34, Sec. 7] Business license revocation. [Ord. No.
2013-68]
A business license issued under this article can be suspended or revoked by
the Building Board of Appeals, and the cause for such action shall be one of
the following:
A. The refusal of any contractor to correct work he has installed
improperly when directed to do so by the Plumbing Inspector;
B. Repeated failure to perform work properly;
C. Failure to have a licensed plumber in his employ at all times as required
by the Illinois State Plumbing Code;
D. Repeated violation of doing work prior to obtaining the required permit.
[Ord. No. 2013-68]
§ 34-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-202
1:1271

ARTICLE III
Permits - Required
[Ord. No. 2005-73]
§ 34-301. [Ch. 34, Sec. 8] Permit.
§ 34-302. [Ch. 34, Sec. 9] Permit in connection with storm drainage
system.
§ 34-303. [Ch. 34, Sec. 10] Permit in connection with public sewer
and water system. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
No plumbing involving a connection with the public sewer or water system
of the City shall be done, except in an emergency as may be allowed under
the provisions of § 34-301 without first securing an excavation permit and
approval of the Director of Public Works and a plumbing permit from the
Plumbing Inspector therefor.
§ 34-304. [Ch. 34, Sec. 11] Permit application. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
Application for a permit to install, alter or change plumbing work shall be
made to and on forms prescribed by the Plumbing Inspector. The application
shall be accompanied by the fees required by this article. When such work
involves a connection with a public sewer or water system, approval shall
be obtained from the Director of Public Works and a plumbing permit shall
be issued therefor.
A. No plumbing shall be installed, altered, or changed in any building
structure or manufactured/mobile home within the City nor within the
area of Lake Bloomington and other areas under the jurisdiction of the
City, except in an emergency, without first having secured a permit for
the same from the Plumbing Inspector. Such permit shall be issued to
the registered plumbing contractor in charge of such work, provided
that a permit may be issued to an owner-occupant of a single-family
residence to do any work regulated by the Illinois State Plumbing Code
adopted by the City with respect to such residences. [Ord. No.
2005-73]
B. Emergency work may be allowed only when warranted. It shall be
reported at the earliest possible time to the Plumbing Inspector and the
required permit obtained thereafter. [Ord. No. 1986-68]
A. No plumbing connected with the storm drainage system of the City
shall be made, except as may be allowed in § 34-301 without an
excavation permit and approval of the Director of Public Works and a
permit secured from the Plumbing Inspector therefor.
B. All interior storm piping must be installed by a licensed registered
plumber. Materials must meet state and local Plumbing Codes. [Ord.
No. 2018-93]
§ 34-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-305
1:1273
§ 34-305. [Ch. 34, Sec. 11.1] Inspection notification and test.
§ 34-306. [Ch. 34, Sec. 12] Plans and specifications.
Before issuing any permit hereunder, the said Plumbing Inspector may
require such detailed plans, specifications, and drawings as are necessary
and complete to describe the work and the requirements thereof and the
materials and manner of installing, altering or repairing. He shall issue
such permit when such plans, etc. show that the said plumbing will be in
compliance with this chapter.
§ 34-307. [Ch. 34, Sec. 13] Plans and specifications not to be
changed after issuance of permits; exceptions. [Ord. No. 2005-73]
After the permit has been issued by the Plumbing Inspector, no change or
modification in the plans or specifications shall be made unless such change
shall have first been submitted to the Plumbing Inspector and approved by
him.
§ 34-308. [Ch. 34, Sec. 15] Expiration of permit. [Ord. No. 2005-73]
If the plumbing work is not commenced within six months after the issue
of said permit, and if the work is not thereafter satisfactorily performed,
such permit will be considered as having expired. The provisions of Chapter
10 (Building Code) regarding expiration/revocation of building permits shall
apply to plumbing permits.
§ 34-309. [Ch. 34, Sec. 17] Water meters and water service.
A. The Plumbing Inspector must be notified by the plumber doing work
when said work is begun and when any work is ready for inspection. All
work must be left uncovered and convenient for examination until
inspected and approved. No notice shall be sent for an inspection until
the work is entirely ready for thorough inspection. No work shall be
covered or approved without correction of violations, if any. The
Plumbing Inspector shall examine the work within two working days
after notice that it is ready for inspection has been received.
Underground plumbing shall be properly secured to prevent floating
prior to inspection and all fittings shall be left exposed for inspection.
B. Where there is reason to believe that the plumbing system fails to
comply with this part, the Plumbing Inspector may require a test. All
plumbing must be tested by water or air test. All defective joints shall
be made tight and defective piping replaced. Acceptable water test
equivalent shall be accepted by the Plumbing Inspector at his
discretion. All drain waste, and vent piping in a multi-story commercial
or multi-story residential building may be tested by water or air and be
witnessed by the Plumbing Inspector. [Ord. No. 2005-73]
§ 34-305 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 34-309
1:1274
A. Water meter. A water meter will be issued only after purchase of a
utility permit from the Public Works Department and a plumbing permit
from the Building Safety Department. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
B. When a water meter is issued for a location it becomes a part of that
property whether residential or commercial. In the event that property
is demolished or otherwise disposed of, the water meter shall become
the property of the City. Provisions for remote reading shall be made
whenever water meters are installed. All water meters shall have a full
port valve installed on each side of the meter. [Ord. No. 2000-88]
C. No person, firm or corporation, except licensed plumbers, shall make
any connections to or attachments with the pipes of the water system of
the City, nor make any repairs, additions to or alterations of any tap,
pipe, cock or other fixture connected with said water department pipes
on the outside or street side of the water meter; provided that the
foregoing shall not apply to authorized employees of the City. [Ord. No.
2005-73]
D. No tap greater than 3/4 inch shall be made in any water main having
less than six-inch waterway. A one inch tap may be made in a eight-inch
waterway. Multiple taps shall be made at least 18 inches apart and shall
not be in the same line along the length of the main. Under no
circumstances will more than two 3/4 inch taps be made to serve any
one water service without prior approval of the Water Department.
[Ord. No. 2005-73]
E. No service pipe between City water mains and the building shall be laid
less than four feet below the surface of the street grade or lawn. The
material used for such pipe shall in each and every case be subject to
the inspection of the Plumbing Inspector and if found defective or below
the standard, its use will not be permitted. All service shall be laid
straight from the curb stop-cock to the building and shall be firmly
bedded on solid earth. White rock, concrete or lime base material is
prohibited in direct contact with buried water lines. Water service shall
not be backfilled until the Plumbing Inspector has inspected the
service. Water and sewer service shall not be run in the same trench,
except by special permission of the Plumbing Inspector. [Ord. No.
2005-73]
F. All piping from the City water mains to the curb stop valve shall be of
type "K" copper; if larger than two inches, it shall be of Class 150 cast
iron. All joints in water services are to be mechanical/compression,
threaded, slip seal or lead free solder. When water services larger than
two inch are installed through the side wall of a building, such iron type
water services shall be restrained with field lock or similar restraining
type devices or locking gaskets. [Ord. No. 2008-49]
G. Water services from the curb box (curb shutoff valve) to the building
shall be type "K" copper, Class 150 cast iron, or copper tube size (CTS)
polyethylene (PE) tubing meeting ASTM D 2737 - standard.
§ 34-309 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-309
1:1275
§ 34-310. [Ch. 34, Sec. 18] Water usage fees during construction.
[Ord. No. 1986-68]
See Chapter 27 of the Bloomington City Code.
Polyethylene (PE) pipe shall be installed only with compression fittings
with insert and clamp type fittings. All clamps shall be of corrosion
resistant material. The inside diameter (ID) of any insert fitting shall not
be less than the minimum allowable size for water service as required
by the Illinois State Plumbing Code. PE tubing water service shall be
one continuous pipe from the curb stop or pig tail to building water
meter. PE water service shall have a solid 12 gauge sheathed coated,
suitable for direct burial tracer wire connected to the coupling or curb
stop, unbroken and accessible at the water meter. [Ord. No. 2013-03]
H. Water service for fire, domestic and combination services shall be
installed and tested from the main to the interior of the building by
same plumbing contractor. [Ord. No. 2013-03]
I. New construction requiring potable water and fire protection water
service shall be combination service. Location of shut off valves shall be
approved by the Plumbing Inspector or Director of Water. [Ord. No.
2013-03]
§ 34-309 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 34-310
1:1276
ARTICLE IV
General Rules and Regulations
[Ord. No. 2005-73]
§ 34-401. [Ch. 34, Sec. 19] Septic tanks. [Ord. No. 2005-73]
For every structure intended for human habitation where no public sewer
is accessible, an inside water closet draining into a septic tank shall be
installed according to the McLean County Health Department specifications
and/or the International Private Sewage Disposal Code. Any septic tank no
longer used shall be pumped out, have bottom punctured, and be filled with
sand or pea gravel.
§ 34-402. [Ch. 34, Sec. 20] Sewer connections.
§ 34-403. [Ch. 34, Sec. 22] Health and safety. [Ord. No. 2005-73]
All plumbing fixtures and other apparatus and pipes from or through which
any sewage is discharged into any sewer shall be subject to inspection by
the Plumbing Inspector at any time at reasonable hours and if upon such
inspection it shall appear that any part of said plumbing system is defective
or fails to conform to the requirements of the Code of the City and by reason
of such failure tends to create a nuisance, the same shall be replaced as the
nature of the condition may require. Such repairs shall be completed after
notice has been given to the owner or occupant by the Plumbing Inspector.
§ 34-404. [Ch. 34, Sec. 23] Remodeling, reconstruction, and
repairs. [Ord. No. 2008-49]
Where a fixture or fixtures are to be removed, all vent, soil, and waste pipes
serving such fixture or fixtures should be removed, if feasible, so as to avoid
any dead ends and the opening left thereby shall be securely closed. Where
an old or defective fixture is removed to be replaced by another fixture of
the same type, or the same fixture is repaired, and no other fixture or piping
is to be added or remodeled, it will not be necessary to reconstruct the
soil, wasted or vent piping to conform to the Code of the City, unless the
said piping is in a defective condition. Plumbing equipment installed in or
removed from a building, if found to conform to the requirements of this
chapter, may be reused. Removal of any plumbing fixtures and/or plumbing
A. No person shall construct or cause to be constructed or make any drain
or sewer leading into any of the common sewers of the City of
Bloomington without the written permission of the City Engineer.
B. New Sewer - replacement sanitary sewer, sewer liner, sewer pipe
bursting replacement or connection to an existing sewer shall only be
approved when sewer connects directly from owner's property to the
City of Bloomington sanitary sewer main. Approval of other
installations shall only be approved by written permission from Public
Works Department. [Ord. No. 2013-03]
§ 34-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-404
1:1277
system shall be done by a licensed plumbing contractor or owner occupant
of a single family residence.
§ 34-405. [Ch. 34, Sec. 24] Interior piping - potable water.
§ 34-406. [Ch. 34, Sec. 24.1] Lawn sprinklers/irrigation systems.
A. Distribution piping in all buildings shall be types "K," "L" or "M" copper,
galvanized steel or equal. Solder joints to be of lead-free solder.
(1) Exception 1: Distribution piping in residential buildings of three
stories or less shall be type "K," "L" or "M" copper galvanized steel
or cross linked polyethylene meeting the fitting and standard
requirements as list in the Illinois State Plumbing Code.
(2) Exception 2: For interior HUD manufactured single-family homes,
Appendix A, Table 6, Section 890 of the Illinois State Plumbing
Code shall apply. [Ord. No. 2008-49]
B. Piping from the meter to the water heater is to be size 3/4 inch or
larger. Point of use water heaters for individual fixtures shall be sized
by the minimum inlet of the water heating unit. [Ord. No. 2005-73]
C. The water heater in a building that supplies more than one family shall
have a shut off valve on both hot and cold water pipes connecting the
water heater. [Ord. No. 2005-73]
D. Domestic hot water supply and distribution, new or replacement water
heater installation. Domestic hot water heating units shall be designed
and sized for the number of plumbing fixtures being served. A water
heater manufactures sizing table shall be used in calculating hot water
demand for each residential, commercial or multi-unit building. [Ord.
No. 2013-03]
E. Chemical dispensing, softening, purification units shall have a
dedicated water supply and shut off valves to each unit. [Ord. No.
2013-03]
A. Lawn sprinkler and irrigation systems connected to the City water
system shall comply with the City Plumbing Code. Materials used
underground shall be type "K" copper lead free solder joints or PVC
with a minimum of 160# test pressure with stainless steel hose clamps,
cross linked polyethylene or solvent weld type connections or equal.
[Ord. No. 2013-03]
B. All landscape irrigation systems installed after the effective date of this
Ordinance shall be equipped with either a rain sensing or soil moisture
sensing device which overrides the irrigation cycle of the sprinkler
system when it rains and/or when the soil has adequate moisture. [Ord.
No. 2005-73]
§ 34-404 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 34-406
1:1278
§ 34-407. [Ch. 34, Sec. 25] Water conservation requirements.
All plumbing done and all plumbing fixtures installed as of the effective date
of this Ordinance shall meet or exceed the following water conservation
requirements:
C. No lawn sprinkler or landscape irrigation system shall be caused or
allowed to operate during rain or in such manner so as to produce
water run-off, over-spraying, low head drainage or any other condition
which results in water flowing onto property not served by the lawn
sprinkler or landscape irrigation system. [Ord. No. 2005-73]
D. Lawn sprinkler contractors shall pay an application fee as set forth in
the Schedule of Fees for each system installed. Registered plumbing
contractors (i.e., installation by plumbers and apprentice only) and
homeowners shall be exempt from the application fee. [Ord. No.
2018-89]
E. No lawn sprinkler system will be installed without approved plans,
securing a permit and prior approval of the Plumbing Inspector. [Ord.
No. 2005-73]
F. All back flow devices must be certified by a licensed Cross-connection
Control Device Inspector and a copy of the certification with the
appropriate fees shall be sent to the Plumbing Inspector. [Ord. No.
2005-73]
G. Lawn irrigation systems from any water source shall have a permit
issued. [Ord. No. 2005-73]
H. Interior piping for lawn irrigation systems shall be copper or cross
linked polyethylene piping to the exterior of building. [Ord. No.
2013-03]
A. All lavatory faucets in public rest rooms shall meet the requirements of
the Illinois State Plumbing Code. [Ord. No. 1998-52]
B. All water used for cooling equipment and machinery shall be recirculated
(exception: Medical equipment). [Ord. No. 2008-49]
C. All automatic or manual in conjunction with automatic car washes must
be designed and built to recycle 20% to 50% of the wash and rinse
water. [Ord. No. 2008-49]
D. All flush valves shall conform to the Illinois Plumbing Code for water
usage. [Ord. No. 2000-88]
E. All other fixtures, applications or systems not specifically described
above shall have their maximum water usage determined by the City of
Bloomington Plumbing Inspector on a case by case basis. No person
shall install or cause the installation of any fixture, application or
system stated above which exceeds the maximum water usage as
§ 34-406 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-407
1:1279
§ 34-408. [Ch. 34, Sec. 26] Explosive or flammable substance in
sewers. [Ord. No. 2005-73]
No explosive or flammable substance shall be discharged into any sewer.
§ 34-409. [Ch. 34, Sec. 31] Prohibited joints and connections. [Ord.
No. 2008-49]
The drilling and tapping of house drains, soil, waste, waterlines or vent
pipes, and the use of saddle hubs, bands and sleeves is prohibited. All joints
and connections shall meet the requirements of the Illinois State Plumbing
Code.
§ 34-410. [Ch. 34, Sec. 33] Fixtures prohibited. [Ord. No. 2005-73]
Fixtures not listed in the Illinois State Plumbing Code as approved by a
listed testing agency shall be approved by the plumbing inspection prior to
installation.
§ 34-411. [Ch. 34, Sec. 34] Prohibited openings. [Ord. No. 2000-88]
No untrapped opening into a soil waste, or vent pipe will be permitted.
§ 34-412. [Ch. 34, Sec. 35] Unions. [Ord. No. 2013-03]
No union in DWV piping may be concealed in partitions or floors except in
emergency repairs.
§ 34-413. [Ch. 34, Sec. 39] Use of plumbing prohibited. [Ord. No.
2017-96]
No part of any new or reconstructed plumbing system shall be used for
which approval has not been granted by the Plumbing Inspector and until a
Certificate of Occupancy has been issued by the Department of Community
Development.
determined by the City of Bloomington Plumbing Inspector. [Ord. No.
1993-76]
F. Installation of water cooled ice machines are prohibited. [Ord. No.
1998-52]
§ 34-407 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 34-413
1:1280
ARTICLE V
Regulations on Cross-Connection Control
[Ord. No. 2005-73]
§ 34-501. [Ch. 34, Sec. 40] Back flow prevention devices required.
[Ord. No. 2018-93]
All plumbing installed within the City of Bloomington, shall be installed
in accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890.
If in accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code or in the judgment of
the Director of Public Works, an approved back flow prevention device is
necessary for the safety of the public water supply system, the Director
of Public Works will give notice to the water customer to install such an
approved device immediately. The water customer shall, at his own expense,
install such an approved device at a location and in a manner in accordance
with the Illinois Plumbing Code, Illinois Environmental Protection Agency
and all applicable local regulations, and shall have inspections and tests
made of such approved devices upon installation and as required by the
Illinois Plumbing Code, Illinois Environmental Protection Agency and local
regulations.
§ 34-502. [Ch. 34, Sec. 41] Non-approved connection methods
prohibited. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
No person, firm or corporation shall establish or permit to be established
or maintain or permit to be maintained any connection whereby a private,
auxiliary or emergency water supply other than the regular public water
supply of the City of Bloomington may enter the supply or distribution
system of said municipality, unless such private, auxiliary or emergency
water supply and the method of connection and use of such supply shall
have been approved by the Director of Public Works and the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency.
§ 34-503. [Ch. 34, Sec. 42] Surveys required. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
It shall be the duty of the customer to cause surveys and investigations to
be made of the customer's properties served by the public water supply to
determine whether actual or potential hazards to the public water supply
may exist. Such surveys and investigations shall be completed by a certified
cross-connection inspector (see § 34-510 Survey and Investigations) and
shall be filed with the Community Development Department and made a
matter of public record and shall be repeated at least every two years, or as
often as the Director of Public Works shall deem necessary. Records of such
surveys shall be maintained and available for review for a period of at least
five years.
§ 34-501 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-504
1:1281
§ 34-504. [Ch. 34, Sec. 43] Right to investigate; effect of refusal to
furnish information. [Ord. No. 2005-73]
The Director of Water or his authorized agent shall have the right to
enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the
public water supply or distribution system of the City of Bloomington for
the purpose of verifying information submitted by the customer regarding
the required cross-connection control inspection. On demand, the owner,
lessees or occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the Director
of Water any information which he may request regarding the piping system
or systems or water use on such property. The refusal of such information,
when demanded, shall, within the discretion of the Director of Water, be
deemed evidence of the presence of improper connections as provided in
this Ordinance.
§ 34-505. [Ch. 34, Sec. 44] Termination of water service. [Ord. No.
2018-93]
The Director of Public Works of the City of Bloomington is hereby
authorized and directed to discontinue, after reasonable notice to the
occupant thereof, the water service to any property wherein any connection
in violation of the provisions of this Ordinance is known to exist, or where
the owner has failed to comply with the survey requirements of this
ordinance, and to take such other precautionary measures as he may deem
necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water
supply distribution mains. Water service to such property shall not be
restored until such conditions have been eliminated or corrected in
compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance, and until reconnection
charges are paid as per Section 30 to the City of Bloomington. Immediate
disconnection with verbal notice can be effected when the Director of
Public Works is assured that imminent danger of harmful contamination
of the public water supply system exists. Such action shall be followed by
written notification of the cause of disconnection. Immediate disconnection
without notice to any party can be effected to prevent actual or anticipated
contamination or pollution of the public water supply, provided that, in
the reasonable opinion of the Director of Public Works or the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency, such action is required to prevent actual
or potential contamination or pollution of the public water supply. Neither
the Public Water Supply, the Director of Public Works, or its agents or
assigns shall be liable to any customer for any injury, damages or lost
revenues which may result from termination of said customer's water
supply in accordance with the terms of this Ordinance, whether or not said
termination was with or without notice.
§ 34-506. [Ch. 34, Sec. 45] Cleanup costs to be borne by customer.
[Ord. No. 2005-73]
The customer responsible for back-siphoned or back-pressured material or
contamination through back flow, if contamination of the potable water
supply system occurs through an illegal cross-connection or an improperly
§ 34-504 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 34-506
1:1282
installed, maintained or repaired device, or a device which has been
bypassed, must bear the cost of cleanup of the potable water supply system.
§ 34-507. [Ch. 34, Sec. 46] Cross-connection control - general
policy.
§ 34-508. [Ch. 34, Sec. 47] Water system.
A. Purpose. The purpose of these Rules and Regulations is:
(1) To protect the public water supply system from contamination or
pollution by isolating within the customer's water system
contaminants or pollutants which could back flow through the
service connection into the public water supply system.
(2) To promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections,
actual or potential, between the public or customer's potable water
system and non-potable water systems, plumbing fixtures and
sources or systems containing substances of unknown or
questionable safety.
(3) To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of crossconnection
control which will prevent the contamination or
pollution of the public and customer's potable water systems.
B. Application. These Rules and Regulations shall apply to all premises
served by the public potable water supply system of the City of
Bloomington.
C. Policy. The owner or official custodian shall be responsible for
protection of the public water supply system from contamination due to
back flow or back siphonage of contaminants through the customer's
water service connection. If in the judgment of the Director of Public
Works or his authorized representative, an approved back flow
prevention device is necessary for the safety of the public water supply
system, the Director of Public Works shall give notice to the customer to
install such approved back flow prevention device at each service
connection to the premises. The customer shall immediately install such
approved device or devices at his own expense; failure, refusal or
inability on the part of the customer to install such device or devices
immediately shall constitute grounds for discontinuing water service to
the premises until such device or devices have been installed. The
customer shall retain records of installation, maintenance, testing and
repair as required in § 34-514D(4) below for a period of at least five
years. The Director of Public Works may require the customer to submit
a cross-connection inspection report to the City of Bloomington to assist
in determining whether or not service line protection will be required.
All cross-connection inspections shall be conducted by a Cross-
Connection Control Device Inspector certified by the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
§ 34-506 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-508
1:1283
§ 34-509. [Ch. 34, Sec. 48] Cross-connection prohibited.
§ 34-510. [Ch. 34, Sec. 49] Survey and investigations.
A. The water system shall be considered as made up of two parts: the
public water supply system and the customer's water system.
B. The public water supply system shall consist of the source facilities and
the distribution system, and shall include all those facilities of the
potable water system under the control of the Director of Public Works
up to the point where the customer's water system begins.
C. The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in the
production, treatment, storage and delivery of water to the public water
supply distribution system.
D. The public water supply distribution system shall include the network
of conduits or watermains used to deliver water from the source to the
customer's water system.
E. The customer's water system shall include all parts of the facilities
beyond the water service connection used to convey water from the
public water supply distribution system to points of use. [Ord. No.
2018-93]
A. Connections between potable water systems and other systems or
equipment containing water or other substances of unknown or
questionable quality are prohibited except when and where approved
cross-connection control devices or methods are installed, tested and
maintained to insure proper operation on a continuing basis.
B. _____
(1) No physical connection shall be permitted between the potable
portion of a supply and any other water supply not of equal or
better bacteriological and chemical quality as determined by
inspection and analysis by the Agency.
(2) There shall be no arrangement or connection by which an unsafe
substance may enter a water supply. [Ord. No. 2005-73]
A. The customer's premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the
approved Cross-connection Control Device Inspector for the inspection
of the presence or absence of cross-connections within the customer's
premises, and testing, repair and maintenance of cross-connection
control devices within the customer's premises.
B. On request by the Director of Public Works, or his authorized
representative, the customer shall furnish information regarding the
piping system or systems or water use within the customer's premises.
The customer's premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the
Director of Public Works, or his authorized representative, for the
§ 34-508 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 34-510
1:1284
verification of information submitted by the inspection customer to the
public water supply custodian regarding cross-connection inspection
results. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
C. It shall be the responsibility of the water customer to arrange periodic
surveys of water use practices on his premises to determine whether
there are actual or potential cross-connections to his water system
through which contaminants or pollutants could back flow into his or
the public potable water system. All cross-connection control or other
plumbing inspections must be conducted in accordance with Ill. Rev.
Stat. 1987, ch. 111, par. 1103(1).74
D. It is the responsibility of the water customer to prevent back flow into
the public water system by ensuring that:
(1) All cross-connections are removed; or approved cross-connection
control devices are installed for control of back flow and back
siphonage.
(2) Cross-connection control devices shall be installed in accordance
with the manufacturer's instructions.
(3) Cross-connection control devices shall be inspected at the time of
installation and at least annually by a person approved by the
Agency as a Cross-connection Control Device Inspector (CCCDI).
The inspection of mechanical devices shall include physical testing
in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.
(4) Testing and records:
(a) Each device shall be tested at the time of installation and at
least annually or more frequently if recommended by the
manufacturer.
(b) Records submitted to the community public water supply shall
be available for inspection by Agency personnel in accordance
with Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 111 1/2, ¶1004(e).75
(c) Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most
recent test, name of CCCDI, and type and date of repairs.
(d) A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:
[1] Date of each test;
[2] Name and approval number of person performing the test;
[3] Test results;
[4] Repairs or servicing required;
74.Editor's Note: See now 225 ILCS 320/3.
75.Editor's Note: See now 415 ILCS 5/4(e).
§ 34-510 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-510
1:1285
§ 34-511. [Ch. 34, Sec. 50] Where protection is required.
[5] Repairs and date completed; and
[6] Serving performed and dated completed. [Ord. No.
2005-73]
A. An approved back flow device shall be installed on all connections to the
public water supply as described in the Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm.
Code 890 and the Agency's regulations, 35 Ill. Adm. Code 680. In
addition, an approved back flow prevention device shall be installed on
each water service line to a customer's water system serving premises,
where in the judgment of the Director of Public Works, actual or
potential hazards to the public water supply system exist. [Ord. No.
2018-93]
B. An approved back flow prevention device shall be installed on each
water service line to a customer's water system serving premises where
the following conditions exist:
(1) Premises having an auxiliary water supply, unless such auxiliary
supply is accepted as an additional source by the Director of Public
Works and the source is approved by the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
(2) Premises on which any substance is handled which can create an
actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system. This
shall include premises having sources or systems containing
process fluids or waters originating from the public water supply
system which are no longer under the sanitary control of the
Director of Public Works. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
(3) Premises having internal cross-connections that, in the judgment of
the Director of Public Works and/or the Cross-Connection Control
Device Inspector, are not correctable or intricate plumbing
arrangements which make it impractical to determine whether or
not cross-connections exist. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
(4) Premises where, because of security requirements or other
prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make
a complete cross-connection survey.
(5) Premises having a repeated history of cross-connections being
established or reestablished.
C. An approved back flow device shall be installed on all connections to the
public water supply as described in the Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm.
Code 890 and the Agency's regulations, 35 Ill. Adm. Code 653. In
addition, an approved back flow prevention device shall be installed on
each service line to a customer's water system serving, but not
necessarily limited to, the following types of facilities unless the
§ 34-510 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 34-511
1:1286
§ 34-512. [Ch. 34, Sec. 51] Type of protection required.
Director of Public Works determines that no actual or potential hazard
to the public water supply system exists:
(1) Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, nursing homes.
(2) Laboratories.
(3) Piers, docks, waterfront facilities.
(4) Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations or stormwater
pumping stations.
(5) Food or beverage processing plants.
(6) Chemical plants.
(7) Metal plating industries.
(8) Petroleum processing or storage plants.
(9) Radioactive material processing plants or nuclear reactors.
(10) Car washes.
(11) Pesticide, or herbicide or extermination plants and trucks.
(12) Farm service and fertilizer plants and trucks. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
A. The type of protection required under § 34-511B(1), (2) and (3) of these
regulations shall depend on the degree of hazard which exists as
follows:
(1) An approved fixed proper air gap separation shall be installed
where the public water supply system may be contaminated with
substances that could cause a severe health hazard.
(2) An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved
reduced pressure principle back flow prevention assembly shall be
installed where the public water supply system may be
contaminated with a substance that could cause a system or health
hazard.
(3) An approved fixed proper air sap separation or an approved
reduced pressure principle back flow prevention assembly or a
double check valve assembly shall be installed where the public
water supply system may be polluted with substances that could
cause a pollution hazard not dangerous to health.
B. The type of protection required under § 34-511B(4) and (5) of these
regulations shall be an approved fixed proper air gap separation or an
approved reduced pressure principle back flow prevention device.
§ 34-511 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-512
1:1287
§ 34-513. [Ch. 34, Sec. 52] Back flow prevention devices.
§ 34-514. [Ch. 34, Sec. 53] Inspection and maintenance.
C. Where a public water supply or an auxiliary water supply is used for a
fire protection system, reduced pressure principle back flow preventers
shall be installed on fire safety systems connected to the public water
supply when:
(1) The fire safety system contains antifreeze, fire retardant or other
chemicals;
(2) Water is pumped into the system from another source;
(3) Water flows by gravity from a non-potable source, water can be
pumped into the fire safety system from any other source;
(4) There is a connection whereby another source can be introduced
into the fire safety system.
D. All other fire safety systems connected to the potable water supply shall
be protected by a double check valve assembly on metered service lines
and a double detector check valve assembly on unmetered service lines.
[Ord. No. 2005-73]
E. Where a Reduced Pressure Principle backflow device is required on fire
system four inch and larger for manufacturing or industrial buildings by
the Illinois State Plumbing Code, it shall be a Reduced Pressure
Principle Detector Assembly. [Ord. No. 2008-49]
A. All back flow prevention devices or methods required by these rules and
regulations shall be approved by the Research Foundation for Cross-
Connection Control of the University of Southern California, American
Water Works Association, American Society of Sanitary Engineering,
Canadian Standards Association or American National Standards
Institute or certified by the National Sanitation Foundation to be in
compliance with applicable industry specification. [Ord. No. 2013-03]
B. Installation of approved devices shall be made in accordance with the
manufacturer's instructions. Maintenance as recommended by the
manufacturer of the device shall be performed. Manufacturer's
maintenance manual shall be available on-site. [Ord. No. 2005-73]
A. It shall be the duty of the customer at any premises on which back flow
prevention devices required by these regulations are installed to have
inspection, tests, maintenance and repair made in accordance with the
following schedule or more often where inspections indicate a need or
are specified in manufacturer's instructions.
(1) Fixed proper air gap separations shall be inspected to document
that a proper vertical distance is maintained between the discharge
point of the service line and the flood level rim of the receptacle at
§ 34-512 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 34-514
1:1288
§ 34-515. [Ch. 34, Sec. 54] Booster pumps.
the time of installation and at least annually thereafter. Corrections
to improper or by-passed air gap shall be made within 24 hours.
(2) Double check valve assemblies shall be inspected and tested at
time of installation and at least annually thereafter and required
service performed within five days.
(3) Reduced pressure principle back flow prevention assemblies shall
be tested at the time of installation and at least annually or more
frequently if recommended by the manufacturer and required
service performed within five days.
B. Testing shall be performed by a person who has been approved by the
Agency as competent to service the device. Proof of approval shall be in
writing.
C. Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most recent
test or visual inspection, name of tester, and type and date of repairs.
D. A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:
(1) Date of each test or visual inspection;
(2) Name and approval number of person performing the test or visual
inspection;
(3) Test results;
(4) Repairs or servicing required;
(5) Repairs and date completed; and
(6) Servicing performed and date completed.
E. Whenever back flow prevention devices required by these regulations
are found to be defective, they shall be repaired or replaced at the
expense of the customer without delay as required by this section.
F. Back flow prevention devices shall not be bypassed, made inoperative,
removed or otherwise made ineffective without specific authorization
by the Director of Public Works. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
A. Where a booster pump has been installed on the water service line to or
within any premises, such pump shall be equipped with a low pressure
cutoff device designed to shutoff the booster pump when the pressure
in the water service line on the suction side of the pump drops to 20 psi
or less.
B. It shall be the duty of the water customer to maintain the low pressure
cutoff device in proper working order and to certify to the Water
Resources Manager, at least once a year, that the device is operable.
[Ord. No. 2005-73]
§ 34-514 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-516
1:1289
§ 34-516. [Ch. 34, Sec. 55] Fees.
§ 34-517. [Ch. 34, Sec. 56] Violations.
A. There shall be a fee, in an amount as set forth in the Schedule of Fees,
for filing the survey required under § 34-503 of this chapter. The fee
shall be assessed for each survey filed. This fee shall be assessed each
time a survey is filed, regardless of whether the survey submitted had
been filed previously and is being resubmitted to correct deficiencies or
errors in a previously filed survey. [Ord. No. 2013-03]
B. There shall be a charge, in an amount as set forth in the Schedule of
Fees, per hour assessed for any inspection conducted by the Director of
Public Works or his authorized agent pursuant to § 34-504 of this
chapter or under any other provision of this chapter to check
information set forth in a survey report or to verify compliance with the
requirements of this article. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
C. There shall be a fee, in an amount as set forth in the Schedule of Fees,
for filing the annual certification of cross-connection control devices as
required in § 34-510D(3) of this chapter. The fee shall be assessed for
each device certified. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
D. All fees provided for herein shall be paid to the Director of Public Works
or his designated representative. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
A. The Director of Public Works shall deny or discontinue, after reasonable
notice to the occupants thereof, the water service to any premises
wherein any back flow prevention device required by these regulations
is not installed, tested, maintained and repaired in a manner acceptable
to the Director of Public Works, or if it is found that the back flow
prevention device has been removed or bypassed, or if an unprotected
cross-connection exists on the premises, or if a low pressure cutoff
required by these regulations is not installed and maintained in working
order.
B. Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the customer
has corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects in conformance
with these regulations and to the satisfaction of the Director of Public
Works, and the required reconnection fee is paid.
C. Neither the City of Bloomington, the Director of Public Works, or its
agents or assigns shall be liable to any customers of the City of
Bloomington for any injury, damages or lost revenues which may result
from termination of said customer's water supply in accordance with
the terms of this ordinance, whether or not said termination of the
water supply was with or without notice.
D. The customer responsible for back-siphoned material or contamination
through back flow, if contamination of the potable water supply system
occurs through an illegal cross-connection or an improperly installed,
§ 34-516 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 34-517
1:1290
maintained or repaired device, or a device which has been bypassed,
must bear the cost of cleanup of the potable water supply system.
E. Any person found to be violating any provision of this Ordinance shall
be served with written notice stating the notice of the violation and
providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof.
The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice,
permanently cease all violation.
F. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance in addition
to the fine provided, shall become liable to the City for any expense, loss
or damage occasioned by the City by reason of such violation, whether
the same was caused before or after notice. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
§ 34-517 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-517
1:1291

ARTICLE VI
Drains and Sewers
[Ord. No. 2005-73]
§ 34-601. [Ch. 34, Sec. 93] Independent system.
The drainage and plumbing system of each new building and of new work
installed in an existing building shall be separate from and independent of
that of any other building, except as provided below, and every building
shall have an independent connection with a public or private sewer when
available. In no case, except as noted below, will the sewer from one
building be permitted to run beneath any other building. A sewer is deemed
available when a public sewer has been provided for the plat of ground of
which it may be a part.
§ 34-602. [Ch. 34, Sec. 94] Exception.
Where one building stands in the rear of another building or an interior lot
and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building
through adjoining alley, court yard, or driveway, the house drain from the
front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole will be
considered as one house drain.
§ 34-603. [Ch. 34, Sec. 95] Existing house sewers and drains. [Ord.
No. 2005-73]
Existing house sewers and drains may be used in connection with new
buildings or new plumbing only when they conform in all respects to
requirements governing new sewers or drains, as prescribed in this article.
All excavations required to be made for installation of a house drainage
system or any part thereof outside of or within the walls of a building shall
be open trench work. All such trenches and tunnels shall be kept open until
the piping has been inspected and approved.
§ 34-604. [Ch. 34, Sec. 98] Building sewer.
A. The waste piping from a point five feet outside a building to the City
sewer shall be considered the building sewer and shall be constructed
of the following materials with a minimum diameter of four inches: cast
or ductile iron, PVC schedule 40, PVC schedule 80 with solvent weld
joints, or PVC Schedule 21 - Type PSM-SDR slip joint pipe.
B. All piping material shall be embedded with a minimum of four inches
granular cradle below the sewer pipe and six inches of granular cradle
above. [Ord. No. 2013-03]
C. Cure in place sewer liners may be accepted for making repairs of
existing sanitary and stormwater sewer services provided liner
systems, installation and materials standards are approved and permits
issued prior to installation.
§ 34-601 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-604
1:1293
§ 34-605. [Ch. 34, Sec. 102] Plat of sewers.
Whenever any sanitary sewer and storm sewer, or either of them, is
constructed or altered on any lot, block, tract, or parcel of land in the City
of Bloomington, Illinois, the owner, building, or contractor thereof shall
file a plat thereof on a form furnished by said City in the office of and
acceptable to the City Engineer showing location, size, depth, direction,
and connections of such sanitary sewer and storm sewer in relation to the
boundary lines of such lot, block, tract, or parcel of land, any building, or
structure located thereon.
D. Pipe bursting is only permitted using approved material as listed in the
Illinois Plumbing and the approval of the Plumbing Inspector (Plans and
Permit required). [Ord. No. 2013-03]
§ 34-604 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 34-605
1:1294
ARTICLE VII
Plumbing Inspector - Office Created; Appointment; Term;
Qualifications
[Ord. No. 2005-73]
§ 34-701. [Ch. 34, Sec. 108] Plumbing Inspector. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
There is hereby created the office of Plumbing Inspector of the City. The
Plumbing Inspector shall be subordinate to the Director of Community
Development. The person shall be well qualified from practical experience
in the business of plumbing, house drainage, and plumbing installations.
He/she must hold a Plumber's State of Illinois License.
§ 34-702. [Ch. 34, Sec. 111] May enter private premises. [Ord. No.
2005-73]
The said Inspector may, as far as necessary in the performance of his
duties, enter during normal business hours any building or premises in the
jurisdiction of the City.
§ 34-703. [Ch. 34, Sec. 112] Notices - record - inspections -
collection of fees. [Ord. No. 2005-73]
It shall be the duty of the said Inspector or designated agent to sign and
issue all notices and certificates required, to pass upon all plans submitted,
to keep a daily record of his work, permits granted, violations of these
regulations, and all other matters which may pertain thereto; the Plumbing
Inspector shall inspect all houses, buildings and structures in the course
of construction or undergoing alteration or repair as often as may be
necessary and shall see that all plumbing work, drainage, and ventilation
is done in accordance with the provisions of these regulations. He/she shall
collect all fees required by this article and pay the same to the City Director
of Finance. All excavations to be made for the purpose of laying or, repairing
sewage pipes from the main sewer line to the building line shall be under
the direction and control of the Plumbing Inspector and shall be subject
to his inspections and approval. All permits necessary for such excavations
shall be issued by the City Engineer.
§ 34-704. [Ch. 34, Sec. 116] Duty of Inspector.
It shall be the duty of the said Inspector to see that the construction,
maintenance, and control of the plumbing, drainage, and ventilation of all
structures or buildings in the City conform to and comply with the rules and
regulations established by the Code of the City or any future amendments
thereto hereafter passed by the Council.
§ 34-705. [Ch. 34, Sec. 117] Fees.
A. New plumbing system installations, additions, or major alterations to
existing systems shall upon approval of plans and specifications be
§ 34-701 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-705
1:1295
granted a work permit. The total fee for such a permit shall be an
accumulation of the fees corresponding to each and every plumbing
fixture or appurtenant device in the system as contained in the
following schedule. The minimum fee for a permit in this section shall
be set forth in the Schedule of Fees.
(1) The fee for any fixture or work not listed in this section shall be
determined by the Plumbing Inspector and as set forth in the
Schedule of Fees.
(2) Medical gas systems. Fees for medical gas system installation shall
be calculated by cost of work using the Building Permit fee
schedule set forth in Chapter 10. All medical gas systems installed
or repaired shall be by a certified medical gas installer.
(3) Except as specifically noted, permit fees of $13 are applicable only
for one and two-family dwelling installations. Multifamily and other
nonresidential fees shall be $15. Fees for plumbing work over
$25,000 will be determined by plumbing permit fee schedule of $15
plus cost of work evaluation using fee schedule for building permit
in the Building Code (Chapter 10). [Ord. No. 2013-03]
B. If proposed work is in pipe replacement only, the fee will be calculated
based on "reasonable estimated cost" and using the fee schedule for
building permits in the Schedule of Fees. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
C. Minor repairs. Minor repairs do not require changes in the piping to or
from plumbing fixtures or involve the removal, replacement,
installation or reinstallation of any pipe or plumbing fixture. The
minimum fee for the permit, if needed, shall be in an amount as set
forth in the Schedule of Fees. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
D. Pipe work. Any water supply pipe replacement or addition, and sewer
pipe installation work shall be granted permits with fees based on the
reasonable cost of improvement and using the fee schedule as set forth
in the Schedule of Fees. The minimum fee for a permit, if needed, shall
be in an amount as set forth in the Schedule of Fees. [Ord. No.
2018-89]
E. Permits issued to owner occupied single-family residences shall be
charged a permit fee based on the above schedules with an additional
50% surcharge. [Ord. No. 2005-73]
F. A penalty surcharge of 100% but not less than $50 shall be added to the
permit fee when any work is undertaken prior to obtaining a required
permit.
G. A re-inspection fee, in an amount as set forth in the Schedule of Fees,
may be imposed when building is locked at time of scheduled inspection
or work being inspected is not complete at time of inspection. [Ord.
No. 2018-89]
§ 34-705 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 34-705
1:1296
§ 34-706. [Ch. 34, Sec. 121] Police power.
The Plumbing Inspector shall have (police) power to enforce compliance
with the rules and regulations set forth in this chapter.
H. Nothing in this section shall prevent the Plumbing Inspector from
recommending to the Plumbing Board of Appeals the revocation of the
contractor's Certificate of Registration for repeated violation of doing
work prior to his obtaining the required permit. [Ord. No. 2005-73]
§ 34-705 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-706
1:1297

ARTICLE VIII
Appeals
[Ord. No. 2013-68]
§ 34-801. [Ch. 34, Sec. 122] Appeals. [Ord. No. 2013-68]
Appeals relating to this chapter will be heard by the Building Board of
Appeals as provided in Chapter 10, § 10-212 of this Code.
§ 34-801 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-801
1:1299

ARTICLE IX
Enactment and Penalties
[Ord. No. 2005-73]
§ 34-901. [Ch. 34, Sec. 127] Revocation of rights and privileges.
[Ord. No. 2005-73]
The rights and privileges of a licensed plumber to perform as such in the
City shall become void in the City when he/she shall refuse or neglect
within a reasonable time after notification thereof to make such necessary
corrections to plumbing work as shall have been ordered by the Plumbing
Inspector or if he/she shall permit the use of his name by a person or
persons for the purpose of obtaining a permit to do plumbing work.
§ 34-902. [Ch. 34, Sec. 128] Penalties for violation. [Ord. No.
1994-60]
Any person or persons who violate, neglect or refuse to comply with or who
resist or oppose the enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter
where no other penalty is provided shall be fined not less than $100 nor
more than $500 for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed each day that a violation continues.
§ 34-901 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-902
1:1301

ARTICLE X
Additions, Deletions, Modifications to the 2004 Illinois State
Plumbing Code
[Ord. No. 2005-73]
§ 34-1001. [Ch. 34, Sec. 130] Plumbing fixtures.
§ 34-1002. [Ch. 34, Sec. 131] Interceptors required.
§ 34-1003. [Ch. 34, Sec. 132] Swimming pools, spas, etc. [Ord. No.
2005-73]
All piping related to the proper operation of a swimming pool, spas, or the
like are part of plumbing work and must comply with the State of Illinois
Plumbing Code and this chapter including necessary permits required.
A. Only fixtures used for personal hygiene shall be installed in a rest room.
B. Commercial. Hand washing lavatory shall be installed in the same room
as the water closet.
C. Mop sink, service sink and similar fixtures shall not be located next to
or in the same room used for a gas fired furnace, boiler, or water heater.
[Ord. No. 2005-73]
A. It is required that grease interceptors (traps) be located outside the
building and shall be accessible for maintenance purposes. See
illustrations in the Illinois State Plumbing Code.
(1) Exception. When property restrictions prevent a grease interceptor
to be located outside of an existing building, i.e., downtown
buildings, strip and shopping malls, Plumbing Drainage Institute
(PDI) approved grease interceptor may be allowed in lieu of the
required outside grease interceptor. Such interceptor shall be
installed with an approved solid interceptor located before the
grease interceptor.
B. All restaurants which require a grease interceptor as per the Illinois
State Plumbing Code shall install a minimum 1,000 gallon outside
interceptor. Sandwich bars and carryout services which only prepare
(not cooked foods) cold sandwiches shall install a minimum 250 gallon
grease interceptor or as described in above code section.
C. Any business or individual which causes the City's sewer to become
laden or plugged with fats, oils, grease, or other substance will be
required to reimburse a minimum of $2,500 (first offense) or actual cost
whichever is greater to the City of Bloomington for any cost related to
cleaning of said sewer. Fines will double for every reoccurrence of this
violation. [Ord. No. 2013-03]
§ 34-1001 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-1003
1:1303
Chapter 35
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 34-1003 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 34-1003
1:1304
ARTICLE I
Composition Officers of City
§ 35-101. [Ch. 35, Sec. 1] Composition of Department - indefinite
absences.
A. The established personnel of the Police Department of the City of
Bloomington shall consist of the following persons: Chief of Police,
three Assistant Chiefs of Police, six Lieutenants, 16 Sergeants, 102
Police Patrol Officers, and such civilian employees as may be provided
for in the annual budget. The Police Department shall be composed of
the following offices, divisions and bureaus to which the Officers and
civilian employees shall be assigned: [Ord. No. 2018-20]
Office of the Chief of Police
Office of the Assistant Chief of Operations
Office of the Assistant Chief of Administration
Office of the Assistant Chief of Professional Standards
Patrol Division
Criminal Investigation Division
Records Division
Public Affairs
Training Division
School Resource Officers
Neighborhood Focus Team
Communication Center
Animal Control (contracted through McLean County)
B. Notwithstanding the limitation enumerated in Subsection A above, the
City Manager is authorized to request an additional member of the
Police Department whenever he determines that at least one member of
the Department is absent from his or her regularly scheduled duties for
a period of indefinite duration.
(1) Whenever the City Manager makes a determination under this
subsection, he shall inform the Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners, which shall treat such determination as a vacancy
and fill it. Any person appointed to the Department under this
subsection shall receive an appointment, subject to being laid off in
the event the absent member returns to his or her regular duties
prior to the creation of a vacancy in the Department, unless the
City Manager makes a determination that laying off the officer at
that time would create a hardship in the department because of the
particular job duties which the officer is engaged in at the time the
absent member returns. Any person laid off shall be recalled to
§ 35-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 35-101
1:1305
§ 35-102. [Ch. 35, Sec. 2] Appointment of Chief; officers. [Ord. No.
1982-38]
The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the City Manager and not the
Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, and his or her appointment shall
be made upon no other basis than that of merit and fitness; and he or
she need not be a member of the Department at the time of his or her
appointment. The members of the Police Department, other than civilian
employees, shall be and are officers of the City.
§ 35-103. [Ch. 35, Sec. 3] Board of Fire and Police Commissioners
to appoint; disqualification; chemical abuse.
service as soon as a vacancy exists or another determination under
this subsection is made.
(2) Layoffs shall be subject to the following provisos:
(a) Officers enrolled in the Police Officer Training Institute or field
training shall not be laid off until completion of such courses or
training;
(b) If more than one officer is hired pursuant to this subsection,
officers shall be laid off pursuant to the "last-in, first out"
method; and
(c) An officer on lay-off status pursuant to this subsection shall be
recalled to service prior to the hiring of a new candidate from
the eligibility list.
(3) The making of a determination under this subsection lies solely
within the discretion of the City Manager, and no person may
compel the City Manager to make a determination under this
subsection. [Ord. No. 1995-51]
A. The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall appoint all members
of the Police Department other than the Chief and civilian employees.
[Ord. No. 1982-38]
B. It is the policy of the City of Bloomington that persons who take or
consume illegal drugs or consume alcohol excessively not be employed
in the Bloomington Police Department. Whenever the Board of Fire and
Police Commissioners finds that an applicant for employment in the
Bloomington Police Department has taken or consumed any narcotic,
dangerous drug or controlled substance (except pursuant to direction
of a licensed physician) or has repeatedly consumed alcohol to the point
of intoxication, it shall refuse to certify such applicant for appointment
as a probationary employee or shall decline to place such applicant on
an eligibility list for original appointment, unless such applicant shall
establish to the Board's satisfaction that such conduct has ceased and is
unlikely to be resumed. An applicant's successful completion of a
chemical dependency detoxification program may be considered as
§ 35-101 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 35-103
1:1306
§ 35-104. [Ch. 35, Sec. 3.1] Application for pension mandatory.
[Ord. No. 1981-52]
The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall require every new
appointee to the Police Department, as a condition of his or her
employment, to make timely application for admission into the City of
Bloomington Police Pension Fund, operated pursuant to Article III of the
Illinois Pension Code (Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 108 1/2 3-101 et seq.)76. The failure
to be accepted after timely application may be the basis for dismissal from
the Department.
§ 35-105. [Ch. 35, Sec. 3.2] Police Training Institute condition of
employment. [Ord. No. 1989-45]
It shall be a condition of continued employment for any person hired as
a police officer, that he or she be accepted and satisfactorily complete all
requirements of the Police Training Institute or comparable facility and
pass the State of Illinois Certification Test. Failure to do so will result in
termination.
§ 35-106. [Ch. 35, Sec. 3.3] Reimbursement of training expenses.
[Ord. No. 1988-83]
Applicants for the position of patrol officer, as a condition of employment,
shall be required to sign an agreement to repay the City of Bloomington
during the first 104 weeks of their employment in the Bloomington Police
Department. Payment can be made by continued employment in the
Bloomington Police Department at the rate of 1/104 of the training costs
each week of employment. As used in this section, "training costs" includes
cost of training, salary, medical examination and equipment.
§ 35-107. [Ch. 35, Sec. 4] Board of Fire and Police Commissioners
not to fill vacancies, etc., except by request.
The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners of the City shall not fill any
vacancies in the Department of Police, or make any promotions within the
Department of Police until requested in writing by the City Manager to fill
such vacancies or make such promotions.
§ 35-108. [Ch. 35, Sec. 5] City Manager to assign duties.
The City Manager shall have the authority to assign the various officers of
the Department of Police of the City to duty in the various divisions of the
Department.
§ 35-109. [Ch. 35, Sec. 6] Duties generally.
evidence of eligibility, but shall not be conclusive evidence thereof.
[Ord. No. 1982-38]
76.Editor's Note: See 40 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.
§ 35-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 35-109
1:1307
§ 35-110. [Ch. 35, Sec. 7] Duties of Chief.
The Chief of Police shall be keeper of the City jail and shall have custody of
all persons incarcerated therein. He shall keep such records and make such
reports concerning the activities of his department as may be responsible
for the performance by the Police Department of all its functions, and all
persons who are members of the Department shall serve subject to the
orders of the Chief of Police.
§ 35-111. [Ch. 35, Sec. 8] Stolen property - custody of.
The Chief of Police shall be custodian of all lost, abandoned or stolen
property in the City.
§ 35-112. [Ch. 35, Sec. 9] Service of process. [Ord. No. 1981-52]
The Chief of Police or any officer of the Department upon general or special
order of the Chief is authorized to serve writs, summons and other process.
A. The Department of Police shall, under the supervision of the Chief of
Police:
(1) Preserve the peace and order of the City;
(2) Protect persons and property from harm;
(3) Prevent crime and detect and arrest or cause to be arrested, with
or without process, all persons who are suspected of or are found
violating any municipal ordinance or any criminal law of the State;
(4) Regulate traffic upon public thoroughfares;
(5) Enforce all criminal laws and ordinances;
(6) Secure all necessary complaints, warrants and other documents for
the enforcement of these duties;
(7) Cause to be served and executed any criminal process issued by
any courts of competent jurisdiction with the City;
(8) Have custody of lost and stolen property; and
(9) Maintain proper records of crimes and criminals and matters
related thereto which shall be made available to legally authorized
persons upon such terms and at such fees as the Chief of Police
may prescribe from time to time.
B. Every member of the Police Department is hereby declared to be a
conservator of the peace. [Ord. No. 1984-65]
§ 35-109 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 35-113
1:1308
§ 35-113. [Ch. 35, Sec. 10] Fires nuisances obstructions.
He shall be charged with the duty of protecting the rights of persons and
property and providing proper police protection at every fire. He shall also
take notice of all nuisances and take proper steps to abate the same. He
shall cause to be removed all impediments and obstructions in the streets,
avenues, alleys and public places of the City or cause immediate notice
thereof to be given to the proper officer whose duty it may be to attend to
the same, according to the Code of the City.
§ 35-114. [Ch. 35, Sec. 11] Assistant Chief duties.
§ 35-115. [Ch. 35, Sec. 13] Monthly reports.
He shall make monthly reports in writing to the City Manager of the state
of the Police Department, with such statistics and suggestions as he may
deem advisable for the improvement of the police force, its discipline and
government. Such report shall also show the number of arrests made by
the police force during the preceding month, the offense charged, the
magistrate before whom tried, and the disposition of the case.
§ 35-116. [Ch. 35, Sec. 14] Conduct of members.
It shall be the duty of every member of the Police Department to conduct
himself in a proper and law abiding manner and to avoid the use of
unnecessary force.
A. The Chief of Police shall, with approval of the City Manager, designate
one person to serve as Assistant Chief of Police of Operations, one
person to serve as Assistant Chief of Professional Standards and one
person to serve as Assistant Chief of Police of Administration. Their
appointments shall be made upon no other basis than that of merit and
fitness. Those persons need not be a member of the Department at the
time of appointment and shall serve in said capacity at the pleasure of
the Chief. If appointed to such position from within the sworn ranks of
the Bloomington Police Department, such person shall be considered as
on furlough from the rank they held immediately prior to being
designated as Assistant Chief and said seniority in such rank continue
to accrue during that assignment as Assistant Chief of Police. If the
Chief removes a person from that assignment as Assistant Chief, any
person who was appointed to such position from within the sworn ranks
of the Bloomington Police Department, shall revert to and be
established in the rank from which he/she was on furlough from and
thereafter shall be entitled to all the benefits and emoluments of such
rank.
B. The duties of the Assistant Chief of Operations, Assistant Chief of
Professional Standards and Assistant Chief of Administration shall
consist of such duties as assigned by the Chief of Police. [Ord. No.
2014-70]
§ 35-113 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 35-117
1:1309
§ 35-117. [Ch. 35, Sec. 15] Witness fees.
Every member of the Police Department shall appear as a witness whenever
this is necessary in a prosecution for a violation of a City ordinance or of a
State or Federal law. But no such member shall receive any witness fees for
such services in any action or suit to which the City is a party; all fees due
for such services shall if paid be turned over to the City Treasurer.
§ 35-118. [Ch. 35, Sec. 16] Rules and regulations.
§ 35-119. [Ch. 35, Sec. 17] Auxiliary policemen.
A. The Chief of Police may make or prescribe such rules and regulations
for the guidance of the members of the Department as he shall see fit;
such rules, when approved by the City Manager, shall be binding upon
such members. He shall see that all Department members have copies
of rules, regulations and orders available to them for study and
reference, and it shall be his duty to see that the same are enforced.
B. The Chief of Police is authorized to establish by rule a program whereby
volunteer chaplains are available to confer with employees of the Police
Department who desire counseling and to provide crisis intervention to
members of the public with whom the police come in contact in the
discharge of their duties. [Ord. No. 1990-89]
A. Appointment. The Police Chief, with the approval of the City Council,
may appoint any reputable person as an Auxiliary Policeman to serve
for such term and on such conditions as may be designated by the terms
of such appointment. Auxiliary Policemen are not members of the
regular Police Department, and shall have only such powers and duties
of an Auxiliary Policeman as may be given by the Chief. Appointments
may be revoked at any time by the Chief of Police, the City Manager or
the Council. [Ord. No. 1981-4]
B. Bond. No such appointment shall become effective until a surety bond
in the amount of $1,000 with a recognized surety company as surety
has been approved by the Corporation Counsel and filed with the City
Clerk, which bond shall be conditioned to pay any damage resulting
from the failure of the appointee to perform his or her duties properly.
[Ord. No. 1981-4]
C. Compensation. Auxiliary Policemen shall receive no compensation from
the City unless such compensation is ordered by the Council. [Ord. No.
1981-4]
D. Guidelines. The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to establish
guidelines for eligibility for appointment as an Auxiliary or Special
Policeman, application procedures, training, identification, symbols of
authority, rules of conduct, fees, and grounds for revocation of
designation as an Auxiliary Policeman. [Ord. No. 1981-4]
§ 35-117 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 35-120
1:1310
§ 35-120. [Ch. 35, Sec. 18] Aiding police.
Any police officer of this City may, at any time, call upon the able-bodied
male person above the age of 21 years, to aid him in arresting or taking into
custody any person guilty of having committed any unlawful act, or charged
therewith, or aid such officer In preventing the commission of any unlawful
act. No such person shall refuse or neglect to give such aid or assistance,
when so requested.
§ 35-121. [Ch. 35, Sec. 19] Resisting arrest: hindering police:
aiding prisoners to escape, etc.
It shall be unlawful for any person to resist any member of the police force
in the discharge of his duty or to in any way interfere with or prevent him
from discharging his duty or endeavor to do so; and in any manner to assist
any person in the custody of any member of the police force to escape or
attempt to escape from such custody.
§ 35-122. [Ch. 35, Sec. 20] Falsely impersonating an officer penalty.
Any person who shall falsely impersonate any of the members of the Police
Department of this City or shall maliciously, or with intent to deceive, use
or imitate any of the signs, signals or devices used by any officer of said
Department or who, not being a police officer, shall wear in public the police
uniform or shall impersonate or represent falsely that he is a member or
officer of said Department shall be subject to a fine of not less than $10 nor
more than $100 for each offense.
§ 35-123. [Ch. 35, Sec. 21] Members of the Police Department bond
oath. [Ord. No. 1981-52]
Before entering upon the duties of his office, each member of the Police
Department shall take the oath prescribed for all City officers and shall
execute a bond payable to the City of Bloomington in the penal sum of
$2,000 with sureties to be approved by the Director of Finance, conditioned
upon the faithful performance of the duties of his office. The Chief of Police
and other members of the Police Department shall receive such salary or
compensation as shall be provided by Ordinance or contract approved by
the corporate authorities.
§ 35-124. [Ch. 35, Sec. 22] Reports to superior officer.
Every policeman shall report to his commanding officer all persons to be
gamblers, or suspected of gambling, receivers of stolen property, thieves,
burglars, or disorderly persons, and also all unlawful or disorderly houses
or places in said City which may, from time to time, come to his knowledge.
He shall also report to the Chief of Police any defects or any obstructions in
any public street, alley, or sidewalk in said City.
§ 35-120 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 35-125
1:1311
§ 35-125. [Ch. 35, Sec. 23] Shall seize all gambling devices.
It shall be the duty of each member of the Police Department to seize any
table, instrument, chips, slot machine, or gambling device, or anything of
any kind used for gambling, and forthwith convey the same to the Police
Headquarters.
§ 35-126. [Ch. 35, Sec. 24] Power of arrest.
The police patrolmen, together with the Chief of Police, Lieutenants,
Sergeants, and all other persons possessing the power and authority of
police patrolmen shall have power to arrest all persons in the City found in
the act of violating any law or this Code or aiding or abetting in any such
violation and shall arrest all persons found under suspicious circumstances
and shall take all persons so arrested to the City prison until they can be
brought before the proper magistrate or court for trial or examination.
§ 35-127. [Ch. 35, Sec. 25] To serve warrants and process have
powers of constables.
They shall also have power and authority and it shall be their duty in
the City and outside of the same, when necessary and lawful, to serve
and execute warrants and other legal papers for the apprehension and
commitment of persons charged with the violation of any provisions of this
Code or any crime or misdemeanor or offense against the laws of the City
or State, or held for examination or trial. They shall also have power and
authority, and it shall be their duty, when ordered by the Chief of Police,
to serve and execute any civil process issued by any court in which the
City is a party and while serving or executing or assisting in the service
or execution of any such warrant or process, they shall be vested with and
have all powers and authority conferred on constables at common law and
by the laws of this State.
§ 35-128. [Ch. 35, Sec. 26] Give fire alarms and attend fires.
It shall be the duty of the members of the Police Department to aid the Fire
Department by giving alarms in case of fire and in clearing the streets or
grounds in the immediate vicinity of the fire, whenever the same shall be
necessary to aid the firemen in the performance of their duties.
§ 35-129. [Ch. 35, Sec. 27] Neglect of duty, etc. penalty.
Any member of the Police Department who shall neglect or refuse to
perform any duty required of him by this Code of the City or the Rules
and Regulations of the Police Department or who shall in the discharge of
his official duties be guilty of any fraud, favoritism, extortion, oppression,
or willful wrong or injustice or who shall become intoxicated while in
the discharge of his duties or who shall hold familiar conversation with
prostitutes or associate with rowdies, gamblers, or persons of low repute
or who shall use violent, coarse, insolent, or abusive language to a superior
or fellow officer or to any citizen, resident, or stranger or who shall use
§ 35-125 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 35-129
1:1312
the power vested in him for the satisfaction of personal ill-will or hatred
against any person shall, in each case, be subject to a fine of not less than
$5 nor more than $100 and shall also be subject to removal from office by
the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners.
§ 35-130. [Ch. 35, Sec. 28] Alleviation of emergency situation -
financial responsibility. [Ord. No. 1982-54]
Whenever any member of the Bloomington Police Department in response
to a call encounters an emergency situation requiring the procuring of
goods or services from sources other than the City of Bloomington to
respond to such emergency, said member is authorized, by means of
procedures determined by the Police Chief, to procure such goods or
services. The City of Bloomington shall be entitled to recover from any
person, firm, or entity causing or contributing to the causing of said
emergency any portion of the cost of said goods and/or services paid by the
City.
§ 35-131. [Ch. 35, Sec. 29] Medical expenses of arrestees.
A. In order to implement "An Act Relating to the Responsibility for Certain
Incurred Expenses Relating to Arrestees" Public Act 83370 approved
September 14, 1983, as heretofore or hereafter amended,77 the City of
Bloomington will accept financial liability for necessary medical
expenses incurred by arrestees of the Bloomington Police Department.
This financial responsibility shall take the form of a direct payment from
the City of Bloomington to the provider of medical services to such
arrestee.
(1) Before liability will be assumed, the following conditions must be
met:
(a) The recipient of the services must have been arrested by and
be in the custody of the Bloomington Police Department;
(b) The recipient must have been in need of immediate medical
care;
(c) The provider of the medical services must be unable to collect
directly from the recipient or his insurance company.
(2) For purposes of this section, a provider of medical services shall be
deemed unable to collect directly from the recipient when, applying
its usual procedures, it has been unable to collect for services
rendered and the next step in its collection procedure is to refer the
account to an attorney or collection agency. [Ord. No. 1983-102]
B. Upon making payment as provided for herein, the City of Bloomington
shall succeed to the rights of the provider of medical services to the
arrestee and shall be empowered to bring any appropriate action at law
77.Editor's Note: See the County Jail Act, 730 ILCS 125/0.01 et seq.
§ 35-129 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 35-131
1:1313
§ 35-132. [Ch. 35, Sec. 30] Fingerprint requests. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
The Bloomington Police Department will in the manner provided in this
section honor requests from persons to be fingerprinted and to have
fingerprint cards prepared for them. Such requests will be honored at times
to be set by the Police Department. A fee shall be charged in an amount set
forth in the Schedule of Fees, per fingerprint card. The Chief of Police is
authorized to waive this fee with respect to cards prepared at the request of
a law enforcement agency, private security agency or military organization
of the United States or State of Illinois.
§ 35-133. [Ch. 35, Sec. 31] Traffic accident reports. [Ord. No.
2018-89]
Except as otherwise provided in this section, the Police Department shall
charge an amount set forth in the Schedule of Fees for each copy of a Traffic
Accident Report. In the event that the Report requested is of an accident
investigated by one or more officers who reconstructed the accident, the
charge for such Report is $20.
§ 35-134. [Ch. 35, Sec. 31.5] Supplemental Police Department fees.
[Ord. No. 2018-89]
The Police Department shall charge fees as set forth in the Schedule of Fees
for various other services and registrations, including Police Department
Service Fees, Sex Offender Registration, Towing Violation and False Alarm
Service.
or in equity to recover payment of the amounts expended on behalf of
the arrestee. [Ord. No. 1983-102]
C. It is the purpose of this section to outline and define the obligation of
the City of Bloomington under Public Act 83370. It is not the intention
of the Bloomington City Council to assume any liability hereby other
than that which is required by Public Act 83370. [Ord. No. 1983-102]
§ 35-131 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 35-134
1:1314
ARTICLE II
False Alarms
§ 35-201. [Ch. 35, Sec. 41] Definitions.
For the purpose of this Ordinance, the following words and phrases will
have the meanings ascribed to them as follows:
ALARM SYSTEM — Any mechanical or electrical device that is arranged,
designed, or used to signal the occurrence in the City of Bloomington of
a burglary, robbery, or other criminal offense requiring urgent attention,
and to which police personnel are expected to respond. Alarm systems
include those through which public safety personnel are notified directly of
such signals through automatic recording devices or are notified indirectly
by way of third persons who monitor the alarm systems and who report
such signals to the Police Department. Alarm systems also Include those
designed to register a signal which is so audible, visible or in other ways
perceptible outside a protected building structure or facility as to notify
persons in the neighborhood beyond the zoning lot where the signal is
located who in turn may notify the Police Department of the signal. Alarm
systems do not include auxiliary devices installed by telephone companies
to protect telephone equipment or systems which might be damaged or
disrupted by the use of an alarm system. Alarms in separate structures are
to be counted as separate systems even though owned by the same person
or entity.
AUDIBLE ALARM — A device designed for the detection of unauthorized
entry on premises which generates an audible sound on the premises when
it is actuated.
AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE DIALING DEVICE — A device which is
interconnected to a telephone line and is programmed to select a
predetermined telephone number and transmit by voice message or code
signal an emergency message indicating a need for emergency response.
COMMUNICATION CENTER — The Bloomington Police Department
located at City Hall, 109 East Olive Street, used for the receipt and
transmission of signals by radio or wire transmissions.
DIRECTOR OF COMMUNICATIONS — The person designated by the Chief
of Police to supervise and direct the Communication Center.
FALSE ALARM — A report received by the Police Department from any
source calling for a response by the Police Department to the premises on
which an alarm system is located, where an emergency situation does not
exist.
HARD LINE — A telephone or other line leading directly from a commercial
alarm service to the Communication Center where said line is used solely to
report the existence of circumstances necessitating police response.
PREMISES — Any private, public, residential, commercial or industrial land
and/or buildings located within the City of Bloomington.
§ 35-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 35-201
1:1315
RESPONSIBLE PARTY — Any person, firm, partnership, company,
association or corporation, or any owner or lessee of premises on which an
alarm system is installed or maintained, or the agents or representatives
of the aforementioned which or who utilize an alarm system on premises
located within the City of Bloomington.
SILENT ALARM — Inaudible alarm which summons police through the
Communications Center.
YEAR — A period beginning January 1 and continuing through December
31.[Ord. No. 1996-24]
§ 35-202. [Ch. 35, Sec. 42] Automatic 911 dialing devices
prohibited. [Ord. No. 1996-24]
It is prohibited for any person owning or maintaining an alarm system with
automatic dialing capabilities to program or permit such alarm system to
automatically dial 911. Violations of this section shall be punished by a fine
not less than $100 and not more than $500 per violation.
§ 35-203. [Ch. 35, Sec. 43] False alarms; affirmative defenses.
§ 35-204. [Ch. 35, Sec. 44] Maintenance of emergency contact
information; notification to Police Department.
A. A responsible party for a premises shall not be assessed a fine for the
occurrence of the first four false alarms per calendar year. [Ord. No.
1996-24]
B. The responsible party will be assessed a fine of $50 for each false alarm
in excess of the first four false alarms in that calendar year. [Ord. No.
1996-24]
C. The following are affirmative defenses to a charge of a false alarm:
(1) That a false alarm was caused by extraordinary climatic conditions
such as electrical storms over which the responsible party had no
control;
(2) That the alarm was caused by extraordinary circumstances beyond
the control of the responsible party such as but not limited to the
downing of a power pole due to a motor vehicle accident;
(3) That immediately prior to the false alarm, the responsible party
notified the Police Department that maintenance was being
performed on the alarm system. Prior to any maintenance or
testing of any alarm system, the responsible party and/or an alarm
company representative must call the Police Department and
advise that such work is being performed. After completion of any
tests/maintenance another call must also be made to the Police
Department advising completion of any tests or maintenance.
[Ord. No. 2004-108]
§ 35-201 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 35-204
1:1316
§ 35-205. [Ch. 35, Sec. 45] Intentional activation of an alarm for a
noncriminal occurrence.
§ 35-206. [Ch. 35, Sec. 46] Audible alarms not deactivated or
disconnected a nuisance.
A. Entities which provide monitoring services of alarm systems and which
notify the Police Department of alarms are required to maintain
accurate emergency contact information which will include the identity
and telephone number or numbers of persons (hereafter called
keyholders) who are to be contacted with the information of the alarm
activation. The responsibility for contacting such keyholders regarding
the alarm activation shall be with the entity providing such monitoring
services and not with the City. [Ord. No. 1996-24]
B. It is the responsibility of an entity providing monitoring services
described in Subsection A to contact the Police Department within 20
minutes after its initial call to the Police Department, informing the
Police Department of the identity of the emergency contact person and
that person's estimated time of arrival. If the monitoring entity cannot
contact the keyholder, it shall report such fact to the Police Department
within that same 20 minute period, explaining the reasons why contact
could not be made. [Ord. No. 1996-24]
C. Violators of this section shall be punishable by a minimum fine of not
less than $100 per violation and not more than $500 per violation.
[Ord. No. 1996-24]
A. Any person who intentionally activates any alarm when no offense is
being committed or to test an alarm without first advising the
Communication Center shall be deemed to have violated this
Ordinance. [Ord. No. 1990-17]
B. It is not a defense to a charge of intentionally activating an alarm under
conditions set forth in this section that such intentional activation was
one of the allowable four false alarms set forth in § 35-203. [Ord. No.
1996-24]
A. Responsible parties who have audible alarms on their premises, must
have alarms reset or shut off within 10 minutes after notification that
the alarm has been activated. [Ord. No. 1996-24]
B. It shall be a violation of this Ordinance if a responsible party:
(1) Fails to deactivate the alarm within 10 minutes after notification
from the Communications Center to do so; or
(2) Fails to provide for it or its designee to be contacted by telephone
within 10 minutes of activation of an audible alarm. [Ord. No.
1996-24]
§ 35-204 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 35-206
1:1317
§ 35-207. [Ch. 35, Sec. 47] (Reserved) [Repealed 4-8-1996 by Ord.
No. 1996-24]
§ 35-208. [Ch. 35, Sec. 48] Grace period for initial installations.
[Ord. No. 1996-24]
Upon the installation of a new alarm system, the responsible party shall
have a thirty-day grace period from the date of installation before any alarm
is counted toward the four allowable false alarms. Initial installation of a
new alarm system does not include any reconditioning, additions or changes
made to an already existing alarm system on a premises. To the extent the
date of installation cannot be determined, the date the alarm license was
issued will be used to determine the expiration of the grace period.
§ 35-209. [Ch. 35, Sec. 49] Appeal process.
§ 35-210. [Ch. 35, Sec. 50] Liability for functioning of alarm
systems. [Ord. No. 1990-17]
The City of Bloomington and the Bloomington Police Department and/or
their agents shall not be held responsible for the installation, maintenance
or malfunctioning of any alarm system.
§ 35-211. [Ch. 35, Sec. 51] Penalty. [Ord. No. 1996-24]
Unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance, violation of any Section of this
Ordinance is punishable by a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $500.
C. It shall be a violation of this Ordinance for a responsible party which
has received notice of discontinued response service as set forth herein
to continue the operation of the audible alarm which results in the
Police Department receiving requests to respond to the premises. [Ord.
No. 1990-17]
A. Any responsible party cited for a false alarm has the right to appeal to
the Chief of Police the validity of the determination that such alarm was
false. An appeal must be in writing and must be made within 10 days of
the alarm considered to be false. [Ord. No. 1990-17]
B. The burden of proof shall be with the responsible party to prove the
alarm activation which was classified as false was caused due to a
condition totally beyond the responsible party's control. [Ord. No.
1990-17]
C. The Chief of Police or his designee shall have the sole authority to deny
or grant any appeal. If the appeal is granted, the record of the false
alarm shall be expunged from the records of the responsible party. If
the appeal is denied the responsible party shall be given written notice
of the reason for the denial. [Ord. No. 1990-17]
§ 35-206 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 35-211
1:1318
ARTICLE III
City Prison
§ 35-301. [Ch. 35, Sec. 64] City Prison established.
The City Prison will consist of that portion of the City Hall Building
designated and allocated for such purpose by the City Manager provided
that the jail of McLean County, Illinois, may be used as the City Prison by
the consent of the proper authorities.
§ 35-302. [Ch. 35, Sec. 65] Chief of Police keeper.
The Chief of Police of said City shall be ex officio the keeper of the same
and shall have the care, custody, and charge of the said City Prison and
all persons committed thereto. He shall enforce such order and discipline
therein as he may deem necessary.
§ 35-303. [Ch. 35, Sec. 66] Shall keep prisoners.
The Chief of Police of said City shall receive into his custody and safely keep
and confine in said prison all persons who may be legally committed to his
custody or charge by any proper officer, judge or magistrate of the Court,
until they shall be legally taken or discharged therefrom.
§ 35-304. [Ch. 35, Sec. 67] Commitment of offenders where
limitation.
Any person upon whom any fine or penalty shall be imposed for the violation
of any provisions of the Code of the City may, upon the order of the Circuit
Court before whom the conviction is had, be committed to the City Prison,
work house, or other place provided by said City for the incarceration
of such offenders until such fine, penalty, and costs shall be fully paid;
provided, that no such imprisonment shall exceed six months for any one
offense.
§ 35-305. [Ch. 35, Sec. 69] Feed prisoners.
The Chief of Police shall furnish all persons who may be confined or kept
in the City Prison under his charge, plain wholesome food and drink and
comfortable bedding.
§ 35-306. [Ch. 35, Sec. 70] Resistance or escape by prisoners
penalty.
Every person in the custody of any officer or committed to the City Prison
shall obey the Chief of Police or any officer in all lawful commands and
shall not molest or hinder any officer in the discharge of his duty and shall
not escape or attempt to escape from said prison or assist others to escape
from any officer or destroy or injure any property appertaining thereto. Any
person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be fined not less
than $10 nor exceeding $100.
§ 35-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 35-307
1:1319
§ 35-307. [Ch. 35, Sec. 71] Payment of fine release.
No person shall be released from the City Prison by the keeper thereof,
except upon the satisfaction of the fine or by an order of the City Manager
or other legal authority.
§ 35-308. [Ch. 35, Sec. 72] Keeper to accept fine disposition
thereof.
The said keeper hereby is authorized to accept the fine imposed upon any
prisoner committed to the City Prison whenever the same, together with all
costs taxed in said case shall be tendered to him, in accordance with rules
of the Circuit Court. All moneys so received by him shall be paid over to the
Clerk or Deputy Clerk of the Circuit Court in accordance with rules of the
Court.
§ 35-309. [Ch. 35, Sec. 73] Violation of chapter penalty.
The Chief of Police or other person in charge of the City Prison shall treat
all persons committed to his charge humanely; and if he shall assault,
abuse, beat, or otherwise maltreat any person in his custody or knowingly
suffer or permit the same to be done; or shall supply any such person
with any intoxicating liquor as a beverage, or knowingly suffer or permit
the same to be done; or shall be guilty of any lascivious behavior or other
improper conduct toward any female in his custody, or knowingly suffer
or permit others to be guilty of such conduct; or shall fail to supply each
and every person so in custody with a sufficient quantity of food and drink,
at reasonable or proper intervals, or cause the same to be done, or with
necessary bedding, shall in each and every case be subject to a fine of
not less than $10 nor more than $100; and a conviction under any of
the provisions of this section shall be deemed cause for his removal from
office. Any person who shall supply or cause to be supplied to any prisoner
confined in the City Prison any intoxicating liquor as a beverage shall, upon
conviction, be fined not less than $10 nor more than $100 for each offense.
§ 35-307 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 35-309
1:1320
ARTICLE IV
Public Safety and Community Relations Board
§ 35-401. [Ch. 35, Sec. 74] Establishment and purpose.
A Public Safety and Community Relations Board (hereinafter "PSCRB" or
"Board") is hereby established to:
§ 35-402. [Ch. 35, Sec. 75] Composition.
§ 35-403. [Ch. 35, Sec. 76] Qualifications for membership.
A. Serve as a citizen advisory committee to the Chief of Police and the City
Manager, providing different perspectives on police policy and training
that improve police community interactions;
B. Educate the community on the avenues available to civilians to make
formal and informal complaints, to assist the community and the police
in clarifying and improving procedures related to complaints, and to
assure that access to these policies and procedures are open and
transparent;
C. Add a resident perspective to the evaluation of civilian complaints,
including the timely, fair and objective review of complaints;
D. Identify perceived deficiencies in police-community interactions that
when addressed may result in improved interactions and shared
understanding; and
E. Provide fair treatment to and protect the rights of civilians and police
officers. [Ord. No. 2017-57]
A. The PSCRB shall consist of seven members appointed by the Mayor
with the approval of the City Council by a 2/3 vote of all aldermen
currently serving.
B. Members shall serve for a three-year term; however, at the inception of
the Board, two members shall be appointed for a one-year term, two
members for a two-year term, and three members for a three-year term,
so that terms are staggered.
C. The chair and a vice-chair of the Board shall be selected amongst the
members of the PSCRB.
D. A majority of the sitting members of the PSCRB shall constitute a
quorum.
E. Members shall serve until their successors are appointed and
confirmed, unless removed from office. [Ord. No. 2017-57]
A. No City employee may be appointed to the Board, nor shall any member
be a current employee of, contracted by or have any official affiliation,
§ 35-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 35-403
1:1321
§ 35-404. [Ch. 35, Sec. 77] Training and orientation. [Ord. No.
2017-57]
The City Legal Department and Police Department shall develop written
standards for mandatory orientation and continuing education for all
PSCRB members. Once developed, the written standards shall be presented
and approved by the City Council.
§ 35-405. [Ch. 35, Sec. 78] Rules and procedures. [Ord. No.
2017-57]
The PSCRB, in consultation with the Legal Department and Police
Department, shall develop rules, procedures, and/or bylaws for the
transaction of PSCRB business. Said rules, procedures, and/or bylaws shall
be reviewed and approved by the City Council.
§ 35-406. [Ch. 35, Sec. 79] Review of Police Department findings by
the PSCRB.
whether current or former, with a federal, state, or local law
enforcement agency.
B. No person with a criminal felony conviction shall be eligible to serve on
the PSCRB.
C. All members of the PSCRB shall possess a reputation for fairness,
integrity, impartiality, and a sense of public service.
D. In making appointments, the Mayor shall endeavor to reflect
community diversity, including different neighborhoods, income levels,
ethnicity, age, gender, sexual orientation and ability status.
E. All members shall be required to maintain strict confidentiality of
sensitive information and the failure to do so shall be cause for removal
among any other applicable legal consequences.
F. Members shall recuse themselves from consideration of any
complaint(s) where they have-or appear to have-a personal,
professional, or financial conflict of interest. Failure to recuse when
required shall be cause for removal. [Ord. No. 2017-57]
A. If a complainant is not satisfied with a determination of the Police Chief
at the conclusion of an internal investigation, the complainant may
make a request for review by the PSCRB within 30 days from the date of
receipt of the notice of the Police Department's findings. The PSCRB
shall have access to any documents either provided voluntarily by the
complainant or that are otherwise subject to release under the Freedom
of Information Act for its review. The Police Chief is further authorized
to discuss the case in a confidential setting with the PSCRB or its chair.
Nothing herein shall entitle the PSCRB to compel any testimony or
conduct a formal re-investigation. Rather, the PSCRB shall review the
complaint and help ensure the Police Chief and/or Police Department
§ 35-403 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 35-406
1:1322
§ 35-407. [Ch. 35, Sec. 80] Meetings.
§ 35-408. [Ch. 35, Sec. 81] Community outreach.
followed proper protocols. The PSCRB may recommend certain policy
changes based on the review to either the Police Chief or City Manager.
B. The PSCRB's review is limited to whether proper protocols were
followed in the investigation, and the PSCRB may have limited
information on specific cases and the PSCRB may only recommend
policy changes to the Police Chief and City Manager. Accordingly, no
action of the PSCRB shall constitute or be considered as evidence of
either wrongdoing or vindication in any action, including in any other
criminal or civil court proceeding, or in any arbitration proceeding.
Nothing herein, however, shall constitute a bar to disciplinary action
against a police officer, by the Police Chief, based on the police
department's own investigation of an officer's conduct. [Ord. No.
2017-57]
A. The PSCRB shall be subject to the Illinois Open Meetings Act and shall
set a regular meeting schedule. In addition to any other meetings that
may be set by the PSCRB, it shall conduct quarterly meetings that
provide the general public with an opportunity to voice concerns and to
provide recommendations for improving interactions between the
Police Department and the community.
B. All PSCRB meetings shall be open to the public except when closed as
provided in the Open Meetings Act and all other applicable federal,
state and local laws. [Ord. No. 2017-57]
A. The PSCRB shall work with the Police Department, Legal Department,
and Human Relations Commission to build community outreach in
order to anticipate and prevent problems, including analyzing data and
making recommendations to the Police Department about issues
requiring special attention.
B. The PSCRB shall develop a brochure explaining PSCRB procedures and
the resources available to complainants. The brochures shall be
approved by the City Council and then distributed to the public
according to a plan developed by the PSCRB and approved by the City
Manager. This information on the PSCRB and its procedures shall also
be posted on the City's website and available through the Police
Department, the Legal Department, and the Bloomington Public
Library.
C. The PSCRB shall develop a poster highlighting the resources available
to complainants to be displayed prominently within the Police
Department. The poster shall be approved by the City Council and shall
provide information on (1) the ability of civilians to make complaints,
and (2) the ability of civilians to have the complaint process reviewed by
the PSCRB.
§ 35-406 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 35-408
1:1323
§ 35-409. [Ch. 35, Sec. 82] Staff assistance. [Ord. No. 2017-57]
The City Manager shall assign staff, including but not limited to personnel
from the Legal Department and Police Department, to assist the PSCRB
with its functions and to serve as a conduit to the City Manager.
D. The PSCRB shall develop and distribute complaint forms in languages
and formats accessible to civilians, and educate the community on the
complaint process and the importance of reporting complaints.
Complaints may be filed either directly with the Police Department, the
PSCRB, or the City's Legal Department.
E. All materials distributed to the public under Subsections C and D of this
section shall contain, in a prominent typeface, the following statement:
"Harassment, retaliation, or retribution for filing a complaint or
testifying on behalf of a complainant will not be tolerated. If you believe
that you are the subject of harassment, retaliation, or retribution as a
result of the complaint process, please contact the Public Safety and
Community Relations Board, the Department of Professional Standards
within the Police Department or the City's Legal Department for
appropriate investigation and follow-up."
F. The PSCRB may hold quarterly meetings with neighborhood groups,
civic organizations, and/or community leaders to build community
relationships and discuss community concerns relating to public safety
and police procedures. [Ord. No. 2017-57]
§ 35-408 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 35-409
1:1324
Chapter 36
SCAVENGERS
§ 35-409 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 35-409
1:1325

ARTICLE I
Day Scavengers
§ 36-101. [Ch. 36, Sec. 1] License - required.
No person other than one licensed under Chapter 21 of this Code shall
be permitted to remove and dispose of swill, offal, table refuse, usually
known as garbage, or any other matter described in § 36-102 of this chapter,
without first having obtained a license to do so; provided, that any person
desiring to gather, remove, and dispose of garbage, decaying animal matter
and fish, swill, or other animal or vegetable refuse and wastes from his own
premises, without the aid of a licensed private scavenger, may do so.
§ 36-102. [Ch. 36, Sec. 2] Same - granting.
§ 36-103. [Ch. 36, Sec. 3] Same - fee: bond. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
Every person applying for the license required by this article shall pay
annually to the Director of Finance a sum in an amount set forth in the
Schedule of Fees and shall execute a bond to the City in the penal sum of
$500 with a corporation surety to be approved by the Corporation Counsel
conditioned that such licensee will comply with the provisions of the Code
of the City on this subject or pertinent thereto which the City Council
may, from time to time, ordain and will also comply with and obey the
directions and regulations of the Department of Health. Said license shall
expire December 31st of the year in which it was issued. License fees shall
not be prorated.
§ 36-104. [Ch. 36, Sec. 4] Disposal of offensive matter.
The offensive matters described in this article shall under no circumstances
be disposed of in any public dump or public place within the City nor in any
other manner or place than as prescribed by the Director of Health.
A. The City Manager shall, from time to time, and upon application, grant
a license to any person to remove and dispose of, in the manner stated
in this article, offal, table refuse, or animal and vegetable matter
usually known as garbage, inflammable waste materials, building
materials and rubbish from hotels, restaurants, cafes, boarding houses,
and other places not otherwise provided for by the City or for the
removal and disposal of swill or any animal or vegetable refuse and
waste, including decaying animal matter and fish from commission
houses and other places where such decaying animal matter and fish
may accumulate.
B. Any person, firm, or corporation holding a license as night scavenger
shall not be required to take out any additional license for engaging in
the business or employment of day scavenger.
§ 36-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 36-105
1:1327
§ 36-105. [Ch. 36, Sec. 5] Identification of vehicle.
Every vehicle under this chapter shall be conspicuously and permanently
marked with the name of the person owning the same and the number of his
license. The letters and figures used in such marking shall not be less than
six inches in height.
§ 36-106. [Ch. 36, Sec. 6] Violations.
Every person so licensed as day scavenger, as aforesaid, who shall in the
conduct of his business violate any of the provisions of the Code of the City
regulating his business or who shall in the conduct of such business refuse
or fail to comply with the rules and regulations of the County Public Health
Department, shall for each offense be subject to a penalty of not less than
$5 nor more than $50, and, upon conviction, his license may be forfeited, in
the discretion of the City Manager.
§ 36-105 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 36-106
1:1328
ARTICLE II
Night Scavengers
§ 36-201. [Ch. 36, Sec. 7] Scavengers - must be licensed.
The City Manager may from time to time grant licenses to any person,
company, or corporation to engage in the business of emptying, cleaning or
removing the contents of privy vaults, cesspools, septic tanks, or sinks, and
every such person, company, or corporation engaged in such business shall
be deemed a night scavenger within the meaning of this article.
§ 36-202. [Ch. 36, Sec. 8] License fee - bond. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
Every person, company or corporation applying for such license shall before
the same issues pay to the Director of Finance the sum in the amount set
forth in the Schedule of Fees per annum for each and every wagon used
by such person for scavenger work and execute a bond with a corporate
surety to be approved by the Director of Finance, conditioned that said
scavenger will comply with the provisions of this article, and the Code of
the City which is in force at the time of the issuance of said license or may
afterward be passed by the Council, touching said occupation, and will also
comply with and obey the directions and regulations of the County Public
Health Department and its agents made in pursuance of law. Said license
shall expire December 31st of the year in which it was issued. License fees
shall not be prorated.
§ 36-203. [Ch. 36, Sec. 9] Unlicensed work - penalty.
No person, company, or corporation within the City shall empty, clean, or
remove the contents of any privy vault, cesspool, or sink or engage in the
business of night scavenger, without having first obtained a license so to
do. Any person violating the foregoing provisions of this section shall forfeit
and pay not less than $5 nor more than $25 for each offense: Provided,
that the owners, occupants, or agents of any premises upon which vaults
are located within the City limits desiring to clean and remove the contents
thereof themselves without the aid of night scavengers, may be allowed to
do so upon the written permission of the Department of Health, and then
only in the manner directed in such permit.
§ 36-204. [Ch. 36, Sec. 10] Odorless machine - approval of -
compensation - penalty.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to empty any septic
tank, privy vault, sink, cesspool, or other receptacle of filth located in said
City, except with an odorless machine, apparatus, or process which has
been approved by the County Public Health Department by a certificate in
writing issued to the person, firm, or corporation proposing to engage in
said business; and such certificate must be presented to the City Manager
before any license shall be issued for said business. Any violation of the
§ 36-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 36-204
1:1329
provisions of this section shall subject the offender to a fine of not less than
$10 or more than $50.
§ 36-205. [Ch. 36, Sec. 11] Specifications.
No part of the contents of any privy vault, sink, or cesspool, except
substances other than excrements insoluble in water, or any accumulation
of any offensive fluid, liquor; or semiliquid substances or materials being in
any excavation, cellar, or place within the limits of the City shall be removed
therefrom; nor shall the same be transported through any of the streets
or avenues of the City unless and except the same shall be removed and
transported by means of an airtight and watertight iron vehicle of a capacity
of not less than 70 cubic feet and in such a manner as shall prevent entirely
the escape of any noxious or offensive odors therefrom and by a permit
from the County Public Health Department. All tools, pails, and tubs used
by the scavengers shall be made from galvanized iron or other metal and
shall be free from all wood to prevent saturation of the night soil into them.
All carts and vehicles mentioned in this article and all boxes, tubs, and
receptacles thereon in which any substance in this article referred to may
be or is carried shall be strong and tight, so that no part of such contents
or load shall fall, leak, or spill therefrom and shall be adequately and tightly
covered so as to prevent the same from becoming offensive or dangerous to
health. Should any such substance or materials being so conveyed fall upon
or in any place, street, or premises, it shall be the duty of every such person
at once to remove any such substance which has fallen therefrom.
§ 36-206. [Ch. 36, Sec. 12] Time of opening vaults - disposition of
contents - penalty.
No privy vault, cesspool, septic tank, or sink shall be opened nor the
contents thereof disturbed or removed between the hours of 5:00 a.m.
and 10:00 p.m., of any day except the same be done by odorless process
approved by the County Public Health Department, nor shall such contents
be deposited or buried within the City except upon the written permission
of the County Public Health Department, in such manner and place as it
shall therein direct. Any person, company, or corporation engaged in such
business who shall violate the directions of the Public Health Department
contained in any such permit shall immediately forfeit his license, and shall
also be subject to a penalty of not less than $10 nor more than $100.
§ 36-207. [Ch. 36, Sec. 13] Signs on scavenger wagons.
Scavengers who engage in the business of removing the contents of privy
vaults, cesspools, septic tanks, or sinks shall cause to be painted on the
sides of their vehicle used in such business the words, "Licensed
Scavenger," and immediately beneath such words shall be painted the
number of their license. Such words and figures shall be painted on all such
vehicles in large letters and figures and in such manner as to render them
most conspicuous, and the number to be used shall be given in the license.
§ 36-204 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 36-208
1:1330
§ 36-208. [Ch. 36, Sec. 14] Offensive vault - notice to owner - work
done by City - expense how paid - penalty.
Whenever in the opinion of the County Health Department any privy, vault,
cesspool, septic tank, or sink shall be Offensive and need cleaning, it shall
be his duty to notify the owner, agent, or occupant of the premises to
which any such vault belongs to cleanse the same within the time and in
the manner set forth in said notice and unless the person so notified shall
comply within the time and in the manner mentioned in said notice, it shall
be the duty of said office to cause said vault, etc., to be cleaned by one or
more of the City scavengers aforesaid; and any person so failing to comply
with such notice shall on conviction be subject to a fine of not less than $10
nor more than $50 for each offense, and in addition thereto shall be liable
to the City for the expense of such cleaning.
§ 36-209. [Ch. 36, Sec. 15] Penalty.
Any person who shall engage in business as a night scavenger or who shall
undertake to remove the contents of any privy vault, cesspool, or sink within
the City without a license or permit, as aforesaid, shall on conviction thereof
be subject to a penalty of not less than $10 nor more than $50 for each
offense; and any night scavenger, as aforesaid, and any owner, agent, or
occupant, as aforesaid, acting under license or permit, as aforesaid, who
shall violate the terms of said permit or refuse or fail to comply with any
order or direction of the County Public Health Department or its agents or
who shall violate any of the provisions of this article, where no other penalty
is prescribed, shall be subject to a penalty of not less than $5 nor more
than $50 for each offense; and any scavenger aforesaid shall also at the
discretion of the City Manager of the City forfeit his license.
§ 36-210. [Ch. 36, Sec. 16] Disinfection.
All vehicles used under the provisions of this article shall be thoroughly
disinfected and put in an inoffensive condition when not in use.
§ 36-211. [Ch. 36, Sec. 17] Unnecessary offensiveness.
A. No driver of a vehicle under the provisions of this article nor any person
having undertaken or being engaged in and about the loading or
unloading thereof, nor any person engaged about the cleaning or
emptying or having undertaken to empty or remove any garbage, offal,
or the contents of any vault, sink, privy, catch basin, cesspool, septic
tank, or any noxious or offensive substance shall do, or permit to be
done about the same, or in connection therewith, that which shall be
needlessly offensive or filthy in respect to any person, street, place,
building, or premises.
B. No vehicle for carrying any offal, swill, garbage, or rubbish or the
contents of any privy vault, cesspool, septic tank, or sink or having upon
it or in it other nauseous or offensive substances shall, without
necessity therefor stand or remain, nor shall a needless number gather
§ 36-208 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 36-211
1:1331
before or near any building, place, or business, or other premises where
any person may be; nor shall any such vehicle occupy an unreasonable
length of time in loading or unloading or in passing along any street
or through any inhabited place or ground; nor shall any such vehicle,
or the driver thereof, or anything pertaining thereto, or the person
in charge thereof, be in a condition needlessly filthy or offensive and
when not in use such vehicles and all implements used in connection
therewith shall be stored and kept in some place where no needless
offense shall be given to any inhabitants of the City or so as to endanger
the health of any person.
§ 36-211 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 36-211
1:1332
Chapter 37
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
§ 36-211 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 36-211
1:1333

ARTICLE I
Sewers
§ 37-101. [Ch. 37, Sec. 1] Supervision and maintenance. [Ord. No.
2018-93]
All sewers, culverts, and drains now made, or hereafter to be made, in any
of the streets, avenues, alleys, or other public places in the City shall be
under the charge of the Department of Public Works, which Department is
charged with the duty of keeping the same in good condition and repair and
to see that the same are kept free from all obstructions; and the Director
of Public Works shall cause such repairs thereof and of the catch basins,
culverts, and openings connected therewith, as may from time to time
become necessary.
§ 37-102. [Ch. 37, Sec. 2] Written permit required.
No person, firm, or corporation shall make any connection with any sewer
or drain in any of the public streets, alleys, easements, or other public
places in said City without obtaining a written permit therefor.
§ 37-103. [Ch. 37, Sec. 3] Sewers and drains - connections - permit.
The City Engineer shall prescribe the manner and point of piercing and
opening any of the sewers or drains in any of the public streets or public
places of the City and the form, size, and material of the connection made
therewith and shall have the authority to grant permits to make lateral
connections with said sewers, which said permit when granted to any
person or persons shall specify the point in such sewer where such lateral
connections shall be made, the form, size, and material to be used in making
such connections, how the same shall be connected at each end of such
lateral, the hour of the day when the street or public thoroughfare may be
dug up for such purpose, and the property for which such connection is
made.
§ 37-104. [Ch. 37, Sec. 4] Penalty for connecting with sewers, etc.,
without permit.
Any person making, attempting to make, or directing or ordering the
making of any connection or opening into any such sewer or drain without
first having obtained a permit or having obtained such permit, makes such
connection in a manner different from the mode prescribed in such permit
issued by said City Engineer be fined not less than $10 nor more than $50.
§ 37-105. [Ch. 37, Sec. 5] Connecting with sewers - how authorized.
The City Engineer may grant permission to persons to construct, at their
own expense, sewers or drains to lay pipes to connect with any sewers or
drains built in any of the streets, avenues, alleys, or public places in the
City in the manner and subject to the provisions herein prescribed and
also subject to the further provision that such persons will indemnify the
§ 37-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37-105
1:1335
City against any loss or damage which it may sustain by reason of injuries
resulting from the work so permitted to be done.
§ 37-106. [Ch. 37, Sec. 6] Sewers - rights reserved.
No person, firm, or corporation constructing any work under the provisions
of the preceding section of this article shall have any claim against the
City if the work so permitted at any time after the same may be completed
is ordered to be taken up by the authority of the City Manager; nor shall
any person, firm, or corporation have any exemption from an assessment
lawfully imposed for constructing sewers or drains in the vicinity of their
property and the constructing of any sewers or drains by any person,
firm, or corporation under the provision of the preceding section of this
article shall be deemed and taken as an acquiescence in the provisions
of this section, whether the same be set forth in the permit of the City
Engineer authorizing such work or not and shall be binding upon the
heirs, administrators, successors, or assigns of any such person, firm, or
corporation.
§ 37-107. [Ch. 37, Sec. 7] Permits - furnishing of - form - use.
It is hereby made the duty of the City Engineer to provide permits to be used
for the purposes herein specified. Upon application to the City Engineer
by any and the person, firm or corporation by any person for such permit,
he shall fill out the same in duplicate to the person, corporation applying
therefor, which duplicates shall be signed by the City Engineer and the
person, firm, or corporation asking for such permit, one of which shall be
delivered to the applicant and the other to remain undetached in the said
book of permits in the office of the said City Engineer and shall be by him
safely kept for any future use or reference by the City.
§ 37-108. [Ch. 37, Sec. 9] Maintenance, continuation or retention of
broken, defective, or presently unlawful building drains, building
sewers or storm drain connections or conditions.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person owning property located within the
City of Bloomington to permit any of the following conditions to be or
remain on such property after the compliance date specified in
notification by the City Engineer or after obtaining actual knowledge of
the existence of such a condition, whichever is earlier:
(1) A storm sewer or storm drain which is so constructed or is in such a
condition as to allow or permit the discharge of stormwater, surface
water or ground water into a building drain, building sewer or
public sanitary sewer, either directly through a direct connection or
indirectly by discharging or permitting the discharge of such water
in or near areas of gravel, crushed rock, or other porous soil-or
material located near or around openings, holes, cracks, loose
joints or other gaps in a building drain, building sewer, or public
sanitary sewer;
§ 37-105 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 37-108
1:1336
(2) A private combined sewer;
(3) A stormwater, surface water, or ground water collection or
diversion device, including without limitation the following: area
drains, yard drains, footing tiles, downspouts, leaders, stormwater,
surface water or ground water, sump pumps, or other pumping
device which is constructed or in such a condition so as to
discharge or permit or allow the discharge of stormwater, surface
water, or ground water into a building drain, building sewer, or
public sanitary or combined sanitary and storm sewer either
directly through a direct connection or indirectly by discharging or
permitting the discharge of such water in or near areas of gravel,
crushed rock, or other porous soil or material located near or
around openings, holes, cracks, loose joints, or other gaps in a
building drain, building sewer, or public sanitary sewer;
(4) A building drain or building sewer with broken, missing, or cracked
tiles, loose or separated joints, or other holes, cracks, gaps, or
spaces;
(5) Any other fixture, structure or condition which permits or allows or
is in such a condition to permit or allow stormwater, surface water,
or ground water to enter directly or indirectly a building drain,
building sewer or public sanitary sewer. [Ord. No. 1981-73]
(6) Existing development.
(a) Any nonresidential property served by a combination sewer
system must have a separate sanitary service line connected to
the existing sewer system. In the event the combination sewer
system is modified to a separate sewer system consisting of a
storm sewer and a sanitary sewer, a separate non-polluted
water discharge line from the property will be connected to the
storm sewer system and the sanitary sewer service will be
connected to the sanitary sewer. Such connections shall be
made within 12 months of the date the separate system is
placed into service. However, in the event the compliance with
this section causes a severe economic hardship, the property
owner may apply for an extension of time. Such extension of
time may be granted only for such times as the demonstrated
hardship exists.
(b) A separate sewer system shall be considered to be available if
located within 100 feet of the nearest property line of the
property. [Ord. No. 2001-23]
(7) Proposed development. Any new nonresidential development
proposed to be served by an existing combination sewer shall have
separate service lines for sanitary waste and for non polluted water
respectively. These services may terminated in existing
combination sewer but must be done in a way that these line could
§ 37-108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37-108
1:1337
§ 37-109. [Ch. 37, Sec. 10] Butcher's offal - garbage, etc. - injury to
sewer or drain - penalty.
No garbage, unless passed through a disposal unit, butcher's offal, dead
animal, or other object or material tending to obstruct a sewer shall be
deposited or thrown in any sewer, sewer outlet, or catch basin and any
person injuring, breaking, or removing any part of any sewer or drain or
in any manner obstructing the mouth or outlet of any sewer or drain shall
be subject to a penalty of not less than $10 nor more than $100 for each
offense.
§ 37-110. [Ch. 37, Sec. 11] Steam - discharge into sewer prohibited.
No connection with or opening into any sewer or drain of the City shall be
permitted for the conveyance or discharge into said sewer or drain of steam
from any boiler or engine or from any manufactory or building in which
steam is either generated or used.
be connected appropriately when a separate sewer system is
available. [Ord. No. 2001-23]
B. The City Engineer may give notification of the existence of such a
description described in Subsection A of this section either personally
or by ordinary mail with postage fully prepaid to the owner of record of
the property on which such a condition is located or to the person who
last paid real estate taxes on such property, and upon the giving or
mailing of such notification, the property owner shall be deemed to
have notice of the existence of such a condition. [Ord. No. 1981-73]
C. The notification provided in Subsection B of this section shall be given if
one or more of the following occurs:
(1) An on-site visual or physical inspection of the property indicates the
existence of a condition described in Subsection A of this section;
(2) A dye or TV monitor test indicates that water or dye placed in
stormwater, surface water, or ground water collection or diversion
devices or in the ground near the foundation of a building or
structure located on such property enters the public sanitary
sewer;
(3) A "smoke test" indicates that smoke placed into the public sanitary
sewer under pressure is escaping through the ground or through
downspouts, leaders, gutters, yard drains, area drains, or other
stormwater collection or diversion devices located on the owner's
property. [Ord. No. 1981-73]
D. The City Engineer is hereby authorized and directed to develop
material describing the testing procedures hereinabove referred to and
indicating the manner in which such tests shall be conducted. [Ord.
No. 1981-73]
§ 37-108 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 37-111
1:1338
§ 37-111. [Ch. 37, Sec. 14] Police - duty in enforcement of article.
[Ord. No. 2018-93]
It is hereby made the duty of the members or officers of the Police
Department to be vigilant in the enforcement of the provisions of this article
and at once to report any violation thereof to the Director of Public Works.
Any member of the Police Department shall, on observing or on being
informed of the violation of any of the provisions of this article by any
person or persons report at once such act to the Director of Public Works.
It is hereby made the further duty of any member of said Police Department
on being informed or upon observing any person or persons making any
opening or excavation in any of the public streets, alley, or other public
grounds of the City to require such person or persons to exhibit his or their
authority or permission so to do, and if none has been obtained from the
proper officer by the person or persons making such opening or excavation,
or if such person or persons shall refuse to exhibit or their authority or
permit, such officer immediately shall report the same to the Director of
Public Works.
§ 37-112. [Ch. 37, Sec. 15] Excavation around sewer - permit
penalty.
Any person who shall uncover or excavate under or around any of the brick
or pipe sewers of the City for any purpose whatever without first having
the written authority so to do of the City Engineer shall upon conviction be
subject to a penalty of not less than $5 nor more than $100 for each offense,
which said penalty shall be recoverable against the person or persons or
their employees so uncovering or excavating under or around said sewers
or drains as aforesaid.
§ 37-113. [Ch. 37, Sec. 18] Construction and use of private drains,
etc.
It shall be the duty of any person constructing or using any private drain,
sewer, cesspool, water closet pipe, or other pipe connecting with or
emptying into any public drain or sewer belonging to the City to construct
and use the same strictly in conformity with this Code.
§ 37-114. [Ch. 37, Sec. 19] Use of public sanitary sewers.
A. No person shall discharge, cause to be discharged, or permit the
discharge of any stormwater, ground water, run-off, sub-surface
drainage, or unpolluted industrial process water from private property
to any public sanitary sewer. [Ord. No. 1981-73]
B. No person shall discharge, cause to be discharged or permit the
discharge of any material into the public sanitary sewer which does not
comply with the Bloomington and Normal Sanitary District ordinances.
[Ord. No. 1981-73]
§ 37-111 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37-115
1:1339
§ 37-115. [Ch. 37, Sec. 21] Draining polluting substances into
stormwater sewers.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to connect or cause
to be connected any drain carrying or to carry any toilet, sink, basement,
septic tank, cesspool, industrial waste or any fixture or device discharging
polluting substances to any stormwater drain in the City.
§ 37-116. [Ch. 37, Sec. 22] Sanitary sewer not to be connected with
stormwater sewers.
That it shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to connect or
cause to be connected any sanitary sewer or other title or drain carrying
water sewers constructed within the corporate limits of the City, and it shall
be unlawful to make or cause to be made any sanitary sewer connection
with lateral stormwater sewers which may be connected with said
stormwater sewers.
§ 37-117. [Ch. 37, Sec. 23] Sewer service or water to areas outside
City limits.
A. That hereafter no connection shall be made to or with any sewer or
system of sewers of said City or to or with any watermain of the high
pressure distribution system or said City or to any extension thereof,
whether said extension be within or outside the corporate limits of said
City, for the purpose of giving sewer service or supplying water to or for
any property lying outside of the corporate limits of said City, and no
sewer service shall be given and no water supplied to any property lying
outside of such corporate limits other than those which now are
supplied with such sewer and water service.
B. This Ordinance shall not apply to the sale of water at wholesale to the
Town of Normal, Illinois, or to the sale of water to industries or other
users on property not contiguous to the City, under the terms of any
existing or future contract entered into voluntarily by the said City
under authority and approval of the City Council thereto, which said
contract provides that the rates for said water shall be 1 1/2 times that
charged to resident users and sewer service shall be 1 1/2 times that
charged to resident users, and which agreement further provides that
in the event any portion of said property should at any time become
contiguous with the corporate limits of the City in any of the manners
prescribed by law, the said City may after reasonable notice discontinue
furnishing said service and continue to refuse to furnish such service
until the entire property of said user has become annexed to the City in
the manner prescribed by law. Such other and further conditions as the
City Council may in its discretion require from time to time in
negotiating with such noncontiguous petitioner for water or sewer
service shall, if accepted by said petitioner, be fully enforceable as a
condition to furnishing said service.
§ 37-115 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 37-118
1:1340
§ 37-118. [Ch. 37, Sec. 25] Map of sewerage districts.
It shall be the duty of the City Engineer to keep currently in his office
maps and plats showing the sewerage districts of the City, the location
of the various sewers therein, their dimensions, grades, openings, inlets,
connections, and the direction of flow.
§ 37-119. [Ch. 37, Sec. 27] Sewers outside City - statement of costs
to be filed.
Wherever sewers are constructed outside the City limits by agreement with
the City and at the expense of one or more persons, firms, or corporation,
and said sewer is constructed adjacent to an eligible user, then the builders
shall file with the City Engineer statement of cost of said sewer as
constructed.
§ 37-120. [Ch. 37, Sec. 28] Connection with sewers outside City -
payment of prorated costs.
Property adjacent to this sewer, which shall subsequently desire to connect
thereto, shall be required to sign an agreement with the City prior to
connection to the sewer and shall be required to pay to the City their
prorated share of the original cost of the sewer, said share to be calculated
by the City Engineer on the basis of front foot cost. The amount paid as a
prorated share of the original construction cost shall in no way obligate the
City to furnish connections, tile pipes, or any other parts or portions of the
individual service required by the potential user. The service necessary will
be installed by the customer at his expense and in conformity with all rules,
regulations, and ordinances governing the use of the sewer system.
§ 37-121. [Ch. 37, Sec. 29] Connection with sewers within City -
payment of prorated costs.
Wherever sewers are or have been built within the City and adjacent to
benefited property that does not pay a share of the original cost at the time
of installation of the sewer, then this adjacent benefited property will be
required to pay to the City its prorated share of the cost at the time of
connection to the sewer.
§ 37-122. [Ch. 37, Sec. 30] Penalty. [Ord. No. 1981-73]
Any person violating any provision of this article or permitting a violation
to remain beyond the period of time provided for voluntary correction or
elimination thereof, shall upon conviction be fined not less than $100 nor
more than $500 for each violation. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 37-123. [Ch. 37, Sec. 31] Definitions.
When used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning
indicated in this section.
§ 37-118 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37-123
1:1341
BUILDING DRAIN — The lowest horizontal portion of a building or
structure's sewage collection and disposal system which is designed to
carry sewage through or beyond the foundation wall to the building sewer.
A building drain may include a sewage sump pump, ejector, lift pump or
other similar device which pumps sewage.
BUILDING SEWER — A pipe or conduit located on private property owned
and controlled by the private property owner which i's designed and
intended to carry sewage from the building to the public sanitary sewer or
a private sewage disposal system.
COMBINED SEWER — A pipe or conduit receiving both surface water and
sewage.
DIRECTOR — The City Engineer of the City of Bloomington or his
authorized deputy, agent, or representative.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — Solids, liquids, or gaseous wastes resulting from
any industrial or manufacturing operation or process.
PUBLIC, SANITARY, OR STORM SEWER — A sanitary sewer or storm sewer
or storm drain located in the public right-of-way or public easement in
which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights and which is
controlled by a public authority.
SANITARY SEWER — A pipe or conduit designed and intended to carry
sewage and to exclude storm, surface, and ground Water.
SEWAGE — The water carried wastes from residences, businesses,
institutions, and industrial establishments, plus minor or incidental amounts
of ground surface or stormwater.
STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN — A pipe or conduit which is designed
and intended to carry storm, surface, and ground water and to exclude
sewage and industrial wastes.[Ord. No. 1981-73]
§ 37-123 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 37-123
1:1342
ARTICLE II
Ground Water - Collection and Discharge
§ 37-201. [Ch. 37, Sec. 35] Discharge from sump pumps and
downspouts.
A. Discharge. Except as provided in Subsection B of this section, no person
shall construct, install, improve, maintain, or permit to be operated on
property he owns or occupies, any sump pump or downspout the
discharge point of which is located on or across, or less than 15 feet
from a front or rear lot line. [Ord. No. 1981-85]
B. Connection to storm sewer. Notwithstanding the provisions of
Subsection A of this section, a person may locate the discharge point of
a sump pump or downspout on public right-of-way by connecting it to a
storm sewer if, but only if:
(1) A permit for such connection from the City Engineer is applied for;
and
(2) In the opinion of the City Engineer such connection will not cause
or contribute to surcharging of the City's storm sewer system; and
(3) The connection is made upon payment of permit fees and pursuant
to such orders, conditions or instructions issued by the City
Engineer for such connections; and
(4) The connection is properly maintained by the applicant or his
successor in title. [Ord. No. 1981-85]
C. Penalty. Any person violating this Ordinance shall, upon conviction, be
fined not to exceed $500. [Ord. No. 1981-85]
D. Correction of noncompliance. If a person, upon notification of the City
Engineer to correct a noncompliance with this Ordinance, fails to do so
within the prescribed time, the City Engineer or his designee may enter
upon the property from which the discharge originates and abate the
noncompliance, and collect the cost thereof from the owner or occupant
of said property. The cost of such abatement shall be a lien upon said
property and collect interest at the rate of 8% from the date of
recording said lien until paid. The City may sue to foreclose upon said
lien at any time after the expiration of 60 days from the recording of
said lien. [Ord. No. 1981-85]
§ 37-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37-201
1:1343

ARTICLE III
(Reserved)
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37-201
1:1345

ARTICLE IV
Rates for Use of Sewerage System
§ 37-401. [Ch. 37, Sec. 51] Charges based on quantity of water
used.
§ 37-402. [Ch. 37, Sec. 52] Reduction of charges when portion of
water does not enter sewerage system. [Ord. No. 1976-126]
Users of sewer service whose average monthly water consumption is in
excess of 8,900 cubic feet and who return only a portion of such water to
the sewerage system may make written request to the Director of Finance
that the volume of water used as a basis in billing for sewer service be
reduced. Such request shall state the attending circumstances and shall
include a report or statement regarding the percentage of total water
consumption being returned to the sewerage system. The said Director of
Finance shall, either himself or through those selected by him, investigate
each such request and shall arrive from the facts at the percentage of total
water consumption being returned to the sewer system. The said Director
of Finance shall apply the percentage so found in determining the charge
for sewer service. Each applicant shall have the, right to submit facts,
figures, statements and arguments to said Director of Finance to assist him
in arriving at a proper percentage and if dissatisfied with the findings of
the Director of Finance shall have the right to appeal the matter to the City
Manager. The Director of Finance thereafter shall review the status of each
case at intervals of not less than three months or more than nine months
from the date of the original finding or review.
A. Effective on billing cycles beginning January 1, 2012, there shall be and
there are hereby established monthly rates and charges for the use of
service of the sewerage system of the City based upon the amount of
water consumed on the water meter reading as follows: $1.60 per 100
cubic feet. The rates charged for sewer shall in no case be less than the
monthly service charge which shall be set at $1.50 per month, exclusive
of consumption.
B. Effective on billing cycles beginning May 1, 2018, there shall be and
there are hereby established monthly rates and charges for the use of
service of the sewerage system of the City based upon the amount of
water consumed on the water meter reading as follows: $2.40 per 100
cubic feet. The rates charged for sewer shall in no case be less than the
monthly service charges which shall be set at $2.25 per month,
exclusive of consumption.
C. Effective on the billing cycle beginning May 1, 2019, the established
monthly rates and charges for the use of service of the sewerage system
of the City will increase annually, at a compounding rate of 3% over the
rate from the previous year, on May 1 of each year. [Ord. No. 2017-81]
§ 37-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37-403
1:1347
§ 37-403. [Ch. 37, Sec. 53] Charges when water not obtained from
City Public Works Department.
§ 37-404. [Ch. 37, Sec. 54] Billing; delayed payment charge.
Charges and rates for sewerage service shall be made monthly on the date
the water meter is read or in case of no water meter, on the first day of
every month. All bills for such service shall be rendered within 10 days after
the water meter is read or within 10 days after the first of the month in case
there is no water meter. Said bills shall be due and payable within 20 days
after the water meter is read or within 20 days after the first of the month,
as the case may be. If not paid within said period, a penalty of 10% shall be
added for each month or fraction thereof that the same remains delinquent.
Failure to receive the monthly bill shall not be an excuse for the nonpayment
of the aforesaid 10% penalty.
§ 37-405. [Ch. 37, Sec. 55] Director of Finance to render bills for
sewerage service.
It is hereby made the duty of the Director of Finance to render bills for the
sewerage service and other charges in connection therewith and to collect
all moneys due therefor.
§ 37-406. [Ch. 37, Sec. 56] Liability for charges; delinquency; liens.
The owner of any lot, building or premises and the occupant thereof and the
user of the sewerage service of said system shall be jointly and severally
liable to pay for such service on said premises, and the services shall be
furnished to the premises by the City only upon the condition that the owner
of the premises, occupant, and user of the service are jointly and severally
liable therefor to the City.
A. Computation of water consumed by all residential, commercial and
industrial establishments which have their own water supply system
and do not purchase any water from the City shall be estimated or
measured monthly by the Director of Public Works of said City or by
such other officer as may hereafter be designated for that purpose by
the City Manager, and the charge for such service shall be based upon
such estimate or measurement in accordance with the above schedule.
B. All users of sewer service of said City which do not purchase any water
from the City may at their option and at their expense install meters for
the purpose of measuring water consumed to establish the quantify
charge as herein provided for. Upon filing notice with the City Clerk of
the option to install meters and upon approval of the meters to be
installed by the Director of Public Works or such other officer than may
hereafter be designated for that purpose, charges for sewerage service
shall be based upon the meter readings in accordance with the above
schedule from and after such installation. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
§ 37-403 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 37-407
1:1348
§ 37-407. [Ch. 37, Sec. 57] Delinquent - lien - filing statements of
delinquency with Recorder of Deeds.
In the event charges for sewerage service are not paid within 30 days
after rendition of the bill for such service, such charges shall be deemed
and are hereby declared to be delinquent, and thereafter such delinquent
charge shall constitute a lien upon the real estate for which such sewerage
services are supplied. The Director of Finance is hereby authorized and
directed to file sworn statements showing such delinquencies in the office
of the Recorder of Deeds of McLean County, Illinois, and the filing of such
statements shall be deemed notice for the payment of the sewerage charges
for sewerage service. If the delinquency in the payment of the sewerage
charges continues for a period of more than 30 days, such service shall be
discontinued.
§ 37-408. [Ch. 37, Sec. 58] Foreclosure of lien.
That the lien for sewerage rents and delinquent penalties established by law
against the premises and real estate upon or for which sewers of the City is
used shall be enforced and foreclosed by a suit in Chancery in the Circuit
Court of McLean County, Illinois, according to the rules and practices of
said Court. Said lien also may be enforced and foreclosed by intervention in
any suit already commenced in said Court or any other Court whenever said
intervention is proper under the law. Whenever the City is made a defendant
in any suit on account of any lien it may have for the furnishing of sewerage,
it shall have full power to enforce its said lien in said proceedings.
§ 37-409. [Ch. 37, Sec. 59] Concurrent remedy.
The method herein provided for enforcing and foreclosing the lien for
sewerage rents and penalties shall not be considered as excluding any other
remedy or any other method of collecting said sewerage rents and penalties
but Shall be concurrent with all other remedies and methods.
§ 37-410. [Ch. 37, Sec. 60] Special fund; use; accounting.
All revenues and moneys derived from the operation of the sewerage system
shall be held by the Director of Finance separate and apart from all other
moneys that may come into his hands as Director of Finance and shall be
deposited in a separate bank account, and all such amounts without any
deductions whatsoever shall be delivered to the City Treasurer not more
than 10 days after receipt of the same or at more frequent intervals as may
from time to time be directed by the City Manager.
§ 37-411. [Ch. 37, Sec. 61] Disposition of revenues.
The City Treasurer shall receive all such revenues from the sewerage
system and all other funds and moneys incident to the operation of said
system as the same may be delivered to him by the Director of Finance as
provided by § 37-410 of this article and deposit the same in a separate bank
account and accounted for as a separate fund designated as the "Sewerage
§ 37-407 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37-411
1:1349
Fund of the City of Bloomington" and said City Treasurer shall administer
such fund in every respect as in manner and form provided by law and shall
establish a proper system of accounts separate from all other records and
accounts which he may be required to keep as such City Treasurer, and
such records and accounts shall show complete and correct entries of all
transactions relating to the sewerage system.
§ 37-411 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 37-411
1:1350
ARTICLE V
Stormwater
§ 37-501. [Ch. 37, Sec. 62] Stormwater Utility and Stormwater
Fund.
§ 37-502. [Ch. 37, Sec. 63] Definitions.
CITY — The City of Bloomington, a municipal corporation organized under
the laws of the State of Illinois.
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer designed to receive or receiving both
wastewater and storm or surface water.
CREDIT — A conditional reduction; the amount of a stormwater service
charge to an individual property based upon the provisions of the
Bloomington Stormwater Credit Manual.
DEVELOPED LAND — Property that has been altered from its natural state
by the addition of impervious area equal to at least 2% of the gross area.
GROSS AREA — The entire area of a parcel, including both the impervious
and pervious areas.
IMPERVIOUS AREA or IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Those areas that prevent
or impede the infiltration of stormwater into the soil. Common impervious
arm include, but are not limited to, rooftops, sidewalks, walkways, patio
areas, driveways, parking lots, storage areas, compacted aggregate and
awnings.
IMPERVIOUS AREA UNIT (IAU) — Shall be used as the basis for
determining the stormwater service charge to a parcel. One thousand
square feet of impervious area shall be one IAU. The number of IAU's
attributed to a parcel will be determined by dividing the total impervious
area (square feet) of the parcel by 1,000 and rounding the result up to the
next integer.
NPDES or NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM
— The national permitting Program implemented under the Clean Water
Act.
A. The City hereby establishes a Stormwater Utility within the Public
Works Department to provide for the management, protection, control,
regulation, use, construction, and enhancement of the stormwater
systems and to facilities owned or operated by the City.
B. The management and supervision of the Stormwater Utility shall be
under the direction of the Director of Public Works.
C. The City hereby establishes a Stormwater Fund. All revenues of the
Stormwater Utility shall be deposited into the Stormwater Fund and
used for purposes of the Stormwater Utility as deemed appropriate by
the City Council. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
§ 37-501 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37-502
1:1351
SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (SFR) —
STORMWATER SYSTEM — A conveyance or system of conveyances and
include sewers, storm drains, curbs, gutters, ditches, retention ponds or
basins, dams, river impoundment, man-made channels or storm drains and
flood control facilities and appurtenances thereof which is designed or
used for the collection, control, transportation, treatment or discharge
of stormwater. Combined sewers are not included in the stormwater
system.[Ord. No. 2004-23]
§ 37-503. [Ch. 37, Sec. 64] Scope of responsibility for the
Stormwater Utility. [Ord. No. 2004-23]
The Stormwater Utility shall be responsible for the operation, maintenance,
management and improvement of the stormwater system owned by the City
including all activities required by the NPDES Stormwater Permit.
§ 37-504. [Ch. 37, Sec. 65] Determination of stormwater service
charges. [Ord. No. 2004-23]
Stormwater service charges shall be determined by the City Council. The
revenue generated by stormwater service charges together with any other
sources of revenue that may be made available to the stormwater utility will
be sufficient to meet the obligations of the Stormwater Utility.
§ 37-505. [Ch. 37, Sec. 66] Stormwater service charges.
Developed land containing one dwelling structure which contains one
or more bedrooms, with a bathroom and kitchen facilities, designed
for occupancy by one or two families. SFR units may include houses
(including duplexes), manufactured homes and mobile homes located
on one or more individual lots or parcels of land.
A.
Developed land may be classified as a SFR despite the presence of
a commercial use within the dwelling unit so long as such use does
not result in additional impervious area such as parking spaces,
playgrounds, structures or additions to the building which are used for
nonresidential uses.
B.
A. Effective on billing cycles beginning May 1, 2018, there shall be and
there are hereby established monthly rates and charges for the use of
service of the stormwater system of the City based upon the following:
(1) Single Family Residential (SFR) property charges:
(a) Small parcels (gross area less than or equal to 7,000 square
feet): $3.77 per month.
(b) Medium parcels (gross area greater than 7,000 square feet and
less than or equal to 12,000 square feet): $5.66 per month.
§ 37-502 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 37-505
1:1352
§ 37-506. [Ch. 37, Sec. 67] Exemptions and credits applicable to
stormwater service charges per month.
§ 37-507. [Ch. 37, Sec. 68] Billing and collection procedures.
(c) Large parcels (gross area over 12,000 square feet): $9.43 per
month.
(2) Parcels other than Single Family Residential:
(a) Charge per Impervious Area Unit (IAU): $1.89 per month.
(b) Parcels less than or equal to 4,000 square feet shall be charged
a flat rate equivalent to four IAU's: $7.54 per month.
(c) Parcels greater than 4,000 square feet will be charged for the
actual number of IAU's within the parcel, or four IAU's
whichever is greater.
B. Effective on the billing cycle beginning May 1, 2019, the established
monthly rates and charges for the use of service of the stormwater of
the City will increase annually, at a compounding rate of 3% over the
rate from the previous year, on May 1 of each year. [Ord. No. 2017-81]
A. All property in the City containing developed land shall be charged
stormwater service charges except pedestrian/bicycle trails, streets
and highway rights-of-ways owned by a Township, McLean County, the
City of Bloomington, or the State of Illinois.
B. Parcels shall be eligible to receive a stormwater service charge credit
based upon the requirements of the Bloomington Stormwater Credit
Manual.
C. Any credit allowed against the stormwater service charge is
conditioned upon continuing compliance with the Bloomington
Stormwater Credit Manual. [Ord. No. 2004-23]
A. Billings for Stormwater Sewer Service charges shall be rendered by the
Public Works Department on a monthly, quarterly or annual basis at the
discretion of the City of Bloomington.
B. When Stormwater Service Charges are not paid on or before the due
date stated on the bill, a penalty of 10% shall be added. Failure to
receive a bill does not entitle the owner or customer to a remission of
penalty.
C. Notice must be given by the parcel owner or authorized agent if it is
desired that bills be forwarded to any other address than the parcel
address.
D. The owner of any lot, building or premises and the occupant thereof and
the customer of the water service of said system shall be jointly and
§ 37-505 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37-507
1:1353
§ 37-508. [Ch. 37, Sec. 69] Stormwater service charges billed in
common. [Ord. No. 2004-23]
The stormwater service charge may be billed on a common statement and
collected along with City water and sewer charges.
§ 37-509. [Ch. 37, Sec. 70] Appeals.
Any customer who believes the provisions of this article have been applied
in error may appeal in the following manner:
severally liable to pay for such Stormwater Service Charges for said
premises.
E. In the event that the City deems it necessary to refer past due
stormwater service charges to the City attorney or a collection agency
for collection, the City may additionally recover its actual expenses so
incurred, including court costs, collection agency fees and reasonable
attorney's fees, in accordance with Chapter 27, §§ 27-506 through
27-508 of City Code. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
A. An appeal must be filed in writing with the Director of Public Works. In
the case of service charge appeals, the appeal shall include a survey
prepared by a Licensed Land Surveyor or Licensed Professional
Engineer containing information on the total property area, the
impervious surface area, and any stormwater management features,
such as detention facilities or conditions which influence the hydrologic
response of the property to rainfall events. All pertinent calculations
shall be included.
B. Using the information provided by the appellant the Director of Public
Works shall conduct a technical review of the conditions on the
property and respond to the appeal in writing within 60 days.
C. In response to an appeal, the Director of Public Works may adjust the
stormwater service charge and any late payment penalties applicable to
a property in conformance with the general purpose and intent of this
article.
D. A decision of the Director of Public Works that is adverse to an
appellant may be appealed to the Construction Board of Appeals (CBA)
within 30 days of receipt of notice of the adverse decision. The appeal
must be filed in writing with the Secretary of the CBA by the appellant
and include a detailed explanation of the grounds for the appeal. The
CBA shall issue a written decision on the appeal within 60 days.
E. Any appeal of the decision of the Construction Board of Appeals must be
made pursuant to Illinois Law. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
§ 37-507 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 37-510
1:1354
§ 37-510. [Ch. 37, Sec. 71] Partial invalidity. [Ord. No. 2004-23]
The provisions of this Ordinance are severable, and if any of the provisions
shall be held unlawful by any court of competent jurisdiction, the decision
of such court shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions.
§ 37-510 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37-510
1:1355
Chapter 37.5
SEXUALLY ORIENTED ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES
§ 37-510 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 37-510
1:1356
ARTICLE I
Short Title
§ 37.5-101. [Ch. 37.5, Sec. 1.1] Title. [Ord. No. 2002-24]
This chapter of the Bloomington City Code, 1960, as amended, shall be
known, cited and referred to as the Sexually Oriented Entertainment
Business Ordinance of the City of Bloomington, Illinois and at times referred
to as "this Ordinance" in this chapter.
§ 37.5-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37.5-101
1:1357

ARTICLE II
Purpose and Intent
§ 37.5-201. [Ch. 37.5, Sec. 2.1] Purpose. [Ord. No. 2002-24]
It is the purpose of this Ordinance to address the negative impacts
associated with sexually oriented entertainment businesses, as identified
in the legislative findings made and cited in § 37.5-202 of this Ordinance
to reduce or prevent neighborhood blight; to protect and preserve the
quality of the City's neighborhoods and commercial districts; to protect the
City's retail trade; to maintain property values; to protect and preserve the
quality of life in the City; to reduce the incidence of unlawful activity and
to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens
of the City. The provisions of this Ordinance have neither the purpose nor
the effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any
communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials for adults.
Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this Ordinance to restrict or
deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First
Amendment to the United States Constitution, or to deny access by the
distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment for adults to
their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this Ordinance
to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material.
§ 37.5-202. [Ch. 37.5, Sec. 2.2] Findings.
The City Council of the City of Bloomington, McLean County, Illinois makes
the following legislative findings:
A. The Courts of Illinois as well as the United States Supreme Court have
recognized the City's authority to adopt rules and regulations over the
operation of sexually oriented entertainment business establishments;
and
B. The City has a substantial governmental interest in protecting the
public health, safety and welfare of its citizens and all persons within
the City and of propounding standards to mitigate the possibility of
infection by contagious sexually transmitted diseases; and
C. There is convincing documented evidence, including statistics and
studies performed in a substantial number of communities in the State
of Illinois and in the United States concerning the serious objectionable
characteristics and secondary effects of sexually oriented
entertainment businesses located in other jurisdictions. The City
Council finds that these studies are relevant to the problems addressed
by the City in enacting ordinances to regulate the adverse secondary
side effects of sexually oriented entertainment business establishments;
and
D. The City Council finds that there is substantial evidence that an
increase in crime tends to accompany, concentrate around, and be
aggravated by sexually oriented entertainment businesses, including
§ 37.5-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37.5-202
1:1359
but not limited to an increase in the crimes related to prostitution, sale
and possession of controlled substances and violence against persons
and property. These studies from other jurisdictions establish
convincing evidence that sexually oriented entertainment business
establishments, if not regulated pursuant to the location and
operational requirements set forth in the ordinances of the City Code,
can result in an increase in criminal activities and other adverse
secondary effects with a deleterious impact on adjacent commercial
and residential properties; and
E. The City Council finds that enclosed or dimly lit areas within sexually
oriented entertainment businesses greatly increases the potential for
unlawful conduct, such as prostitution, sales of controlled substances,
and lewd and lascivious conduct, and further finds that requirements
for all indoor and enclosed public areas be open to view by management
and visible to all other public areas in the sexually oriented
entertainment business establishment. Adequate lighting, and direct
management supervision of such areas are necessary in order to reduce
the opportunity for and incidents of illegal conduct and facilitate
routine inspection by public safety personnel; and
F. The City Council, in adopting this Ordinance, is aware of and takes
legislative notice of well-established legal principles related to the
regulation of sexually oriented entertainment businesses and does not
intend to suppress or infringe upon any expressive activities protected
by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution, but instead
intends to enact reasonable regulations that address the adverse
secondary effects of sexually oriented entertainment businesses; and
G. The City Council finds that location and zoning regulations alone are
insufficient to adequately protect the health, safety, and general welfare
of the citizens of the City, and thereby finds that it is in the public
interest to establish certain requirements with respect to the ownership
and operation of sexually oriented entertainment businesses; and
H. The City Council finds that there is clear and convincing evidence that
close contact between performers and patrons, and the direct
solicitation of and the direct giving of gratuities in sexually oriented
business entertainment establishments facilitates the opportunity for
specified criminal acts, including, but not limited to: solicitations for
sexual acts, transfer of controlled substances, and lewd and lascivious
conduct, and further finds that the enforcement of such laws
prohibiting such specified criminal acts requires a disproportionate
level of public safety resources; and
I. The City Council finds the following, based upon its understanding of
the documents and judicial decisions in the public record:
(1) Evidence supports a finding that some dancers and entertainers,
and other persons who publicly perform specified sexual activities
or publicly display specified anatomical parts, as defined herein, in
§ 37.5-202 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 37.5-202
1:1360
sexually oriented entertainment businesses (collectively referred
to as "performers") have been found to engage in specified sexual
activities with patrons of such sexually oriented entertainment
businesses on the site of sexually oriented entertainment
businesses;
(2) Evidence demonstrates that performers employed by sexually
oriented entertainment businesses have been found to offer and
provide private shows to patrons who, for a price, are permitted to
observe and participate with the performers in live entertainment
exhibiting specified sexual activities or displaying specified
anatomical parts, as defined herein;
(3) Evidence supports a finding that performers at sexually oriented
entertainment businesses have been found to engage in acts of
prostitution with patrons of the sexually oriented entertainment
businesses;
As a result of the above, and in view of the increase in incidents of Acquired
Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) and Hepatitis B, which are both
sexually transmitted diseases (STD), the City has a substantial interest in
adopting regulations that will reduce, to the greatest extent possible, the
possibility for the occurrence of prostitution and casual sex at sexually
oriented entertainment businesses; and
J. The City Council finds that there are unique harmful effects on children
and minors exposed to the effects of sexually oriented entertainment
businesses, including, but not limited to, the deterioration of respect for
family values, exposure to images and acts for which they are too young
or immature to fully understand, exposure to items and displays
containing pornography or sexually oriented toys or novelties, and the
possibility that such children or minors could inadvertently become
targets or otherwise victims of solicitations of a sexual nature for which
they are too young or immature to understand or otherwise take
appropriate measures to protect themselves; and
K. The City Council desires to minimize and control the adverse secondary
side effects associated with the operation of sexually oriented
entertainment businesses and thereby protect the health, safety and
welfare of the citizens of the City from increased criminal activity,
preserve the quality of life, minimize adverse impacts on property
values and the character of surrounding neighborhoods and
commercial businesses, and to deter the spread of communicable and
sexually transmitted diseases. [Ord. No. 2002-24]
§ 37.5-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37.5-202
1:1361

ARTICLE III
Definitions
§ 37.5-301. [Ch. 37.5, Sec. 3.1] Definitions.
For the purposes of this Ordinance, unless the context clearly requires
different meaning, the words, terms and phrases set forth shall have the
meanings given them herein.
ADULT CABARET — A building or portion of a building featuring dancing or
other live entertainment if the dancing or other live entertainment involves
the exhibiting of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as
defined in this Ordinance, for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT HOTEL/MOTEL — A hotel or motel or similar business
establishment offering public accommodations for any form of consideration
which provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films,
computer generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or
other photographic reproductions 30% or more of the number of which are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exhibiting of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined in this Ordinance;
and rents, leases, or lets any single room for less than a six-hour period, or
rents, leases, or lets any single room more than twice in a twenty-four-hour
period.
ADULT MEDIA — Magazines, books, videotapes, movies, slides, c.d.- r.o.m.s
or other devices used to record computer images, or other media that
are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting,
describing, or relating to hard-core material.
ADULT MEDIA STORE — An establishment that rents and/or sells media,
and that media meets any of the following tests:
ADULT MODELING STUDIO — A business which provides, for any form
of compensation, monetary or other consideration, hire or reward, figure
models who, for the purposes of sexual stimulation of patrons, display
"specified anatomical areas," as defined herein, to be observed, sketched,
photographed, painted, sculpted or otherwise depicted by persons paying
such consideration. Schools certified pursuant to standards set by the State
of Illinois are not included in the definition of "Adult Modeling Studio."
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER — An establishment emphasizing
or predominantly showing sexually oriented movies distinguished or
10% or more of the gross public floor area is devoted to adult media as
defined in this Ordinance.
A.
10% or more of the stock-in-trade consists of adult media as defined in
this Ordinance.
B.
It advertises or holds itself out in any forum as "XXX," "adult," "sex," or
otherwise as a sexually oriented business other than an adult cabaret,
adult hotel/motel, adult lingerie modeling studio, adult modeling studio,
or adult motion-picture theater as defined in this Ordinance.
C.
§ 37.5-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37.5-301
1:1363
characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating
to "hard-core material," "specified anatomical areas" and/or "specified
sexual activities" (as defined in this article) for observation by patrons
therein.
ADULT SEX BUSINESS — Any sexually oriented entertainment business,
including any business establishment that regularly features live
entertainment distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the
exposure of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities, as
defined herein, or any business establishment whose primary purpose is the
sale or display of any explicit sexual material which, pursuant to state law
or other regulatory authority, can be offered only to persons over the age
of 18 years. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years
to be within any building that is the site of an "Adult Sex Business." "Adult
Sex Business" may include an adult cabaret, adult hotel/motel, adult media
store, adult modeling studio, adult motion-picture theater, adult video
arcade, adult lingerie modeling studio, adult video arcade, or a sex shop.
ADULT VIDEO ARCADE — Any place in an adult media store to which the
public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or
electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture,
or video machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are
maintained to show images distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on matters depicting, describing, or relating to "hard-core material,"
"specified anatomical areas" and/or "specified sexual activities" (as defined
in this article) in video-viewing booths or arcade booths for observation by
patrons therein. Adult video arcades are prohibited uses except in adult
media stores.
APPLICANT — A person who is required to file an application for a license
under this Ordinance, including an individual owner, managing partner,
officer of a corporation, or any other operator, manager, employee or agent
of a "Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business," as defined herein.
BUSINESS OPERATOR — A person who supervises, manages, inspects,
directs, organizes, controls or in any other way, is responsible for or in
charge of the premises of a "Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business," as
defined herein, or activities occurring on the premises thereof.
BUSINESS OWNER — A person or persons who hold a financial or other
business interest, in whole or in part, either singly or jointly in a "Sexually
Oriented Entertainment Business," as defined herein. For purposes of this
Ordinance, indicia of ownership may be established by evidence including,
but not limited to: business license information, fictitious business name
registration, utility billing information, or by other competent evidence. For
purposes of this Ordinance, the person whose name appears on the Sexually
Oriented Entertainment Business license application as the business owner
shall be deemed to be the "business owner."
CITY CLERK — The City Clerk for the City of Bloomington, Illinois, or his or
her designee.
CITY COUNCIL — The City Council for the City of Bloomington, Illinois.
§ 37.5-301 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 37.5-301
1:1364
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR — The Director of the
Department of Community Development for the City of Bloomington,
Illinois, or his or her designee.[Ord. No. 2017-96]
DAYS — Calendar days, unless otherwise specifically set forth in this
Ordinance.
DISPLAY PUBLICLY — The act of exposing, placing, posting, exhibiting, or
in any fashion displaying in any location, whether public or private, an item
in such a manner that it may be readily seen and its content or character
distinguished by normal unaided vision viewing it from a street, highway,
or public sidewalk, or from property of others, or from any portion of the
premises where items and material other than adult media are on display to
the public.
ESTABLISHMENT — Any business regulated by this Ordinance.
EXPLICIT SEXUAL MATERIAL — Any hard-core material as defined by this
Ordinance.
GROSS PUBLIC FLOOR AREA — The total floor area of the building
accessible or visible to the public, including showrooms, motion-picture
theaters, motion picture arcades, service areas, behind-counter areas,
storage areas visible from such other areas, rest rooms (whether or not
labeled "public"), areas used for cabaret or similar shows (including stage
areas), plus aisles, hallways, and entryways serving such areas.
HARD-CORE MATERIAL — Media characterized by sexual activity that
includes one or more of the following: erect male genitals; contact of the
mouth of one person with the genitals of another; penetration with a finger
or male genital or other object into any genital or anal orifice in another
person; open female labia; penetration of a sexually oriented toy or novelty
into any orifice in another person; male ejaculation; or the aftermath of male
ejaculation.
LICENSED PREMISES — The place or location described in a Sexually
Oriented Entertainment Business License where a Sexually Oriented
Entertainment Business Establishment is authorized to operate.
LICENSEE — Any person or entity that has been issued a Sexually Oriented
Entertainment Business License pursuant to the provisions of this
Ordinance.
LINGERIE MODELING STUDIO — An establishment or business that
provides the services of live models modeling lingerie to individuals,
couples, or small groups in a room smaller than 600 square feet in gross
public floor area.
MASSAGE THERAPY STUDIO — An establishment offering massage
therapy and/or body work by a massage therapist, licensed by the City
under Chapter 22, Article X, of the Bloomington City Code, 1960, as
amended or under the direct supervision of a licensed physician.
MEDIA — Anything printed or written, or any picture, drawing, photograph,
motion picture, film, videotape or videotape production, or pictorial
§ 37.5-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37.5-301
1:1365
representation, or any electrical or electronic reproduction of anything that
is or may be used as a means of communication. Media includes but shall
not necessarily be limited to books, newspapers, magazines, movies, videos,
sound recordings, c.d.- r.o.m.s, other magnetic media, and undeveloped
pictures.
MEDIA SHOP — A general term, identifying a category of business that
may include sexually oriented material but that is not subject to the special
provisions applicable to adult media stores. In that context, media shop
means a retail outlet offering media for sale or rent, for consumption off
the premises provided that any outlet meeting the definition of "adult media
store" shall be treated as an adult media store.
NUDE (NAKED) — A state of dress or undress that exposes to view (1) less
than completely and opaquely covered human genitals; pubic region; anus;
or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areolae,
but not including any portion of the cleavage of the female breast exhibited
by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel,
provided that the areolae is not exposed; or (2) human male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
REVIEWING DEPARTMENTS — The Community Development Department,
the Legal Department, the Fire Department, and the Police Department for
the City of Bloomington, Illinois.[Ord. No. 2017-96]
ROLE PLAYING INTERACTION — An arrangement, service or program
where a server, host, hostess, dancer, singer, or model, for consideration,
engages a customer in a meeting or conversation involving, depicting,
simulating or participating in any "specified sexual activities."
SADOMASOCHISTIC PRACTICES — Flagellation or torture by or upon a
person clothed or naked, or the condition of being fettered, bound, or
otherwise physically restrained on the part of one clothed or naked.
SEMI-NUDE — A state of dress or undress in which clothing covers no
more than the human genitals, pubic region, anus, and areolae of the female
breast as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or
devices by other minor accessory apparel such as caps, gloves and socks.
SEX SHOP — An establishment offering goods for sale or rent and that
meets any of the following tests:
The establishment offers for sale items from any two of the following
categories: (a) adult media, (b) lingerie in a lingerie modeling studio, or
(c) leather goods marketed or presented in a context to suggest their
use for sadomasochistic practices; and the combination of such items
constitutes more than 10% its stock-in-trade or occupies more 10% of
its gross public floor area.
A.
More than 5% of its stock-in-trade consists of sexually oriented toys or
novelties.
B.
More than 5% of its gross public floor area is devoted to the display of
sexually oriented toys or novelties.
C.
§ 37.5-301 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 37.5-301
1:1366
SEXUALLY ORIENTED ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS — An inclusive term
used to describe collectively: adult cabaret; adult modeling studio, adult
motion-picture theater; adult video arcade located within an adult media
store; adult lingerie modeling studio; and/or sex shop.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS EMPLOYEE — Any
person, including entertainers, who work in or at, or render any services
directly related to the operation of, a sexually oriented entertainment
business establishment; provided however, that this definition shall not
include persons delivering goods, materials (other than adult media), food
and beverages, or performing maintenance or repairs, to the licensed
premises.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS LICENSE — A
license issued for a sexually oriented entertainment business establishment
pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS PATRON — Any
person, other than a sexually oriented entertainment business employee,
present in or at any sexually oriented entertainment business establishment
at any time when such sexually oriented entertainment business
establishment is open for business; provided however, that this definition
shall not include persons delivering goods, materials (other than adult
media), food and beverages, or performing maintenance or repairs, to the
licensed premises.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED TOYS OR NOVELTIES — Instruments, devices, or
paraphernalia either designed as representations of human genital organs
or female breasts, or designed or marketed primarily for use to stimulate
human genital organs.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Human genitals in a state of sexual
stimulation or arousal or acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse,
sodomy, or fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, or female breast.
STRADDLE DANCE — The use by any person, including specifically, but
without limitation, a Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business Employee,
of any part of his or her body to touch the genitals, pubic region, buttock,
anus or female breast of any Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business
Patron or any other person in an adult sex business, or the touching of
the genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus or female breast of any person
in a Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business by a Sexually Oriented
Entertainment Business Patron. Conduct shall be a "Straddle Dance"
regardless of whether the "touch" or "touching" occurs while the person
Less than completely and opaquely covered: human genitals, human
pubic region, human buttocks, and human female breast below a point
immediately above the top of the areola; and
A.
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely
and opaquely covered.
B.
§ 37.5-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37.5-301
1:1367
is displaying or exposing any specified anatomical area as defined herein.
Conduct shall be a "Straddle Dance" regardless of whether the "touch" or
"touching" is direct or through a medium. Conduct commonly referred to
by the slang terms "lap dance," "table dance," and "face dance" shall be
included within this definition of "Straddle Dance."
VIDEO-VIEWING BOOTH (ARCADE BOOTH) — Any booth, cubicle, stall,
or compartment that is designed, constructed, or used to hold or seat
patrons and is used for presenting motion pictures or viewing publications
by any photographic, electronic, magnetic, digital, or other means or media
(including, but not limited to film, video or magnetic tape, laser disc, c.d.-
r.o.m., books, magazines, or periodicals) for observation by patrons therein.
A video-viewing booth shall not mean a theater, movie house, playhouse, or
a room or enclosure or portion thereof that contains more than 600 square
feet.[Ord. No. 2002-24]
§ 37.5-301 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 37.5-301
1:1368
ARTICLE IV
Excluded Activities
§ 37.5-401. [Ch. 37.5, Sec. 4.1] Excluded activities.
This Ordinance does not apply to any of the following activities:
A. Any activity conducted or sponsored by a school district or government
agency; provided that such activity is being conducted as part of and
within the scope of an authorized and regular part of the curriculum or
is part of a training or instructional program being conducted by a
school district or government agency.
B. Any activity conducted by a person pursuant to any license issued by
the State of Illinois or any agency thereof charged with the
responsibility of licensing, prescribing standards for and supervising
such activity or profession, in and to the extent that such activity is
conducted within the course and scope of the exercise of the privileges
authorized by such license or the duties of such agency. [Ord. No.
2002-24]
§ 37.5-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37.5-401
1:1369

ARTICLE V
Ordinance Enforcement Officer
§ 37.5-501. [Ch. 37.5, Sec. 5.1] Ordinance enforcement officer.
The Community Development Director shall be the Enforcement Officer for
this Ordinance and shall have the following powers and duties:
A. To administer and rule upon the applications for, and the issuance,
renewal, suspension, and revocation of Sexually Oriented
Entertainment Business Licenses as set forth in this Ordinance;
B. To conduct or provide for such inspections of Sexually Oriented
Entertainment Business Establishments as shall be necessary to
determine and ensure compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance
and other applicable provisions of law;
C. To periodically review the provisions of this Ordinance and the conduct
and operation of Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business
Establishments and their Licenses and to make such reports and
recommendations to the City Council as the Community Development
Director shall deem necessary;
D. To conduct such hearings, studies, and investigations on Sexually
Oriented Entertainment Business Establishments, and the regulations
pertaining thereto, as the Community Development Director shall deem
necessary, and to conduct such hearings on the revocation or
suspension of a Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business License as
required pursuant to this Ordinance;
E. To establish written rules and regulations implementing the provisions
of this Ordinance, including but not limited to, the content and
processing of any application or petition and the conduct of any
hearing; and
F. To take such further actions as the Community Development Director
shall deem necessary to carry out the purpose and intent of this
Ordinance and to exercise such additional powers in furtherance
thereof as are implied or incident to those powers and duties expressly
set forth in this Ordinance. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
§ 37.5-501 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37.5-501
1:1371

ARTICLE VI
Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business Licenses Generally
§ 37.5-601. [Ch. 37.5, Sec. 6.1] Sexually oriented entertainment
business license required. [Ord. No. 2002-24]
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct, establish, operate
or maintain a Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business within the City
unless the person first obtains and continues to maintain in full force and
effect a Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business License issued by the
City Clerk as required by this Ordinance.
§ 37.5-602. [Ch. 37.5, Sec. 6.2] Operation without license
prohibited. [Ord. No. 2002-24]
It shall be unlawful for persons not having a current and valid Sexually
Oriented Entertainment Business License to establish, operate, or maintain
a Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business within the City at any time
after the effective date of this Ordinance.
§ 37.5-603. [Ch. 37.5, Sec. 6.3] Operation in violation of license
prohibited. [Ord. No. 2002-24]
It shall be unlawful for any Licensee to establish, operate, or maintain a
Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business within the City except in the
manner authorized by, and in compliance with, the provisions of this
Ordinance and the Licensee's Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business
License.
§ 37.5-604. [Ch. 37.5, Sec. 6.4] Content and display of license. [Ord.
No. 2002-24]
Every Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business License shall be provided
by the City and shall, at a minimum, prominently state on its face the
name of the Licensee, the expiration date, and the address of the Sexually
Oriented Entertainment Business Establishment. Every Licensee shall
cause the Licensee's Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business License
to be framed, covered by glass, and hung at all times in plain view in a
conspicuous place on the Licensed Premises so it can be easily seen and
read at any time by any person entering the Licensed Premises.
§ 37.5-605. [Ch. 37.5, Sec. 6.5] License term. [Ord. No. 2002-24]
Except as hereinafter provided, Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business
Licenses shall be operative and valid, unless first terminated, suspended
or revoked, for a term of one year commencing on January 1 of the year
following the year of issuance and terminating on December 31 of that
same year. Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business Licenses issued after
January 1 of any year for operations to commence in that year shall be
operative and valid, unless first terminated, suspended or revoked, for a
§ 37.5-601 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37.5-605
1:1373
term commencing on the date of issuance and terminating on December 31
of that same year.
§ 37.5-606. [Ch. 37.5, Sec. 6.6] License renewal. [Ord. No. 2002-24]
A Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business License may be renewed only
by making application as required for an initial License pursuant to
§ 37.5-603 of this Ordinance. Application for renewal shall be made at
least 45 days before the expiration of the then-current license term. The
expiration of the License shall not be affected or extended by a renewal
application that is made less than 45 days before expiration.
§ 37.5-607. [Ch. 37.5, Sec. 6.7] Form and submittal of license
application.
A. Required form:
(1) An application for a Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business
License, or the renewal thereof, shall be made in writing to the City
Clerk on a form prescribed by the City Clerk and shall be signed:
(a) By the applicant, if the applicant is an individual;
(b) By at least one of the persons entitled to share in the profits of
the establishment and having unlimited personal liability for
the obligations of the establishment and the right to bind all
other such persons, if the applicant is a partnership (general or
limited), joint venture, or any other type of organization where
two or more persons share the profits and liabilities of the
organization;
(c) By a duly authorized agent, if the applicant is a corporation; or
(d) By a trustee, if the applicant is a land trust.
(2) The application shall be verified by oath or affidavit as to all
statements made on or in connection with the application and any
attachments thereto.
(3) Each application shall specifically cite the applicant and the
Licensed Premises for which a Sexually Oriented Entertainment
Business License is sought.
(4) Each initial or renewal application shall be accompanied by seven
identical applications.
B. Administrative processing fee. Every applicant for a Sexually Oriented
Entertainment Business License or for the renewal of an existing
Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business License shall pay an
Administrative Processing Fee in the amount set forth in the Schedule
of Fees by certified check to the City of Bloomington, Illinois at the time
of filing such application. Such fee shall in all cases be nonrefundable
and shall be deposited in the general corporate fund of the City. Such
§ 37.5-605 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 37.5-607
1:1374
fee shall be used to defray, in part, administrative costs incurred by the
City in processing such application and is not made in lieu of any other
fees or taxes required under this Ordinance. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
C. Required information and documentation. Each application for a
Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business License shall include the
following information and documentation:
(1) Applicant background profile:
(a) Individuals. If the applicant is an individual, include the
applicant's legal name, the applicant's business address and
written proof of the applicant's age.
(b) Partnerships (general or limited). If the applicant is a
partnership, joint venture or other type of organization where
two or more persons share the profits and liabilities of the
organization, include the applicant organization's complete
name and official business address; the legal name, the ages,
and business addresses of each partner (other than limited
partners) or any other person entitled to share in the profits of
the organization, whether or not such person is also obligated
to share in the liabilities of the organization.
(c) Corporations. If the applicant is a corporation, include the
corporation's complete name and official business address; the
legal name, the ages and business addresses of all directors,
officers, and managers of the corporation and every person
owning or controlling more than 20% of the voting shares of
the corporation; the corporation's date and place of
incorporation and the object for which it was formed; proof
that such corporation is in good standing and authorized to
conduct business in the State of Illinois; and the name of the
registered corporate agent and the address of the registered
office for service of process.
(d) Land trusts. If the applicant is a land trust, include the
applicant land trusts' complete name; the legal name, and the
business address of the trustee of the land trust; the legal
name, and the ages and business addresses of each beneficiary
of the land trust and the specific interest of each such
beneficiary in land trust; and the interest, if any, that the land
trust holds in the Licensed Premises, as required by Chapter
765 ILCS 405 (Illinois Compiled Statutes). All such
applications shall be verified by the applicant in his/her
capacity as trustee, or by the beneficiary as a beneficial owner
of interest in such land trust.
(2) If a corporation or partnership is an interest holder that must be
disclosed pursuant to Subsection C above, then such interest
§ 37.5-607 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37.5-607
1:1375
holders shall disclose the information required in said section with
respect to their interest holders.
(3) The general character and nature of the business of the applicant
and the length of time that the applicant has been in such business.
(4) The location, including street address and legal description, and
telephone number, of the premises for which the Sexually Oriented
Entertainment Business License is sought, and the identity of each
fee simple owner of the licensed premises. If the applicant is not
the fee simple owner, a copy of the lease therefore shall be
provided.
(5) The specific name of the business that is to be operated under the
Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business License and the specific
type or types of sexually oriented entertainment businesses that
the applicant proposes to operate in the licensed premises.
(6) A site plan showing the lot or property on which the Sexually
Oriented Entertainment Business Establishment is or will be
located, and the location of the building or portion thereof in which
the Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business is or will be located,
the number of available parking spaces, the location and type of
available and proposed lighting, landscaping, trash enclosures, and
all means of ingress and egress to and from the property. The site
plan need not be professionally prepared, but shall be drawn to
scale with marked dimensions to an accuracy of plus or minus one
foot.
(7) A floor plan diagram showing the internal and external
configuration of the licensed premises, including all doors,
windows, entrances, exits, the fixed structural internal features of
the licensed premises, plus the interior rooms, walls, partitions,
stages, performance areas, and rest rooms. A professionally
prepared floor plan diagram in the nature of an engineer's or
architect's blueprint shall not be required; provided, however that
each such diagram shall be oriented to the north or to some
designated street or object, and shall be drawn to a designated
scale or with marked dimensions and to an accuracy of plus or
minus six inches and sufficient to show clearly the various interior
dimensions of all areas of the licensed premises and to demonstrate
compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance. The
requirements of this paragraph shall not apply for a renewal
applications if the applicant the adopts a floor plan diagram that
was previously submitted for the license sought to be renewed and
if the licensee certified the licensed premises has not been altered
since the immediately preceding issuance of the license and that
the previous floor plan diagram continues to accurately depict the
exterior and interior layouts of the licensed premises. The approval
or use of the diagram required pursuant to this paragraph shall not
be deemed to be, and shall not be interpreted or construed to
§ 37.5-607 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 37.5-607
1:1376
§ 37.5-608. [Ch. 37.5, Sec. 6.8] Processing of license application.
constitute, any other City approval otherwise required pursuant to
applicable City ordinances and regulations.
(8) The name of the individual or individuals who shall be the day-today,
onsite managers of the proposed sexually oriented
entertainment business establishment. If the manager is other than
the applicant, the applicant shall provide, for each manager, all of
the information required pursuant to § 37.5-607C(1) of this
Ordinance.
D. Incomplete applications returned. Any application for a Sexually
Oriented Entertainment Business Establishment that does not include
all the information and documents required pursuant to Subsection C of
this § 37.5-607 as well as the Administrative Processing Fee pursuant to
Subsection B of this § 37.5-607 shall be deemed to be incomplete and
shall not be acted on or processed by the City. The City Clerk shall,
within 10 days of such submittal, return the incomplete application to
the applicant along with a written explanation of the reasons why the
application is incomplete. [Ord. No. 2002-24]
A. Reviewing departments. Within five days after receipt of a complete
application for a Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business License
that includes all the information, documents, the administrative
processing fee as required pursuant to § 37.5-607 of this Ordinance, the
City Clerk shall transmit a copy of such application to the Reviewing
Departments.
B. Reviewing department reports. Each of the Reviewing Departments
shall, within 45 days after transmittal of the application of thereto, or
within such other period of time as the City and the applicant may
otherwise agree:
(1) Review the application;
(2) Conduct such inspections of the proposed Licensed Premises and
background investigations of the applicant and any of the
individuals identified in the application pursuant to § 37.5-607C(1),
(2) and (8) of this Ordinance, regarding matters within their
respective jurisdictions, as shall be reasonably necessary to verify
the information set forth in the application and to determine
whether the proposed Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business
Establishment and Licensed Premises comply with the
requirements of this Ordinance and other applicable laws, codes,
ordinances, rules, and regulations; and
(3) Prepare and submit to the Community Development Director a
written report regarding the results and findings of such reviews,
inspections, and investigations.
§ 37.5-607 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37.5-608
1:1377
C. Community development director review. The Community Development
Director shall also conduct such inspections and investigations as the
Community Development Director shall deem reasonably necessary to
verify the information set forth in the application and to determine
whether the proposed Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business
Establishment and Licensed Premises comply with the requirements of
this Ordinance and other applicable laws, codes, ordinances, rules, and
regulations.
D. Reliance on diagrams. In the event that the Licensed Premises has not
yet been constructed or reconstructed to accommodate the proposed
Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business Establishment, the
Community Development Director and the reviewing departments shall
base their respective reports, investigations, and inspections to the
extent necessary, on the site plan and floor plan diagrams submitted
pursuant to § 37.5-607C(6) and (7) of this Ordinance. Any Sexually
Oriented Entertainment Business License issued prior to the
construction or reconstruction necessary to accommodate the proposed
a Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business shall be subject to the
condition that the Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business shall not
be open for business until the Licensed Premises has been inspected
and determined to be in substantial compliance with the diagrams
submitted with the application.
E. Applicant cooperation required. An applicant for a Sexually Oriented
Entertainment Business License shall cooperate fully with the
inspections and investigations conducted by the Community
Development Director and the Reviewing Departments. The applicant's
refusal: to give any information reasonably relevant to the investigation
of the application; to allow the Licensed Premises to be inspected; to
appear at any reasonable time and place for examination under oath of
regarding the application; or to otherwise cooperate with the
investigation and inspection required by this Ordinance shall constitute
an admission by the applicant that the applicant is ineligible for a
Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business License and shall be
grounds for the Community Development Director to direct the City
Clerk to deny the License.
F. Time for issuance or denial. The Community Development Director
shall, within 45 days after submittal of a properly completed
application, or within such other period of time as the City and the
applicant shall otherwise agree, either direct the City Clerk to issue a
Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business License pursuant to the
provisions of § 37.5-609A of this Ordinance or to direct the City Clerk to
deny issuance of a Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business License
pursuant to the provisions of § 37.5-609B of this Ordinance. The City
Clerk shall issue or deny the License within said forty-five-day period,
or such other period of time agreed to by the City and the applicant,
regardless of whether or not the Community Development Director has
received all of the Reviewing Department reports. Provided, if after 45
§ 37.5-608 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 37.5-608
1:1378
§ 37.5-609. [Ch. 37.5, Sec. 6.9] Standards for issuance or denial of
license.
days a criminal history background investigation has not been
completed, the City Clerk may issue a temporary Sexually Oriented
Entertainment Business License during the investigation period. The
temporary Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business License shall be
valid for 90 days from date of issuance and shall automatically
terminate at the end of the ninety-day term. The City Clerk shall revoke
the temporary Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business License
immediately upon an unsatisfactory completion of a criminal history
background investigation.
G. Decision final. The action taken by the City Clerk to issue or deny a
sexually oriented entertainment business license pursuant,
respectively, to § 37.5-609A or B of this Ordinance shall be final, subject
to judicial review. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
A. Issuance. The City Clerk shall issue a Sexually Oriented Entertainment
Business License to an applicant if, but only if, the Community
Development Director finds and determines all of the following, based
on the reports, investigations, and inspections conducted by the
Community Development Director and the Reviewing Departments and
on any other credible information on which it is reasonable for the
Community Development Director to rely:
(1) All of information and documents required by the § 37.5-607 of this
Ordinance for issuance of a Sexually Oriented Entertainment
Business License have been properly provided and the material
statements made in the application are true and correct.
(2) For Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business Establishments, all
persons identified in the application pursuant to § 37.5-607C(1), (2)
and (8) and of this Ordinance are at least 18 years of age and not
under any legal disability.
(3) No person identified in the application pursuant to § 37.5-607C(1),
(2) and (8) of this Ordinance is overdue on payment to the City for
taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against, or imposed on, any
such individual in connection to any Sexually Oriented
Entertainment Business Establishment.
(4) The Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business Establishment, the
Licensed Premises, and the proposed operation of the Sexually
Oriented Entertainment Business comply with all then-applicable
building, health, and life safety codes and regulations and have
received all necessary zoning approvals required pursuant to the
then-applicable provisions of Chapter 44 of the Bloomington City
Code, 1960, as amended (Zoning Code).
§ 37.5-608 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37.5-609
1:1379
(5) No Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business License shall be
issued to any person or premises for which a massage therapy
studio license or a liquor license has been issued as provided in
Chapter 22 or Chapter 6 of the Bloomington City Code, 1960, as
amended.
(6) When a Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business License has
been revoked or surrendered following notice of a hearing, as
provided herein, no license and shall be granted to any person for
the period of one year thereafter for the conduct of a Sexually
Oriented Entertainment Business on the premises to try and in the
revoked licenses.
(7) Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business Establishments shall be
subject to the following location requirements:
(a) Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business Establishments may
be located only in the B-1 Highway Business District, the B-2
General Business Service District and the B-3 Central Business
District as set forth in Chapter 44 of the Bloomington City
Code, 1960, as amended (Zoning Code), subject to the location
criteria cited herein below in Subsection A(7)(b).
(b) No lot line of any lot to be occupied by any Sexually Oriented
Entertainment Business Establishment shall be located closer
than 1,000 feet to the lot line of any other lot occupied by a
Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business Establishment, and
no lot line of any lot to be occupied by any Sexually Oriented
Entertainment Business Establishment shall be located closer
than 500 feet to the lot line of any other lot used for an
amusement center, an amusement park, a day-care center,
children's home, children's museum, orphanage, agency
operated family home, agency operated group home, child care
facility, foster care home, hobby shop or toy store, institutional
home for the care of children, nursery school or preschool,
elementary school, junior high school, senior high school, park,
playground, gymnasium, recreation center, a miniature golf
course, a place of worship, a religious education facility, a
residential dwelling, a hospital, a skating rink or a zoo.
(8) The applicant shall either own or have a valid lease for the licensed
premises for the term of the Sexually Oriented Entertainment
Business License.
(9) The applicant has confirmed in writing and under oath as part of
the application of that the applicant has read this Ordinance and all
provisions of the City Zoning Code applicable to Sexually Oriented
Entertainment Business Establishments, that of the applicant is
familiar with their terms and conditions, and that the licensed
premises and the proposed Sexually Oriented Entertainment
§ 37.5-609 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 37.5-609
1:1380
§ 37.5-610. [Ch. 37.5, Sec. 6.10] Inspection by the City.
Business Establishment and its proposed operation are and shall be
in compliance therewith.
B. Denial of license. If the Community Development Director determines
that the applicant does not meet any one or more of the conditions set
forth in Subsection A of this § 37.5-609, then the Community
Development Director shall direct the City Clerk to deny issuance of the
Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business License and shall give the
applicant written notification and explanation of such denial. The City
Clerk's notice of denial shall be delivered in person or by certified U. S.
mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the
applicant's address as set forth in the application. The Sexually
Oriented Entertainment Business License shall be deemed denied on
the day that the notice of denial is delivered in person or three days
after it is placed in the U. S. mail as provided in this Subsection B.
C. License deemed to be issued. If the City Clerk does not issue or deny
the Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business Establishment or grant a
temporary license, within 45 days after the properly completed
application is submitted, then the Sexually Oriented Entertainment
Business License applied for shall be deemed to have been issued.
[Ord. No. 2017-96]
A. Authority. The Community Development Director and other Reviewing
Department representatives with jurisdiction shall periodically inspect
all the Sexually Oriented Entertainment Businesses as shall be
necessary to determine compliance with the provisions of this
Ordinance and all other applicable laws.
B. Licensee cooperation. A licensee shall permit representatives of the
City to inspect the licensed premises and the Sexually Oriented
Entertainment Business Establishment for the purpose of determining
compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance and all other
applicable laws at any time during which the licensed premises is
occupied or the Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business
Establishment is open for business.
C. Interference or refusal illegal. It shall be unlawful for any Licensee, any
Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business Establishment Employee or
any other person to prohibit, interfere with the, or refuse to allow, any
lawful inspection conducted by the City pursuant to this ordinance or
any other authority.
D. Suspension or revocation. Any such a prohibition, interference, or
refusal shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the Sexually
Oriented Entertainment Business License pursuant to Article XI of this
Ordinance. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
§ 37.5-609 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37.5-610
1:1381

ARTICLE VII
Operational Restrictions for All Sexually Oriented Entertainment
Business Establishments
§ 37.5-701. [Ch. 37.5, Sec. 7.1] General compliance. [Ord. No.
2002-24]
All Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business Establishments shall comply
with the provisions of this Ordinance; all other applicable City ordinances,
resolutions, rules and regulations; and all other applicable federal, state
and local laws.
§ 37.5-702. [Ch. 37.5, Sec. 7.2] Hours of operation. [Ord. No.
2002-24]
No Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business Establishment shall be open
for business at any time between the hours of 12:01 a.m., and 7:00 a.m.,
prevailing time whether Central Standard Time or Central Daylight Savings
Time on any day.
§ 37.5-703. [Ch. 37.5, Sec. 7.3] Animals. [Ord. No. 2002-24]
No animals, except only for animals trained and used to assist a person with
a disability shall be permitted at any time at or in any Sexually Oriented
Entertainment Business Establishment.
§ 37.5-704. [Ch. 37.5, Sec. 7.4] Rest rooms. [Ord. No. 2002-24]
All rest rooms in Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business Establishments
shall be equipped with standard toilets, sinks, and other traditional lavatory
facilities. No explicit sexual material or live performances displaying
specified sexual activities shall be provided or allowed at any time in the
rest rooms of Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business Establishments.
Rest rooms shall not contain television monitors or other motion picture or
video projection, recording or reproduction equipment.
§ 37.5-705. [Ch. 37.5, Sec. 7.5] Restricted areas. [Ord. No. 2002-24]
No Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business Establishment patron shall
be permitted at any time to enter into any of the nonpublic portions of
any Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business Establishment, including
specifically but without limitation, any storage areas or dressing or other
rooms provided for the benefit of Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business
Establishment employees. No cameras or other surveillance devices shall
be installed or maintained by the business operator in the dressing room
facilities for the purpose of broadcasting or projecting images for viewing
by the patrons of the establishment or for broadcasting or projecting images
over of the Internet. This subsection shall not apply to persons to bringing
goods and materials, food and beverages, or performing maintenance or
repairs to the licensed premises; provided, however, that any such person
§ 37.5-701 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37.5-705
1:1383
shall remain in such nonpublic areas only for the purposes and to the extent
and time necessary to perform their job duties.
§ 37.5-706. [Ch. 37.5, Sec. 7.6] Specified prohibited areas.
§ 37.5-707. [Ch. 37.5, Sec. 7.7] Exterior display prohibited. [Ord.
No. 2002-24]
No Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business Establishment shall be
maintained or operated in any manner that causes, creates, or allows public
viewing of any explicit sexual material, or any entertainment depicting,
describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas, from any sidewalk, public or private right-of-way, or any property
other than a lot of which the licensed premises is located. No portion of
the exterior of the Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business Establishment
shall utilize or contain any flashing lights, searchlights, or spotlights, or
any other similar lighting systems, or any words, lettering, photographs,
A. No person at any Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business
Establishment shall appear, be present, or perform while nude. No
Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business Establishment patron shall
appear, be present or perform while seminude.
B. No Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business Establishment
employees or any other person at that any Sexually Oriented
Entertainment Business Establishment shall perform or conduct any
specified sexual activity with or for any Sexually Oriented
Entertainment Business Establishment patron or any other Sexually
Oriented Entertainment Business Establishment employee or any other
person. No Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business Establishment
patron or any other person at any Sexually Oriented Entertainment
Business Establishment shall perform or conduct any specified sexual
activity with or for any employee or any other Sexually Oriented
Entertainment Business Establishment patron or any other person. No
Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business Establishment employees or
any other person at that any Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business
Establishment shall perform or conduct any role playing interaction
with or for any Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business
Establishment patron or any other Sexually Oriented Entertainment
Business Establishment employee or any other person.
C. Straddle Dances shall be prohibited at all Sexually Oriented
Entertainment Business Establishments.
D. No massage therapy as regulated by Chapter 22, Article X, of the
Bloomington City Code, 1960, as amended, shall be provided at any
Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business Establishment.
E. No alcoholic liquor shall be delivered, received, sold, purchased,
provided, or consumed by any person at any Sexually Oriented
Entertainment Business Establishment. [Ord. No. 2002-24]
§ 37.5-705 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 37.5-707
1:1384
silhouettes, drawings, or pictorial representations of any manner except
to the extent specifically allowed pursuant to § 37.5-708 of this Ordinance
with regards to signs. This section shall apply to any advertisement, display,
promotional material, decoration, or sign; to any performance or show; and
to any window, door or other opening.
§ 37.5-708. [Ch. 37.5, Sec. 7.8] Sign limitations. [Ord. No. 2002-24]
All signs for Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business Establishments shall
be flat wall signs. The maximum allowable sign area shall be one square foot
of sign area per foot of lot frontage on a street, but in no event exceeding
32 square feet. The maximum number of signs shall be one per lot frontage.
Signs otherwise permitted pursuant to this Ordinance shall contain only the
name of the Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business Establishment and/
or the specific type of Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business conducted
on licensed premises. Temporary signs shall not be permitted in connection
with any to Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business Establishment.
§ 37.5-709. [Ch. 37.5, Sec. 7.9] Noise amplification outdoors. [Ord.
No. 2002-24]
No loudspeakers or sound equipment audible beyond the licensed premises
shall be used at any time.
§ 37.5-710. [Ch. 37.5, Sec. 7.10] Gambling and related devices
prohibited. [Ord. No. 2002-24]
No sexually oriented entertainment business establishment shall contain
any video pinball, slot, bagatelle, pigeonhole, pool, or any other games,
machines, or implements.
§ 37.5-711. [Ch. 37.5, Sec. 7.11] Lighting. [Ord. No. 2002-24]
All areas of the sexually oriented entertainment business establishment
shall be equipped with the overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity
to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at a
minimum illumination level of not less than one footcandle as measured at
the floor level. The it shall be the duty of the business operator and the
business operator's agents to insure that the minimum illumination level
required by this section is maintained at all times that a patron is present
on the premises.
§ 37.5-712. [Ch. 37.5, Sec. 7.12] Manager's station. [Ord. No.
2002-24]
Each sexually oriented entertainment business establishment shall have
one or more manager's stations. The interior of each sexually oriented
entertainment business establishment shall be configured in such a manner
that there is either a direct and substantially unobstructed view from at
least one manager's station to every part of the entire premises (except rest
rooms) of such establishment to which any sexually oriented entertainment
§ 37.5-707 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37.5-712
1:1385
business establishment patron is permitted access for any purpose. Where
the manager's station will not have a clear view of the entire premises,
the use of wide-angle mirrors or video systems shall be required to provide
continuous monitoring of blind spots or remote parts of the premises
(except rest rooms).
§ 37.5-713. [Ch. 37.5, Sec. 7.13] Age limitations. [Ord. No. 2002-24]
No employee of a Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business Establishment
shall be under the age of 18 years old.
§ 37.5-712 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 37.5-713
1:1386
ARTICLE VIII
Special Restrictions for Adult Video Arcades
§ 37.5-801. [Ch. 37.5, Sec. 8.1] Prohibited except in an adult media
stores. [Ord. No. 2002-24]
Adult video arcades shall be prohibited in all adult sex business
establishments except adult media stores.
§ 37.5-802. [Ch. 37.5, Sec. 8.2] Occupancy and prohibited acts.
[Ord. No. 2002-24]
Only one individual shall occupy a video viewing booth at any one time. No
individual occupying a video viewing booth shall engage in any specified
sexual activities or damage or deface any portion of a video viewing booth.
§ 37.5-803. [Ch. 37.5, Sec. 8.3] Open booth requirement. [Ord. No.
2002-24]
In addition to satisfying the manager's station requirements of § 37.5-712 of
this Ordinance, all adult media stores containing adult video arcades shall
be physically arranged in such a manner that the entire interior portion
of each video-viewing booth shall be visible from the common continuous
main aisle in the adult video arcade. To satisfy this requirement, there
shall be a permanently open and unobstructed entrance way for each videoviewing
booth and for the entrance way from the area of the adult media
store that provides other adult media to the area of the adult media store
containing the adult video arcade. Each of these entrance ways shall not
be capable of being closed or obstructed, entirely or partially, by any door,
curtain, partition, drapes, or any other obstruction whatsoever that would
be capable of wholly or partially obscuring the area of the adult media
store containing video-viewing booths or any person situated in a videoviewing
booth. It shall be unlawful to install video viewing booths within any
sexually oriented entertainment business establishment for the purpose of
providing secluded viewing of hard core materials or live performances of
specified sexual activities.
§ 37.5-804. [Ch. 37.5, Sec. 8.4] Aisle required. [Ord. No. 2002-24]
There shall be one continuous lighted main aisle adjacent to the entrance
to each video viewing booth provided in any adult media store. Each person
situated in a video-viewing booth shall be visible at all times from said aisle.
§ 37.5-805. [Ch. 37.5, Sec. 8.5] Apertures prohibited. [Ord. No.
2002-24]
Except for the open entranceway to a video-viewing booth, the walls and
partitions of each video-viewing booth shall be constructed and maintained
as solid opaque walls or partitions without any apertures, holes or openings
that would facilitate specified sexual activity between persons on either side
of such walls or partitions.
§ 37.5-801 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37.5-806
1:1387
§ 37.5-806. [Ch. 37.5, Sec. 8.6] Sanitation required. [Ord. No.
2002-24]
The floors, seats, walls and other interior portions of all of video-reviewing
booths shall be maintained clean and free from waste and bodily secretions.
Presence of human excrement, urine, semen or saliva in any such booth
shall be evidence of improper maintenance and inadequate sanitary
controls; repeated instances of such conditions may justify its suspension
or revocation of the owner and operator's license to conduct the sexually
oriented entertainment business.
§ 37.5-807. [Ch. 37.5, Sec. 8.7] Sign required.
A sign shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance way to
each video-viewing booth that states that:
§ 37.5-808. [Ch. 37.5, Sec. 8.8] Age limitations.
A. Only one person is allowed in a video-viewing booth that any one time;
B. It is unlawful to engage in any specified sexual activities while in a
video-viewing booth; and
C. It is unlawful to possess or consume any alcoholic liquor while in a
video-viewing booth. [Ord. No. 2002-24]
A. No employee of an adult video arcade shall be under the age of 18 years
old.
B. No patron of an adult video arcade shall be under the age of 18 years
old. [Ord. No. 2002-24]
§ 37.5-806 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 37.5-808
1:1388
ARTICLE IX
Special Restrictions for Adult Cabarets
§ 37.5-901. [Ch. 37.5, Sec. 9.1] Performance area. [Ord. No.
2002-24]
The performance area of an Adult Cabaret shall be limited to one or more
stages or platforms (Cabaret Stages) permanently anchored to the floor.
Each Cabaret Stage shall be elevated above the level of, and separate from
the Adult Cabaret patron seating area by a minimum distance of 24 inches.
Each Cabaret Stage shall be separated by a minimum distance of 36 inches
from all areas of the premises to which the adult cabaret patrons have
access. A contiguous barrier at least 36 inches in height and located at least
36 inches from all points of each Cabaret Stage shall separate each Stage
from all patron seating areas. No adult cabaret patron shall be allowed at
anytime on any Cabaret Stage. Each Cabaret Stage shall have a minimum
area of 600 square feet with minimum dimensions of 20 feet by 30 feet. The
business operator shall provide access for entertainers between the stage
and the dressing rooms which is completely separated from the patrons.
If such a separate access is not physically feasible, the business operator
shall provide a minimum three-foot wide walk aisle for entertainers between
the dressing room area and the stage, with the railing, fence or other
barrier separating the patrons and the entertainers capable of (and which
actually results in) preventing any physical contact between patrons and
entertainers of an adult cabaret. No entertainers either before, during or
after performances, shall have physical contact with a patron and no patron
shall have physical contact with any entertainer either before, during or
after performances by such entertainer. This shall apply only to physical
contact on the premises of the adult cabaret.
§ 37.5-902. [Ch. 37.5, Sec. 9.2] Lighting. [Ord. No. 2002-24]
Sufficient lighting shall be provided and equally distributed throughout the
public areas of the adult cabaret so that all objects are plainly visible all
times. A minimal lighting of not less than 30 lux horizontal, measured that
30 inches above the floor and on ten-foot centers shall be maintained and
all times for all areas of the adult cabaret where adult cabaret patrons are
admitted.
§ 37.5-903. [Ch. 37.5, Sec. 9.3] Tipping. [Ord. No. 2002-24]
No adults cabaret patron shall offer, and no adult and cabaret employee
having performed on any cabaret stage shall accept, in any form of tip
or gratuity offered directly or personally to the employee by the adult
cabaret patron. Rather, all tips and gratuities to adult cabaret employees
performing on any cabaret stage shall be placed into a receptacle provided
for receipt of such tips and gratuities by the adult cabaret establishment or
shall be placed by the adult cabaret patron on the cabaret stage on which
the adult cabaret employee is performing.
§ 37.5-901 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37.5-904
1:1389
§ 37.5-904. [Ch. 37.5, Sec. 9.4] Notice of sign rules required. [Ord.
No. 2002-24]
A sign not to exceed two square feet in area with letters at least one inch
high shall be conspicuously displayed on or adjacent to every adult in every
stage stating the following:
THIS ADULT CABARET IS REGULATED BY THE CITY OF BLOOMINGTON,
ILL
NO ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR SHALL BE PERMITTED AT ANY TIME.
ENTERTAINERS ARE:
1. NOT PERMITTED TO ENGAGE IN ANY TYPE OF SEXUAL CONDUCT.
2. NOT PERMITTED TO ACCEPT ANY TIPS DIRECTLY OR PERSONALLY
FROM PATRONS. ANY SUCH TIPS MUST BE PLACED INTO THE
RECEPTACLE PROVIDED BY MANAGEMENT OR MUST BE PLACED
DIRECTLY ON THE CABARET STAGE.
§ 37.5-905. [Ch. 37.5, Sec. 9.5] Age limitations.
§ 37.5-906. [Ch. 37.5, Sec. 9.6] Security guards required.
Adult cabarets shall employ security guards in order to maintain public
peace and safety, based upon the following standards:
A. No employee of an adult cabaret shall be under the age of 18 years old.
B. No patron of an adult cabaret shall be under the age of 18 years old.
[Ord. No. 2002-24]
A. Adult cabarets and featuring live entertainment show provide at least
one security guard at all times while the businesses open. If the
occupancy limit of the premises is greater than 35 persons, an
additional security guard shall be on duty.
B. Security guards shall be charged with preventing violations of law and
enforcing compliance by patrons of the requirements of this Ordinance.
Security guards shall be uniformed in such a manner so as to be readily
identifiable as a security guard by the public until be duly licensed as a
security guard as required by applicable provisions of State law. No
Security guard required pursuant to this section shall act as a door
person, ticket seller, ticket taker, admitting person, or employee
occupant of the manager's station while acting as a security guard.
[Ord. No. 2002-24]
§ 37.5-904 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 37.5-906
1:1390
ARTICLE X
Special Restrictions for Adult Theaters
§ 37.5-1001. [Ch. 37.5, Sec. 10.1] Seating. [Ord. No. 2002-24]
Each adult theater shall provide seating in individual chairs with arms or
in seats separated from each other by immovable arms and not on couches,
benches or other multiple person seating structures. The number seats shall
equal the maximum number of persons who may occupy the adult theater.
§ 37.5-1002. [Ch. 37.5, Sec. 10.2] Aisle required. [Ord. No. 2002-24]
Each adult theater shall have a continuous main aisle alongside the seating
area in order that each person seated in the adult theater shall be visible at
all times.
§ 37.5-1003. [Ch. 37.5, Sec. 10.3] Sign required. [Ord. No. 2002-24]
Each adult theater shall have a sign posted in a conspicuous place at or near
each entrance way to the auditorium or similar area that lists the maximum
number of persons or may occupy the auditorium area, which number shall
not exceed the number of seats in the auditorium area.
§ 37.5-1004. [Ch. 37.5, Sec. 10.4] Age limitations.
A. No employee of an adult theater shall be under the age of 18 years old.
B. No patron of an adult video theater shall be under the age of 18 years
old. [Ord. No. 2002-24]
§ 37.5-1001 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37.5-1004
1:1391

ARTICLE XI
License Revocation or Suspension
§ 37.5-1101. [Ch. 37.5, Sec. 11.1] Grounds.
Pursuant to the procedures of set forth in § 37.5-1103 of this Ordinance,
the Community Development Director may direct the City Clerk to suspend
for not more than 30 days, or revoke, any Sexually Oriented Entertainment
Business License if the Community Development Director, based upon
credible and reasonably reliable information and evidence, determines that
any one or more of the following has occurred:
A. The Licensee has violated any of the provisions are requirements of this
Ordinance or the sexually oriented entertainment business license
issued pursuant here to, or the provisions of the City Zoning Code
applicable to the licensed premises or to the sexually oriented
entertainment businesses establishment.
B. The licensee:
(1) Knowingly or negligently furnished false or misleading information
or withheld information on any application or other document
submitted to the City for issuance or renewal of any sexually
oriented entertainment businesses license; or
(2) Knowingly or negligently caused or suffered any other person to
furnish or withhold any such information the Licensee's behalf.
C. The Licensee has committed a felony or specified criminal act on the
licensed premises.
D. The Licensee authorizes, approves, or, as a result of the Licensee's
negligent failure to supervise the licensed premises or the sexually
oriented entertainment businesses establishment, allows, a sexually
oriented entertainment businesses employee and a sexually oriented
entertainment business patron, or any other person to:
(1) Violate any of the provisions or requirements of this Ordinance or
the provisions or requirements of the sexually oriented
entertainment business license issued pursuant hereto; or
(2) Commit a felony or specified a criminal act on the licensed
premises.
E. The Licensee, or any other person, identified pursuant to
§ 37.5-607C(1), (2) and (8) of this Ordinance becomes disqualified for
the issuance of a sexually oriented entertainment businesses license at
any time during the term of a license at issue. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
§ 37.5-1101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37.5-1102
1:1393
§ 37.5-1102. [Ch. 37.5, Sec. 11.2] Licensee's responsibility for
employees. [Ord. No. 2002-24]
Every act or omission of whatsoever nature at the licensed premises
constituting a violation of any of the provisions of this Ordinance by any
officer, director, manager, agent or employee of any Sexually Oriented
Entertainment Businesses shall be deemed and held to be an act of such
licensee, and said licensee shall be punishable in the same manner as if
said act or omission had been done or omitted by the licensee personally.
Accordingly, any act or omission of any such persons constituting a violation
of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be deemed, for purposes of
determining whether the licensee's Sexually Oriented Entertainment
Businesses License shall be issued, revoked, suspended, or renewed, to be
an act or omission of the License.
§ 37.5-1103. [Ch. 37.5, Sec. 11.3] Procedure.
A sexually oriented entertainment business establishment license may be a
suspended for not more than 30 days, or revoked, pursuant to the terms and
conditions set forth herein.
A. Notice. Upon determining that one or more of the grounds for
suspension or revocation under § 37.5-1101 of this Ordinance may
exist, the City Clerk shall serve a written notice on the licensee in
person or by certified U. S. mail, postage prepaid, a return receipt
requested, addressed to the licensee's address as set forth in the
licensee's application. A written notice shall be at a minimum:
(1) State that the Community Development Director has determined
that the sexually oriented entertainment business license may be
subject to suspension or revocation pursuant to Article XI of this
Ordinance;
(2) Identify the specific grounds for the Community Development
Director's determination; and
(3) Set a date for a hearing regarding the Community Development
Director's determination as to the possibility of suspension or
revocation of the sexually oriented entertainment business license.
The date of the hearing shall be no less than five days after service
of the Community Development Director's notice, unless an earlier
or later date is agreed to by the licensee and the Community
Development Director.
B. Suspension of sexually oriented entertainment business license due to
unsanitary conditions. The Community Development Director may
order the immediate suspension of a sexually oriented entertainment
business license if the Community Development Director finds, based
upon specific and credible evidence, that a threat to public health exists
by reason of unsanitary conditions which could lead to a spread of
communicable disease. The Community Development Director shall
§ 37.5-1102 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 37.5-1103
1:1394
give the licensee a written notice setting forth the reasons for the
suspension. The suspension shall continue so long as the threat to
public health continues unabated by the licensee. The licensee may
request judicial review of the action of the Community Development
Director.
C. Hearing. The hearing shall be conducted by the Community
Development Director. At the hearing, the licensee may present and
submit evidence and witnesses to refute the grounds cited by the
Community Development Director for suspending or revoking the
license, and the City and any other persons may submit evidence to
sustain such grounds. The administrative record compiled on the
sexually oriented entertainment business establishment pursuant to
§ 37.5-1201 of this Ordinance shall be made a part of the hearing
record. Provided, the Community Development Director may designate
a hearing officer to schedule, convene and conduct the public hearing.
In such case, the hearing officer shall have the same powers as the
Community Development Director to conduct the hearing. Where such
designation has been made, a hearing officer shall submit proposed
findings and recommendations to the Community Development
Director within seven days of the close of the hearing. Within 14 days
after the close of the hearing, the Community Development Director
shall, having considered the record made at the hearing, render a
decision in writing, setting forth the reasons for the decision. The action
taken by the Community Development Director shall be final and shall
be subject to judicial review.
D. Notice and effective date of suspension or revocation. The Community
Development Director's written decision shall be posted at Office of the
City Clerk and shall be served by the City Clerk on the licensee in
person or by certified U. S. mail, postage prepaid, return receipt
requested, addressed to the licensee's address as set forth in the
licensee's application. To permit the licensee the opportunity to obtain a
judicial review, any suspension or revocation, as the case may be, shall
take effect on the 10th day following the date that the Community
Development Director's written decision is delivered in person or three
days after it is placed in the U. S. mail as provided in this paragraph.
E. Surrender of License and Security: Upon the suspension or revocation
of a sexually oriented entertainment business license pursuant to this
Ordinance, the City Clerk shall take custody of the suspended or
revoked license. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
§ 37.5-1103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37.5-1103
1:1395

ARTICLE XII
Record Keeping, Penalties, Nuisances, and Severability
§ 37.5-1201. [Ch. 37.5, Sec. 12.1] Administrative record. [Ord. No.
2002-24]
The City Clerk shall cause to be kept in the City Clerk's office an accurate
record of every sexually oriented entertainment business license application
received and acted on, together with all relevant information and material
pertaining to such application, any sexually oriented entertainment
business license issued pursuant thereto and any sexually oriented
entertainment business establishment operated pursuant to such sexually
oriented entertainment business license.
§ 37.5-1202. [Ch. 37.5, Sec. 12.2] Record keeping by licensee.
§ 37.5-1203. [Ch. 37.5, Sec. 12.3] Penalty for violation. [Ord. No.
2002-24]
Any person who violates, neglect, refuses to comply with, or assists or
participates in any way in the violation of any of the provisions or
requirements of this Ordinance or of any of the provisions or requirements
of any Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business License, upon conviction
thereof, shall be fined not less than $250 or more than $3,000 for each
offense. Each violation of this Ordinance may be grounds for revocation of
any Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business License issued to any such
establishment by the City.
A. The licensee of every sexually oriented entertainment business
establishment shall maintain a register of all of its employees. For each
such employee, the register shall include the following information:
(1) Legal name;
(2) Date of birth;
(3) Gender;
(4) Date of commencement of employment; and
(5) Date of employment termination, if applicable.
B. The Register shall be maintained for all current employees and all
employees employed at any time during the preceding 36 months. The
Licensee shall make the Register of its sexually oriented entertainment
business establishment employees available for inspection by the City
immediately upon demand at all reasonable times. [Ord. No. 2002-24]
§ 37.5-1201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37.5-1204
1:1397
§ 37.5-1204. [Ch. 37.5, Sec. 12.4] Nuisance declared. [Ord. No.
2002-24]
Any sexually oriented entertainment business establishment established,
operated, or maintained in violation of any of the provisions or requirements
of this Ordinance or of any sexually oriented entertainment business license
shall be and the same is, declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance.
The City may, in addition to or in lieu of any other remedies set forth
in this Ordinance, commence an action to enjoin, remove, or abate such
nuisance in the manner provided by law and shall take such other steps
and apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such
relief as will abate or remove such public nuisance, and restrain and enjoin
any person from establishing, operating, or maintaining a sexually oriented
entertainment business establishment contrary to the provisions of this
Ordinance.
§ 37.5-1205. [Ch. 37.5, Sec. 12.5] Rules for computation of time.
[Ord. No. 2002-24]
Unless otherwise specifically set a forth in this Ordinance, the time within
which any act required by this Ordinance is to be done shall be computed
by excluding the first day and including the last day, unless the last date is
Saturday, Sunday or a federal or state holiday, in which case it shall also
be excluded. If the day immediately following such a Saturday, Sunday, or
holiday is also a Saturday, Sunday or holiday, such as succeeding day shall
also be excluded.
§ 37.5-1206. [Ch. 37.5, Sec. 12.6] Severability. [Ord. No. 2002-24]
In the event that any provision of this Ordinance, or any part thereof, or
any application thereof to any person or circumstance, is for any reason
held to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid or ineffective by any court
of competent jurisdiction on its face or as applied, such holding shall not
affect the validity or effectiveness of any of the remaining provisions of this
Ordinance, or any part thereof, or any application thereof to any person
or circumstance or of said provision as applied to any other person or
circumstance. It is hereby declared to be legislative intent of the City that
this Ordinance would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, invalid
or ineffective provisions not been included herein.
§ 37.5-1204 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 37.5-1206
1:1398
Chapter 38
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC WAYS
§ 37.5-1206 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37.5-1206
1:1399

ARTICLE I
Generally
§ 38-101. [Ch. 38, Sec. 1] Streets - Department of Public Works.
§ 38-102. [Ch. 38, Sec. 2] Streets for public use.
The street, avenues, alleys, and sidewalks in the City shall be kept free and
clear of all encumbrances and encroachments for the use of the public, and
they shall not be used or occupied in any other way than is herein provided
in this chapter.
§ 38-103. [Ch. 38, Sec. 3] Defects in - by casualty, etc. [Ord. No.
2018-93]
Whenever it shall be brought to the notice of the Director of Public Works
that through any sudden casualty or accident a defect has occurred in any
public street, sidewalk, sewer, gutter, or drain whereby the public safety is
in danger, he shall cause the same to be provided with proper safeguards.
§ 38-104. [Ch. 38, Sec. 4] Contractor paving streets to erect guards.
When any street, alley, or other public place shall hereafter be paved or
otherwise improved, it shall be the duty of the contractor or contractors
who have charge of said work to cause to be placed in said street, alley,
or public place at the intersection of all cross streets proper and sufficient
guards to prevent automobiles or vehicles of all kinds and descriptions and
animals of all kinds and descriptions from entering in and upon such streets
so being paved or otherwise improved for a distance of at least one block
from that part of the said improvement that has been lastly constructed
until such shall be fit for public use, leaving at all times a sufficient passage
for pedestrians.
A. Duties. The Department of Public Works shall, under the supervision of
the Director:
(1) Maintain and keep in repair all streets, alleys, curbings, and other
public ways, except as otherwise specified by law;
(2) Supervise the collection and disposal of garbage and refuse in the
City in accordance with the code or contract relating thereto;
(3) Clean improved streets, clear them of snow and remove dead trees;
(4) Maintain, repair, and be responsible for all culverts, bridges, and
viaducts belonging to the City;
(5) Operate the necessary plants, yards, repair shops, and other
facilities required to carry out these provisions. [Ord. No.
2018-93]
§ 38-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-105
1:1401
§ 38-105. [Ch. 38, Sec. 5] Liability of contractor.
Any contractor for any public work or any other person making an
excavation in any street, alley, avenue, or sidewalk of said City, who shall
leave the same open and unprotected by lights or otherwise, in the night
time so as to endanger the safety of persons or vehicles passing thereby,
shall be liable to a fine of not less than $10 nor more than $200 for each
offense.
§ 38-106. [Ch. 38, Sec. 6] Closing of streets for improvement. [Ord.
No. 2018-93]
The Director of Public Works of said City may, when any public improvement
is in progress which makes necessary the closing of any street or portion
of any street to public travel to fence or otherwise close such street or
authorize the contractor performing the work of such improvement to do so,
while such necessity exists.
§ 38-107. [Ch. 38, Sec. 7] Unlawful to ride or drive over pavement
within such guards.
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, drive, or in any manner propel
any kind of vehicle or piece of machinery over, along, or upon that portion
of any street, alley, or other public place in the City so being paved or
otherwise improved that is within the guards or obstructions placed upon
such street, alley, or public place by the party in charge of such pavement
or improvement as provided in this article or at, over, or near which there is
a person or sign warning persons not to drive over or across such pavement
or a sign stating that the street is closed.
§ 38-108. [Ch. 38, Sec. 8] Unlawful to remove guards.
It shall be unlawful for any person other than these engaged in the
construction of said pavement or improvement to remove or destroy any
such guards or obstructions placed upon any such street, alley, or public
place that is being paved or improved until such street is opened to traffic.
§ 38-109. [Ch. 38, Sec. 9] Traffic control devices - interference with
- penalty. [Ord. No. 2018-67]
Any person who does not have consent of the Director of Public Works, the
Chief of Fire, the Chief of Police or a designee of Public Works, Fire or
Police, shall not intentionally alter, deface, knock down, remove, or move
any barricades, barrels, cones, signs, or other official devices designed as
a protection from danger and placed to protect the public (special events),
or to protect work or repairs on streets, sidewalks, or public places. Any
person who shall violate any provisions of this section of the Code shall,
upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not less than $250 nor more
than $500 for each offense. Under this section, a separate offense shall
be each time one traffic control device is intentionally altered, defaced,
knocked down, removed, or moved without authorization.
§ 38-105 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 38-110
1:1402
§ 38-110. [Ch. 38, Sec. 10] Stakes prohibited on paved streets.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive iron or other stakes in any
brick, stone, asphalt, or other pavement within the City, except as otherwise
provided by this Code.
§ 38-111. [Ch. 38, Sec. 11] Removal of curbs.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, break out or remove any curb
along a street, except as provided in Article VI, of this chapter, or as
provided in any other section of this Code.
§ 38-112. [Ch. 38, Sec. 13] Defacement, etc., of bench monuments.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cover up, conceal, deface, obliterate
or in any manner to injure, erase, disfigure, or change the location of any of
the standard bench monuments which have heretofore been established or
which may hereafter be established by the City.
§ 38-113. [Ch. 38, Sec. 14] Tampering with cornerstones.
No person shall willfully or heedlessly change, remove, or destroy any
stone, stake, or post set or placed to mark the cornerstone of any lot or
parcel of ground, street, or alley or to show the grade of any street, alley, or
sidewalk of the City.
§ 38-114. [Ch. 38, Sec. 15] Barbed wire fences or barriers -
prohibited.
No person shall build, construct, use, or maintain any fence or barrier
consisting or made of what is called "barbed wire" or of which barbed wire
is a part within the City.
§ 38-115. [Ch. 38, Sec. 16] Refusal to remove.
Wherever barbed wire is now in use in part or in whole for fence or barrier,
the same shall be removed; and any party or parties owning, controlling, or
building the same shall upon written notice from the City Manager remove
such barbed wire within 30 days from service of such notice upon the party
or parties so building, controlling, or maintaining such barbed wire fence or
barrier, and upon failure of such party or parties to comply with said notice
such party or parties shall be subject to a fine of not less than $5 nor more
than $25.
§ 38-116. [Ch. 38, Sec. 17] Performances and exhibitions
interfering with passage upon sidewalks, etc.
No person shall engage in any game, sport, amusement, performance, or
exhibition, or exhibit any machine or show or any animal, or indulge in
any acrobatic or gymnastic feats on any public way in the City, nor shall
any person give or cause to be given any performance, show, or exhibition
§ 38-110 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-116
1:1403
of any kind or nature whatsoever in any show window or in or on any
premises immediately abutting upon any street, public way, or sidewalk in
the City, which is designed or intended to or which as a matter of fact does
collect, attract, or cause to be collected or attracted a sufficient number of
persons to interfere with the passage of the public along the street, public
way or sidewalk upon which such show window or premises abut. If such
show, performance, or exhibition results in the collection or attraction of
a sufficient number of persons to interfere with the passage of the public
along such public way, any member of the Police Department shall have
the power, and it shall be his duty to enter such premises and cause such
show, performance, or exhibition to be discontinued forthwith and to cause
any performer, figure, apparatus, or other thing of any kind or nature
whatsoever, engaged in or used in or about such show, performance, or
exhibition to be removed from such show window or premises forthwith.
§ 38-117. [Ch. 38, Sec. 18] Loud speakers or radio broadcasting
equipment.
§ 38-118. [Ch. 38, Sec. 21] Litter prohibited - penalty.
A. No person shall use any loud speaker or other radio broadcasting
equipment upon any vehicle driven upon the streets of the City, without
first obtaining a permit from the Chief of Police. Any person desiring
such permit shall first pay to the Director of Finance a fee in the amount
set forth in the Schedule of Fees for the privilege of so using such
streets for such purpose; and [Ord. No. 2018-89]
B. The Chief of Police is empowered to authorize or prohibit and to
prescribe the conditions governing the use of any loud speaker or other
radio broadcasting equipment installed upon any vehicle driven upon
the streets or upon public or private premises abutting any sidewalk or
street, when the operation of the same would constitute a nuisance or
unreasonably annoy persons in the vicinity thereof, or draw persons to
the vicinity in such numbers as to obstruct the free and convenient
passage of vehicles and persons along and across any street or
sidewalk.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, in person or by his agent, employee
or servant to cast, throw, sweep, sift or deposit in any manner in or
upon any street, alley, sidewalk, public right-of-way or other publiclyowned
property in the City, or in or upon any river, public water, drain,
sewer or basin within the City, any kind of litter. Nor shall any person
cast, throw, sweep, sift or deposit any litter anywhere within the City in
such manner that it may be carried or deposited, in whole or in part, by
the action of the sun, wind, rain or snow, into any of the aforementioned
places.
B. Litter includes but is not limited to the following:
§ 38-116 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 38-118
1:1404
§ 38-119. [Ch. 38, Sec. 22] Cleansing goods in street or public
place.
No person shall wash, rinse, cleanse, or cause or procure to be washed,
rinsed, or cleansed any cloth, yarn, or garment in any street or Public place
in the City.
§ 38-120. [Ch. 38, Sec. 23] Permitting oils, etc., to spill, etc., upon
asphalt pavement.
It shall be unlawful for any person to spill any turpentine, kerosene,
gasoline, benzene, naphtha, coal oil, or any product thereof or any oil used
for lubricating, illuminating or fuel purposes or to allow any of such fluids to
(1) Picnic or eating utensils, such as paper plates, cups, napkins,
towels, plastic utensils, metal foil, cellophane, wax paper, paper
bags, or any food wrappings;
(2) Liquid or beverage containers such as beer, soft-drink, and juice
cans, beer, soft-drink, liquor and wine bottles, and milk or juice
cartons;
(3) Tobacco and confection wrappers, such as cigarette packages,
candy, ice cream, popsicle, gum or any other type of dessert or
confection wrapping or container;
(4) Food wastes, such as fruit or vegetable peelings, pulp, rinds,
leftovers or any other type of table wastes;
(5) Newspapers, books, placards, handbills, pamphlets, circulars,
notices or papers of any type; or
(6) Any other type of rubbish, garbage, refuse matter, article, thing or
substance such as discarded clothing, boxes, dust, manure or
ashes.
C. Provided, that this section shall not apply to the deposit of material
under a permit authorized by any ordinance of the City; or to goods,
wares, or merchandise deposited upon any public way or other public
place temporarily, in the necessary course of trade, and removed
therefrom within two hours after being so deposited.
D. Persons owning commercially zoned property or managing businesses
in the City shall, within two business hours after the start of the
business day, remove and clear away, or cause to be removed and
cleared away, all litter on any street, alley, sidewalk, public right-of-way
or publicly owned property adjacent to such property or business.
"Business hours" shall be as defined in § 38-228 of this chapter.
E. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be fined
not less than $100 nor more than $500 for each offense. [Ord. No.
2004-62]
§ 38-118 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-120
1:1405
escape to or upon any asphalt pavement of the City or to operate or permit
to be operated any tank truck or other vehicle from which any of such fluids
are permitted to escape.
§ 38-121. [Ch. 38, Sec. 24] Transportation of materials - manner of -
penalty. [Ord. No. 2004-62]
Any person hauling any material along or upon the streets, avenues, or
alleys of the City shall so construct, keep, and maintain the means of
conveyance thereof so that at no time shall any of said material so hauled
be dropped or spilled onto said streets, avenues, or alleys. No person shall
operate any motor vehicle with a load on or in such vehicle unless the
load on or in such vehicle is adequately secured to prevent the dropping or
shifting of materials from such load onto the roadway. Any person violating
this section shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $500 for each
offense.
§ 38-122. [Ch. 38, Sec. 25] Sweeping, shoveling, etc., snow, ice, etc.,
upon public ways.
No person shall sweep, shovel, or pile or cause to be swept, shoveled, or
piled any snow, ice, or other waste upon any of the streets, avenues, alleys,
sidewalks, or other public ways of the City.
§ 38-123. [Ch. 38, Sec. 26] Throwing stones, playing ball, etc., in,
forbidden - penalty.
It shall be unlawful for any person on any street, lane, alley, or public place
of said City to fly kites, throw stones, play ball, or engage in any sport or
exercise likely to injure persons or embarrass the passage of vehicles; and
any person violating this section shall forfeit and pay not less than $1 nor
more than $25 for each offense.
§ 38-124. [Ch. 38, Sec. 27] Sewers and culverts - use of and injury
to - penalty.
It shall be unlawful for any person in said City to injure, obstruct, or
destroy any public sewer or culvert or the grating or openings of the same,
constructed or owned in whole or in part by said City, nor shall any such
sewer or culvert be used for any other purpose than that for which the same
was constructed; and any person violating this section shall forfeit and pay
not less than $10 nor more than $100 for each offense.
§ 38-125. [Ch. 38, Sec. 28] Flags and banners over.
The suspending of any banners, signs, transparencies, or other thing over
any street in the City is hereby forbidden without the consent in writing of
the City Manager.
§ 38-120 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 38-126
1:1406
§ 38-126. [Ch. 38, Sec. 30] Vehicles with cogs, etc.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to drive, propel,
haul, or convey over, upon, or along any paved street, avenue, or alley
any wheeled vehicle having cogs, spikes, or other rough metallic substance
upon the outside rim or tires of any of the wheels or to drive, propel, haul,
or convey over, upon, or along any street, avenue, or alley that is oil or that
is paved with blacktop or macadam any wheeled vehicle having iron rims or
tires. Any person who shall violate this section shall be liable to a fine of not
less than $10 nor more than $300 for each offense.
§ 38-127. [Ch. 38, Sec. 31] Burning leaves, etc., on streets
prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to burn any leaves, papers, trash, weeds,
or rubbish of any kind upon the paved portion of any paved or improved
street, avenue, or alley in the City under penalty of not less than $5 nor
more than $100 for each offense.
§ 38-126 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-127
1:1407

ARTICLE II
Sidewalks
§ 38-201. [Ch. 38, Sec. 46] Sidewalk contractors - bond.
§ 38-202. [Ch. 38, Sec. 47] Permit required - duty of City Clerk.
§ 38-203. [Ch. 38, Sec. 48] Penalty.
Any person, firm, or corporation constructing or attempting to construct
any public sidewalk without first complying with the foregoing sections
of this article shall be subject to a penalty of not less than $10 and not
exceeding $50 for each offense.
A. Every person, firm, or corporation engaging in the business of
constructing public sidewalks shall before engaging in such business
file with the City a bond in the sum of $1,000 to assure said City and
property owners that such sidewalks will be constructed in strict
accordance with the requirements of the City for such work, and that
such work shall be so constructed as to remain in safe condition and
good repair, natural wear expected, for the period of five years from the
completion of such work.
B. Such bond shall be in effect for and during the fiscal year in which filed
and shall cover all work done during the fiscal years in which filed.
Persons, firms, or corporations desiring to continue in such business
shall renew such bond on the first day of May of each year.
C. The bond herein provided to be given shall be executed by the person,
firm, or corporation desiring to engage in such business and by two
responsible sureties or by some surety company, such sureties to be
approved by the Corporation Counsel.
A. All persons, firms, or corporations prior to constructing a public
sidewalk shall apply to and receive a permit from the City Engineer for
the construction of any public sidewalk and no permit shall be issued to
any such person, firm, or corporation for the construction of any
sidewalk until such person, firm, or corporation shall comply with the
provisions of this article. [Ord. No. 1980-25]
B. The City Engineer shall charge a fee in the amount set forth in the
Schedule of Fees for each permit issued. If any person, firm or
corporation shall begin construction of a public sidewalk without said
permit, the City Engineer shall charge a permit fee in the amount set
forth in the Schedule of Fees for such permit. No person, firm or
corporation may be issued any permit under this chapter if any permit
fees requested by this section remain unpaid. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
C. To aid in carrying out this section, the City Clerk shall file with the City
Engineer the names and addresses of all persons, firms, or corporations
filing bonds as herein required. [Ord. No. 1980-25]
§ 38-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-204
1:1409
§ 38-204. [Ch. 38, Sec. 49] Sidewalks - built under City's
supervision - grades - private use of - penalty.
§ 38-205. [Ch. 38, Sec. 50] Sidewalks - material - specifications -
penalty.
All sidewalks shall hereafter have an incline toward the gutter of 1/2 inch
in two feet and shall be constructed of concrete made of gravel or crushed
stone and Portland cement in the proportions prescribed in plans and
specifications for such work by the City Engineer and all sidewalks
hereafter constructed shall be built according to the plans and
specifications for sidewalks to be prepared and kept on file in the office
of the City Engineer; provided, that where there is at present a brick
sidewalk made of good hard brick and the same is in a reasonably safe and
satisfactory condition and by reason of the City's changing the grade of the
street or sidewalk, it becomes necessary to raise or lower such sidewalk in
such case but not otherwise. All violations of this section shall be punished
by a fine of not less than $10 and not more than $50, and every day such
violation shall continue after the first conviction shall be a separate offense.
A. The whole work of grading and laying down sidewalks, whether done by
the City or the owners of the respective lots or parcels of land abutting
upon the streets, shall be done under the supervision and subject to the
approval of the City Engineer. The City Engineer shall establish the
grades for all sidewalks to be established and the same shall conform,
as nearly as may be, to the grades of their respective streets.
B. Where no permanent grade is established, the City Engineer may give a
temporary grade, but the giving of such temporary grade shall in no
way bind the City or make it liable for any expense of changing the walk
if a permanent grade different from said temporary grade later is
established. He shall, when requested by any person desiring to build a
sidewalk, stake out the ground thereof without charge to such person;
and no person shall construct or lay or cause to be constructed or laid
any sidewalk where no grade has been established by the City or
contrary to any grade given by said Engineer; and no part of any
sidewalk shall be taken for private use by lowering or cutting down the
same next to the building fronting thereon; or by railing off the same by
an iron or other railing or otherwise shutting off the public from using
the same, but said sidewalk shall be built clear up to the lot line in a
uniform grade as herein before provided. No sidewalk shall be removed
without provision for rebuilding the sidewalk. Whoever shall violate any
of the provisions of this section shall be subject to a penalty of $5 for the
first offense and to an additional penalty of $1 for each day after the
first conviction that he shall continue such violation.
§ 38-204 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 38-206
1:1410
§ 38-206. [Ch. 38, Sec. 51] Dangerous - to be repaired. [Ord. No.
2018-93]
Whenever it shall be brought to the notice of the Director of Public Works
that any sidewalk have become dangerous to the public safety, the Director
of Public Works shall cause the same to be rendered safe.
§ 38-207. [Ch. 38, Sec. 52] Building or extending sidewalk.
No person shall build or extend any sidewalk beyond the established width,
and no person shall insert any smooth piece of glass or metal in any
sidewalk. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be
fined not exceeding $10 and a further penalty of $2 for each day he shall
continue such violation after the first conviction.
§ 38-208. [Ch. 38, Sec. 53] Steps, platforms, or fixtures, etc. -
prohibited - penalty.
No steps, platforms, or other fixtures shall extend into or upon any sidewalk
or alley in said City. No open cellar or basement way shall be permitted in
any sidewalk or alley, Whoever shall violate or fail to comply with any of the
requirements of this section shall be subject to a penalty of not less than
$3 nor more than $20 for each offense, and to the further penalty of $3 for
each day he shall fail or refuse to comply therewith after the first conviction
hereunder.
§ 38-209. [Ch. 38, Sec. 54] Openings in sidewalks generally - use of
space restricted.
§ 38-210. [Ch. 38, Sec. 55] Openings in sidewalks, alley, etc., for
stairways, ramps, etc., to be protected by guard rails.
Openings adjacent to City sidewalks and alleys used for stairways, ramps,
lifts, elevators, chutes, and all other purposes, shall be provided with closed
metal guard rails three feet high for the protection of pedestrians. All guard
A. There shall be no permanent opening in any sidewalk, alley, or street.
B. No space, room, or structure under a sidewalk shall be used for storage
of explosives or flammable liquids, nor shall a cesspool be located
therein.
C. No person shall hereafter be allowed to newly construct or occupy for
vaults, areas, or for any other purpose the space beneath the streets,
sidewalks, avenues, alleys, or public places in the City.
D. Every covered aperture or opening in any sidewalk over any vault or
coal hole shall be covered with a substantial iron gate or place having a
rough surface. The reconstruction or repair of all vaults and coal holes
under sidewalks shall be subject to the direction and supervision of the
City Engineer.
§ 38-206 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-210
1:1411
rails of stairs for public access and all ramps shall be permanently and
substantially fixed.
§ 38-211. [Ch. 38, Sec. 57] Same - removal of grate or covering.
No person shall remove or insecurely fix, or cause or procure or suffer or
permit to be removed or to be insecurely fixed, so that the same can be
moved in its bed, any grate or covering of any coal hole, vault, or chute
under any street, sidewalk, or other public place; provided that nothing
herein contained shall prevent the owner or occupant of the building with
which such coal hole, vault, or chute shall be connected from removing the
grate or covering for the proper purpose of such openings; provided that
he encloses such opening or aperture and keeps the same enclosed while
such grate or covering shall be removed, with a strong box or curb at least
24 inches high, firmly and securely made; provided further that he shall
not remove such grate or covering until after sunrise of any day and shall
replace such grate or covering before 1/2 hour after sunset.
§ 38-212. [Ch. 38, Sec. 58] Same - liability to City.
The person in possession of any premises abutting on a vault or coal hole
shall be held responsible to the City for any and all damages occasioned to
persons or property in consequence of the aperture in the sidewalk being
left exposed and uncovered or in consequence of the covering thereof being
left insecure or unfastened.
§ 38-213. [Ch. 38, Sec. 59] Open grating - vault or cellar door -
penalty.
Any person who shall keep or leave open any cellar door or grating of any
vault on any public highway or sidewalk, or suffer the same to be left or kept
open, or place any obstruction thereon that will endanger the public travel,
shall forfeit and pay a penalty of not less than $25 nor more than $200 for
each offense.
§ 38-214. [Ch. 38, Sec. 60] Injury to by riding or driving upon, etc. -
penalty.
Any person who shall ride upon, over, or across, or drive or pass over, along,
or across any sidewalk or any curb with any automobile or vehicle, except
at proper crossing places and where the alleys intersect the streets, shall,
upon conviction, forfeit and pay not less than $1 nor more than $25 for each
offense; provided that any occupant of any yard, lot, or warehouse may have
access to the same by placing in front thereof at his or her expense, with the
consent and direction of the City Engineer, a temporary bridge or carriage
way over the gutter, curbing, and sidewalk in such manner as will preserve
the same from injury and not obstruct it.
§ 38-210 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 38-215
1:1412
§ 38-215. [Ch. 38, Sec. 61] Obstructions - coal, firewood, etc. -
penalty.
It shall be unlawful for any person in said City to throw, cast, or place upon
any sidewalk any stone, coal, coke, or firewood, or to cut, split, or saw any
firewood upon any sidewalk; and any person convicted under this section
shall forfeit and pay not less than $1 nor more than $10 for each offense;
provided that every person shall have the privilege of unloading his or her
coal, firewood or other fuel in front of his or her house, shop, store, and
outside of the sidewalk, in such manner only as will not obstruct the free
passage of the street, the same shall be removed before the expiration of 12
hours from the time the same may be deposited.
§ 38-216. [Ch. 38, Sec. 62] Persons not to obstruct - penalty.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to occupy or encumber any
sidewalk, street, or alley in said City by standing, sitting, or remaining upon
the same so as to prevent or obstruct the free and convenient passage of
persons along and across any of said streets, sidewalks, or alleys, but all
such persons shall disperse or move on at the request of any policeman; and
any person violating this section shall forfeit and pay not less than $1 nor
more than $50 for each offense.
§ 38-217. [Ch. 38, Sec. 63] Permission to restrict City streets.
A. All persons, contractors, utilities and other agencies must obtain a
Street Closure Permit, and pay any permit fee as set forth in the
Schedule of Fees, for any obstruction of all streets, parkways,
sidewalks, alleys, or any other public rights-of-way within the City of
Bloomington. After notification, failure to obtain a permit as required by
this section may result in immediate job stoppage and/or removal of all
obstructions from public right-of-way. All Street Closure Permits shall
be issued by the Public Works Department. Street Closure Permits shall
be divided into two types:
(1) Permit to obstruct sidewalk, parkway and/or parking lane.
(2) Permit to obstruct traffic lane.
B. The Public Works Department reserves the right to deny any Street
Closure Permit during any time when in their judgment the traffic
restriction could result in intolerable congestion, accident potential or
hazard to workmen or the public. No person, contractor, utility
company or other agency will be issued any permit under this chapter if
any permit fees requested by this section remain unpaid. Whenever any
person to whom such permit may be granted shall fail through either
willfulness or neglect to perform any of the conditions or execute any of
the requirements of the same he shall forfeit and pay $75 for each
offense; and the said Director of Public Works shall have the further
power, in his discretion, to revoke the privileges granted in said permit
and require the removal forthwith of all materials, dirt, and rubbish
§ 38-215 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-217
1:1413
§ 38-218. [Ch. 38, Sec. 64] Conducting water from building on -
penalty.
No person owning, occupying, or controlling any building in said City shall
cause the pipes conducting the water from the eaves of the same to be so
constructed as to spread the water over the sidewalks or upon any person
passing along any sidewalk; and any person failing to comply with the
provisions of this section shall forfeit and pay not less than $1 nor more than
$25 for each offense.
§ 38-219. [Ch. 38, Sec. 65] Signs on sidewalks - penalty.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to place or maintain
or cause to be placed or maintained any sign or fixture for advertising
purposes, whether or not the same is stationary or movable, upon or in any
sidewalk, street, alley, or other public place in the City. Violations of this
section shall subject the offender to a fine of not less than $5 nor more than
$100 for each offense, and each day any such sign or fixture shall so remain
shall be considered a separate offense.
§ 38-220. [Ch. 38, Sec. 66] Merchandise on sidewalks - penalty.
placed upon the occupied portion of the right-of-way. [Ord. No.
2018-93]
A. Except as otherwise provided in this section, it shall be unlawful for any
person to place upon, over or across, or to suspend upon, over or across
any sidewalk, street or alley any vegetables, food products, fruits,
berries, produce or any other articles of merchandise whatsoever for
the purpose of storage, exhibition, sale or offering for sale. The
definition of street includes and incorporates all that area within the
public right-of-way line including sidewalk, pavement of street right-ofway,
parkway, which is defined as that area between the sidewalk and
the paved portion of the street, and any additional land whether used
for the foregoing or other purposes.
B. The provisions of Subsection A above shall not apply to any devices
commonly known as newspaper boxes or similar devices whereby a
person is allowed to remove one or more newspapers or magazines
from said device upon depositing therein the purchase price thereof
located on sidewalks provided such devices meet the following
standards:
(1) Such device shall not stand higher than four feet from the ground
nor possess any horizontal dimension in excess of two feet;
(2) Such device shall not be located:
(a) In any location in which any part of the device, including any
door thereto when opened, extends onto street pavement or
§ 38-217 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 38-220
1:1414
§ 38-221. [Ch. 38, Sec. 67] (Reserved) [Repealed 6-13-1994 by Ord.
No. 1994-59]
§ 38-222. [Ch. 38, Sec. 68] Receiving or delivering merchandise -
penalty.
No person, while receiving any goods, wares or merchandise, shall permit
the same to remain on any sidewalk longer than two hours and for this
purpose he shall not occupy over four feet of the outer edge of the sidewalk
in front of the place of business so receiving or delivering any such goods,
wares, merchandise, etc. Any person violating the provisions of this section
shall be liable to a penalty of not less than $5 nor more than $50 for each
offense.
§ 38-223. [Ch. 38, Sec. 69] Storage of personal property, etc., on
streets, sidewalks, etc.
No street, alley or sidewalk shall be used for the storage of personal
property, goods, wares or merchandise of any kind or description whatever.
No person shall place or cause to be placed in or upon any street, alley or
sidewalk any barrel, box, hogshead, crate, package or other obstruction of
any kind or description whatsoever and suffer the same to remain thereon.
§ 38-224. [Ch. 38, Sec. 70] Pots on sills, etc. - protection from
falling - penalty.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or keep on a window sill, railing,
balcony, porch, or any other projection from any house or building standing
upon or near to the line of any sidewalk, street, or alley or other public
place in the City, any earthen flower pot, wooden box or other article or
thing whatever unless the same is securely and firmly fastened or protected
leaves less than five continuous feet of sidewalk width or
obstructs pedestrian traffic;
(b) Adjacent to any bus stops or any no parking zone anywhere in
the City;
(c) Within five feet of any intersection where the presence of such
a device obstructs a motorist's view of cross traffic or
pedestrians;
(d) Within one foot of any building;
(3) Such device shall not be chained to any bench adjacent to a bus
stop, tree, traffic signal, traffic control device, including traffic
signs, traffic lights or parking meters;
(4) Such device shall contain a name, address and telephone number
of a person to be notified in case of theft, vandalism, nonfunctional
condition of the device, or the device's noncompliance with this
chapter. [Ord. No. 1975-93]
§ 38-220 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-224
1:1415
by proper railing so as to render it impossible for the same to fall under a
penalty of not exceeding $10 for each such offense.
§ 38-225. [Ch. 38, Sec. 71] Sidewalks to be kept free from snow, ice,
dirt and weeds.
Every owner or occupant of any dwelling house or other building or
proprietor or lessee of any enclosed lot or premises and every person having
the charge or control of any church, hall or public building within the City
shall during the winter season, whenever there is a fall of snow, and by
10:00 a.m. on every morning thereafter, clear the sidewalks in front of or
adjoining such house, building or premises from snow and ice and keep the
same conveniently free therefrom; or shall, in case the snow and ice are so
congealed as not to be removed without difficulty or injury to the pavement,
strew the same with ashes, sand or sawdust. Every such owner or occupant
shall also, at all times, keep such sidewalks clear and free from dirt, filth,
and weeds or other obstructions so as to allow pedestrians the safe and
unobstructed use of the same.
§ 38-226. [Ch. 38, Sec. 72] Sidewalk, curbing, gutters, etc. - injury
to - penalty.
Any person or persons who shall injure or obstruct any gutter, pavement,
curbing or sidewalk or cause the same to be injured or obstructed shall
forfeit and pay a sum not less than $1 nor more than $50 for each offense.
§ 38-227. [Ch. 38, Sec. 72.5] Sidewalk adjacent to redeveloped area
- improvement.
A. Whenever property is redeveloped as defined in this section, the owner
thereof shall, prior to occupancy, provide for such construction,
reconstruction or repair as will improve all public sidewalk adjacent to
said redeveloped property to a safe and usable condition. Sidewalk
improvements are provided for within the meaning of this section
whenever the owner of such property, or his agent, presents to the
Director of Building Safety a contract with a licensed sidewalk
contractor for improvement of adjacent sidewalks to a standard
acceptable to the City Engineer within a period of time found
reasonable by the City Engineer in light of the availability of material
and qualified labor, the extent of the sidewalk improvement and the
time of the year. [Ord. No. 1977-146]
B. Redevelopment property defined. Property is redeveloped within the
meaning of this Ordinance whenever:
(1) The property is subdivided and required sidewalk improvements
have not been waived;
(2) A new building is erected on the site where an older building
previously existed:
§ 38-224 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 38-227
1:1416
§ 38-228. [Ch. 38, Sec. 73] Definitions.
The following terms, when used in §§ 38-229 and 38-230, shall have the
meaning provided in this section:
BUSINESS DAY — Any day not a Sunday or national or state holiday.[Ord.
No. 1977-3]
BUSINESS HOURS — The hours between 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any
business day.[Ord. No. 1977-3]
CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT — Refers to the area bounded by the
following streets: Beginning at the intersection of Locust and Roosevelt
Streets; thence east on Locust to Prairie Street; thence south to Douglas
Street; thence east to Gridley Street; thence south to Jefferson Street;
thence east to McLean Street; thence south to Front Street; thence west to
Gridley Street; thence south to Olive Street; thence west to Prairie Street;
thence south to Jackson Street; thence west along Jackson Street and an
extension thereof to Main Street; thence north to Kentucky Alley; thence
west to Center Street; thence north to Olive Street; thence west to Lee
Street; thence north to Front Street; thence west to Oak Street; thence
north to Monroe Street; thence east to Roosevelt Street; thence north to a
point immediately south of Mulberry Street; thence east to a point halfway
between the Roosevelt Street right-of-way and the Madison Street right-ofway;
thence north to Locust Street.[Ord. No. 1977-11]
OCCUPANT — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
governmental entity, or other entity of any description other than the owner
having the right to possession of the premises.[Ord. No. 1977-3]
OWNER — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
governmental entity, or other entity of any description holding legal title to
the Premises.[Ord. No. 1977-3]
§ 38-229. [Ch. 38, Sec. 74] Snow and ice to be removed from
sidewalks by owner or occupant.
(3) An existing building is improved in an amount exceeding 50% of its
assessed value. [Ord. No. 1977-146]
A. Except as provided in Subsection B, every owner and occupant of any
building or lot of land within the central business district fronting or
abutting on a paved sidewalk shall remove and clear away, or cause to
be removed and cleared away, snow and ice from so much of said
sidewalk as is in front of or abuts on said building or lot of land within
four business hours after the cessation of any fall of snow, sleet or
freezing rain or by the beginning of business hours of the next business
day following such fall, whichever period is shorter. [Ord. No. 1977-3]
B. In the event snow and ice on a sidewalk has become so hard that it
cannot be removed without likelihood of damage to the sidewalk, the
person or entity charged with its removal shall, within the time
mentioned in Subsection A hereof, cause enough sand or other abrasive
§ 38-227 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-229
1:1417
§ 38-230. [Ch. 38, Sec. 75] Failure to clean sidewalk -
consequences.
to be put on the sidewalk to make travel thereon reasonably safe; and
shall then, as soon thereafter as weather permits, cause said sidewalk
to be thoroughly cleaned. [Ord. No. 1977-3]
A. Owners and occupants of properties in the central business district
failing to comply with the requirements of § 38-229 shall upon
conviction thereof be fined in an amount not less than $25 nor more
than $200. [Ord. No. 1977-3]
B. This ordinance is enacted for the benefit and protection of all
pedestrians in the central business district who are intended to be
protected thereby. Failure to comply with the requirements of § 38-229
shall constitute a prima facie showing of negligence, and any
pedestrian in the central business district who is killed or sustains an
injury to his person or property caused by failure of an owner or
occupant of property in the central business district to comply with the
requirements of § 38-229, shall have a cause of action against such
owners and/or occupants, who shall be Jointly and severally liable to
such pedestrian or his estate for any damages so sustained. [Ord. No.
1977-3]
§ 38-229 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 38-230
1:1418
ARTICLE III
Obstruction And Encroachments
§ 38-301. [Ch. 38, Sec. 76] Unauthorized obstruction or
encumbrance on streets, etc. prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to place, throw, or leave or cause to be placed or left any
encroachment, obstruction, or encumbrance in or upon any street, avenue,
or alley except as authorized by this Code.
§ 38-302. [Ch. 38, Sec. 77] Same - liability.
Any person who shall place or leave or cause to be left any encroachment,
obstruction, or encumbrance upon any street, avenue, or alley shall in cases
be liable to the City and to private persons for all injury or damage arising
therefrom.
§ 38-303. [Ch. 38, Sec. 78] Street closure permits.
A. Permit to Obstruct Sidewalk, Parkway, and/or Parking Lane.
(1) Any persons, contractors, utilities or other agencies desiring to
occupy or otherwise obstruct any portion of a sidewalk, parkway,
alley or parking lane located on public right-of-way shall first obtain
a permit from the Public Works Department before obstructing said
area. This permit shall state the location and nature of the
obstruction, the amount of public right-of-way to be occupied, and
the length of time to be occupied. All permits issued for this
purpose must be obtained 24 hours in advance of the anticipated
placement of any materials or obstructions in the permit area. The
permit shall include an obligation on the part of the applicant to
observe the Code of the City in relation thereto and to protect the
City from any liability to any person or persons on account of
accident or damage arising from said occupied space and to restore
the area to its original condition immediately upon the expiration of
the period granted in said permit.
(2) Permit time limits and fees.
(a) The City shall charge a permit fee for each permit issued. The
permit fee shall be based on the length of time the obstruction
is to remain. A permit fee of $25 shall be charged for each
permit issued for a period of up to two weeks. If the obstruction
is to remain for a period of more than two weeks, but less than
one month, a permit fee of $50 will be charged. No permit shall
be issued for more than a one-month period, without prior
permission from the Downtown Traffic Committee (DTC) or the
Director of Public Works for areas outside of the Downtown
Area. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
§ 38-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-303
1:1419
(b) All sidewalks, parkways, or parking lanes which are obstructed
for other than short Periods of time shall require a permit as
described in this section. If any persons, contractors, utilities
or other agencies obstruct any of these areas on public right-ofway
without said permit the Public Works Department shall be
empowered to charge a permit fee of double the normal permit
fee for the appropriate type of permit. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
(3) General traffic control regulations. All permits issued under this
section shall include provisions for public protection based on work
site circumstances. The requirements, standards, and methods of
application for traffic control in all permit areas shall conform with
the Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Only traffic
control devices and applications approved in this manual will be
allowed in use within the City of Bloomington. Any variance from
these standards without prior permission from the Public Works
Department shall be considered a violation of permit conditions
and may result in penalties as described in § 38-217. [Ord. No.
2018-93]
B. Permit to obstruct traffic lane.
(1) Any persons, contractors, utilities or other agencies desiring to
occupy or otherwise obstruct any portion of a traffic lane or lanes
located on a public street shall first obtain a permit from the Public
Works Department before obstructing said area. This permit shall
state the location and nature of the obstruction, the amount of
public right-of-way to be occupied and the length of time to be
occupied. All permits issued for this purpose must be obtained 24
hours in advance of the anticipated placement of any materials or
obstructions in the permit area. The permit shall include an
obligation on the part of the applicant to observe the Code of the
City in relation thereto and to protect the City from any liability to
any person or persons on account of accidental damage arising
from said occupied space and to restore the area to its original
condition immediately upon the expiration of the period granted in
said permit. This type of permit may be written to include the
obstruction of sidewalks, parkways and parking lane at no
additional fee.
(2) Permit time limits and fees. The City shall charge a permit fee for
each permit issued. The permit fee shall be based on the length of
time the obstruction is to remain. A permit fee of $10 per day shall
be charged for each permit. All traffic lanes which are obstructed
for other than short periods of time shall require a permit as
described in this section. If any persons, contractors, utilities or
other agencies obstruct a traffic lane or part of any traffic lane on
City right-of-way without said permit, the Public Works Department
shall be empowered to charge a permit fee of $20. No Permit shall
be issued for more than a thirty-day period without prior
permission from the Downtown Traffic Committee (DTC) or the
§ 38-303 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 38-303
1:1420
§ 38-304. [Ch. 38, Sec. 79] Erecting or placing buildings in streets,
etc. - penalty.
No person shall erect or place any building, in whole or in part, upon any
street, avenue, alley, or other public ground of this City under a penalty of
$50.
§ 38-305. [Ch. 38, Sec. 80] Removal of from streets, etc. - penalty.
The owner, occupant, or person in control of any building, fence, porch,
steps, gallery, or other obstruction which is now or may hereafter be erected
or placed upon any street, avenue, alley, or sidewalk or other public ground
of the City shall remove the same upon written notice of the City Manager,
and any person failing or refusing to comply with such notice within 10 days
after being so notified shall be subject to a penalty of not less than $5 nor
more than $50.
§ 38-306. [Ch. 38, Sec. 81] Removal of obstruction.
The City Manager and all public officers of the City are hereby authorized
to cause any obstruction, encroachment, article, or thing which may be
in violation of the law or the provisions of this article to be removed
within a reasonable time after a notice to the owner, agent, or person in
possession of the premises where such violation occurs or after notice to the
person causing any such obstruction. In case the owner, agent, or person
in possession of any such premises or the persons causing such obstruction
cannot be found, then the City Manager shall cause any such obstruction to
be removed at once. In addition to the penalty in this article prescribed, the
person or persons causing such obstruction shall pay all costs and expenses
of such removal. In cases when notice has been given, the person or persons
so notified, failing after a reasonable time to remove any such obstruction,
shall be liable in a like manner as in cases where no notice is given. Every
person who shall oppose or resist the execution of the orders of the City
Manager in such regard shall be subject to a penalty of not less than $10
nor more than $50.
Director of Public Works for areas outside of the Downtown area.
[Ord. No. 2018-93]
(3) General traffic control regulations. All permits issued under this
section shall include provisions for public protection based on work
site circumstances. The requirement standards and methods of
application for traffic control in all permit areas shall conform to
the Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Only traffic
control devices and applications approved in this Manual will be
allowed in use within the City of Bloomington. Any variance from
these standards without prior permission from the Public Works
Department shall be considered a violation of permit conditions
and may result in penalties as described in § 38-217. [Ord. No.
2018-93]
§ 38-303 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-307
1:1421
§ 38-307. [Ch. 38, Sec. 82] Enclosure, etc., extending over streets,
etc.
No person shall make, or cause to be made, any enclosure, fence, arched
way or building of any kind extending over or across any street, avenue,
alley, or sidewalk within said City, under a penalty of not less than $10 nor
more than $100 for each offense, and a further penalty of $5 for each day
that he shall allow such enclosure, fence, bridge, or building to remain after
being notified to remove the same by the City Manager or any Police Officer.
§ 38-308. [Ch. 38, Sec. 83] Policy. [Ord. No. 2010-45]
It is the policy of the City Council of the City of Bloomington that any
mailbox or newspaper delivery box (hereafter referred to as "mailbox")
should not interfere with the safety of the motoring public or the operation
of the street system. It should conform to rules and regulations of the U.S.
Postal Service. Any mailbox constructed or located contrary to this policy
ant the requirements of §§ 38-309 through 38-313 of this chapter, whether
before or after September 8, 1989, hereby declared to be an unauthorized
obstruction under Bloomington City Code Chapter 38 and under Section
9-117 of the Illinois Highway Code (605 ILCS 5/9-117).
§ 38-309. [Ch. 38, Sec. 83.1] Permit required. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
No person shall construct or locate a mailbox on public right-of-way without
a permit to do so from the Department of Public Works. The application for
a permit, and any required fee as set forth in the Schedule of Fees, shall
contain an agreement limiting the City's liability for damages to the mailbox
to the amounts specified in Chapter 38, § 38-313.
§ 38-310. [Ch. 38, Sec. 83.2] Location of mailboxes.
A. No mailbox may be constructed where access to it is from lanes of a
freeway or where it is otherwise prohibited by law or regulation. [Ord.
No. 1989-82]
B. Mailboxes shall be located on the righthand site of the roadway in the
direction of the delivery route except on one-way streets where they
may be placed on the lefthand aide. The bottom of the box shall be set at
an elevation establishes by the U.S. Postal Service, usually between
three feet six inches and four feet zero inches above the roadway
surface. The roadside face of the box shall be offset from the edge of the
traveled way a minimum distance of the greater of the following: eight
feet (where no paves shoulder exists), the width of the all-weather
shoulder present plus eight inches to 12 inches, or the width of an allweather
turnout specified by the City plus eight inches to 12 inches.
[Ord. No. 1989-82]
C. Exceptions to the lateral placement criteria above will exist on
residential streets ant certain designated rural roads where the City
§ 38-307 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 38-310
1:1422
§ 38-311. [Ch. 38, Sec. 83.3] Construction and materials.
deems it in the public interest to permit lesser clearances or to require
greater clearances.
(1) On curbed streets, the roadside face of the mailbox shall be set
back from the face of curb a distance between six inches and 12
inches.
(2) On residential streets without curbs or all-weather shoulders and
that carry low traffic volumes operating at low speeds, the roadside
face of a mailbox shall be offset between eight inches and 12 inches
behind the edge of pavement.
(3) On very low volume rural roads with low operating speeds, the City
may find it acceptable to offset mailboxes a minimum of six feet
eight inches from the traveled ways and under some low volume,
low speed conditions may find clearances as low as two feet eight
inches acceptable. [Ord. No. 1989-82]
D. Where a mailbox is located at an intersecting road, it shall be located a
minimum of 100 feet beyond the center of the intersecting road in the
direction of the delivery route. This distance shall be increased to 200
feet when the average daily traffic on the intersecting road exceeds 400
vehicles per day. [Ord. No. 1989-82]
E. Support structures for the mailbox shall not be located closer than 18
inches from the back of any curb. [Ord. No. 1989-82]
A. Mailboxes shall be of light sheet metal or plastic construction
conforming to the requirements of the U.S. Postal Service. Newspaper
delivery boxes shall be of light sheet metal or plastic construction of
minimum dimensions suitable for holding a newspaper. [Ord. No.
1989-82]
B. No more than two mailboxes may be mounted on a support structure
unless the support structure and mailbox arrangement have been
shown to be safe by crash testing. However, lightweight newspaper
boxes may mounted below the mailbox on the site of the mailbox
support. [Ord. No. 1989-82]
C. Mailbox supports shall not be set in concrete unless the support design
has been shown to be safe by crash tests when 80 installed. [Ord. No.
1989-82]
D. A single four inches by four inches or 4 1/2 inches diameter wooden
post or a metal post with a strength no greater than a two inches
diameter standard strength steel pipe and embedded no more than 24
inches into the ground will be acceptable as a mailbox support. A metal
post shall not be fitted with an anchor plate, but it may have an antitwist
device that extends no more than 10 inches below the ground
surface. [Ord. No. 1989-82]
§ 38-310 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-311
1:1423
§ 38-312. [Ch. 38, Sec. 83.4] Removal of unsafe mailboxes. [Ord.
No. 1989-82]
Any mailbox hereafter constructed in violation of these §§ 38-310 through
38-311 are subject to removal at the owner'e expense, whether done by the
owner or by the City after the owner has failed to remove it upon 10 days'
written notice to do so.
§ 38-313. [Ch. 38, Sec. 83.5] Damage to or destruction of
mailboxes.
§ 38-314. [Ch. 38, Sec. 84] Trees, shrubs, etc., obstructing view.
If any fence or other structure shall be constructed or maintained on, or
if any trees, shrubs, bushes, weeds, or plants shall be permitted to grow
upon premises adjacent to a street in such manner as to obstruct the view
and endanger traffic conditions, it shall be considered a nuisance, and the
owner or occupant of such premises shall, upon being notified in writing by
the City Manager, remove or eliminate such obstruction.
E. The post-to-box attachment details should be of sufficient strength to
prevent the box from separating from the post top if the installation is
struck by a vehicle. [Ord. No. 1989-82]
F. The minimum spacing between the centers of support posts shall be 3/4
the height of the posts above the groundline. [Ord. No. 1989-82]
G. Mailbox support designs not described in this regulation will be
acceptable if approved by the City Engineer. [Ord. No. 1989-82]
H. It will be the responsibility of the postal patron to inform the City of any
new or existing mailbox installation where shoulder construction is
inadequate to permit all-weather vehicular access to the mailbox. [Ord.
No. 1989-82]
A. The City shall not be financially responsible for the cost of mailbox
replacement beyond that set forth hereafter in this section for repair or
replacement of mailboxes damaged or destroyed by City vehicles or
employees in the course of their operation. The City shall inspect
mailboxes reported as damaged and place a temporary mailbox within
48 hours after the mailbox damage is reported to the City. The
temporary mailbox will be removed after 30 days. At the request of the
owner of the mailbox, the City will install a permanent mailbox and/or
post from materials in compliance with § 38-311 giving due
consideration to appearance requests of the owner of the mailbox.
Mailbox replacements or reimbursements shall only occur for damage
reported within 10 business days of the date of the damage occurred or
as soon as reasonable possible thereafter.
B. Reimbursement schedule. Replacement of mailbox and/or post will be
capped at a maximum of $150. [Ord. No. 2010-45]
§ 38-311 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 38-315
1:1424
§ 38-315. [Ch. 38, Sec. 86] Railroad obstructing street.
A. No railroad corporation shall block or obstruct any street within the
City by stopping any train upon or by leading any car or engine standing
on it a track where the same intersects or crosses such street except for
the purpose of receiving or discharging passengers or freight or for
taking in or setting out cars or to receive the necessary fuel and water,
and in any case not to exceed five minutes for each train, car, or engine.
B. Any railroad corporation violating the provisions of this section shall be
punished by a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $200 for each
offense, and any engineer or conductor causing an obstruction in
violation of the provisions of this section shall also be individually guilty
of a violation and shall be punished by a fine of not less than $5 nor
more than $200.
§ 38-315 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-315
1:1425

ARTICLE IV
Excavations Generally
DIVISION 1
General Provisions
§ 38-401. [Ch. 38, Sec. 87] Permit required.
§ 38-402. [Ch. 38, Sec. 88] Deposit of cost of replacing pavement -
walks, etc.
No such permit shall be granted until the applicant therefor, in addition to
complying with all of the requirements of this chapter, shall deposit with
the Director of Finance a sum of money sufficient to cover the expense of
replacing the ground, including pavement, walks, etc. in a good condition
as before the same was dug up or opened. The amount of said deposit shall
be ascertained by the City Engineer and in all cases shall be fixed at the
lowest sum for which said repairing or replacing can be properly done. Said
repairing or replacing shall be done by the City under the direction of the
City Engineer, and the actual cost thereof shall be borne by the person upon
whose request such digging or opening is done.
§ 38-403. [Ch. 38, Sec. 89] Liability of permittee.
All excavations or openings in streets, alleys, crosswalks, sidewalks, or
other public grounds shall be maintained in a safe condition by the
permittee from the time that the permittee makes the openings or
excavations and until the City accepts the excavation for refill, and the
permittee shall be liable and responsible for any and all accidents or
damages of any nature, occasioned by any such openings or excavations
until the same have been accepted by the City Engineer.
A. No person shall injure or tear up any pavement, sidewalk, or crosswalk,
or any part thereof, dig any hole, ditch, or train in, or dig or remove any
sod, stone, earth, sand, or gravel from, or dig, place, or construct any
tunnel or drive, or bore for any pipe conduit, wire main or shaft in or
under, any street, alley, or public ground in the City without having first
obtained written permission from the City Engineer given in
accordance with the provisions of this Code. [Ord. No. 1980-25]
B. The City Engineer shall charge an amount as set forth in the Schedule
of Fees for each such permit which is for excavation. If any person, firm,
or corporation shall begin construction of a public sidewalk without
said permit, the City Engineer shall charge a permit fee, as set forth in
the Schedule of Fees, for such permit. No person, firm, or corporation
may be issued any permit under this chapter if any permit fees
requested by this section remain unpaid. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
§ 38-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-404
1:1427
§ 38-404. [Ch. 38, Sec. 90] Return of surplus deposit upon
satisfactory completion of work; procedure in case of deficiency.
After completion of the work, under the provisions of this article, to the
satisfaction of the City Engineer, he shall certify to the Director of Finance
the amount of any surplus remaining from the amount deposited in such
case and such surplus shall thereupon be paid over to the proper claimant;
but if for any reason the amount of such deposit shall have been insufficient
to cover the cost of such work or if any damage shall have been done to
any underground work or connections, or otherwise not contemplated in
the original estimate which shall have caused increased expenditure, the
amount of such deficiency or damage shall be certified to the Director of
Finance who shall collect the same from the person to whom the permit was
issued.
§ 38-405. through § 38-410. (Reserved)
§ 38-404 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 38-405
1:1428
DIVISION 2
Laying, Repairing, Etc., Pipes, Etc.
§ 38-411. [Ch. 38, Sec. 91] Laying pipes, etc., in - permit.
It shall be unlawful for any company, firm, or corporation, their agents,
servants, or employees, or for any person to make or cause to be made an
opening, ditch, or excavation in or upon any of the streets, avenues, alleys,
or other public places of the City for the laying of any pipes or making
any change, alteration or repairs to any pipes already laid or for any other
purpose whatsoever, except upon condition that a permit therefor shall have
first been obtained, and any fees paid, as set forth in the Schedule of Fees,
of the City Engineer for such purpose.
§ 38-412. [Ch. 38, Sec. 92] Permit - application for - cost of
repairing, etc.
Any company, corporation, or person desiring to lay, lower, change or
remove any gas, water, or other pipe or pipes or to make connection
therewith or to make any change, alteration, or improvement in the rightof-
way on any street shall first apply to the City Engineer for a permit to
enter upon such street, avenue, alley, or other public place of the City. Such
application shall accurately describe the premises sought to be broken, dug,
or excavated, and the applicant shall agree properly to guard the place
which may be dug, broken, or excavated so as to protect the City from
loss and all persons from accident and injury and to complete the work
to be done with reasonable dispatch and when completed to notify the
City Engineer; provided, that no such permit shall be issued by the City
Engineer for the digging up, excavating or disturbing of any street, avenue,
or alley of the City until the cost of replacing or repairing of the same
shall first have been ascertained by him and paid by the applicant to the
Director of Finance. The application shall be signed by the person, firm, or
corporation or their or its duly authorized agent; and in addition to the other
requirements herein prescribed shall recite that the person, persons, firm,
or corporation to whom the same is issued will indemnify the City against
any loss or damage in any way resulting to the City by the granting of the
permit to such applicant.
§ 38-413. [Ch. 38, Sec. 93] Same - issuance: bond required of
person not responsible.
Upon application for the permit required by Division 2 of this article being
made in the manner required in the preceding section, the City Engineer
shall issue a permit to the applicant as therein authorized. The City
Engineer may, if not satisfied of the responsibility of the person seeking
such permit, require of them a bond or such other guaranty as will protect
the public and save and keep the City harmless.
§ 38-411 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-414
1:1429
§ 38-414. [Ch. 38, Sec. 94] Public utility companies to lay, repair, or
renew before streets paved.
All public utility companies shall lay, repair, or renew all mains, laterals, and
service connections on unpaved streets before such streets are paved.
§ 38-415. [Ch. 38, Sec. 95] City Engineer to notify public service
companies of letting of contracts for local improvements.
It shall be the duty of the City Engineer to notify in writing all public utility
companies at least four weeks prior to the letting of any contracts for local
improvements on unpaved streets.
§ 38-416. [Ch. 38, Sec. 96] Penalty for violation of two preceding
sections.
Any public utility company failing to lay, repair, or renew mains, laterals, or
service connections in accordance with the provisions of the two preceding
sections shall be fined as provided in this Code, and each and every day
such public utility company fails to comply with the provisions of such
sections shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 38-417. [Ch. 38, Sec. 97] Changes to be made in water service
pipes when street repaved.
That whenever any unimproved street, alley, or other public place in the
City is hereafter to be permanently improved by paving, all owners or
persons in control of lots, blocks, or tracts of land abutting, fronting,
touching, or along and upon such street, streets, alleys, or public places
shall before or at the time the street surface is torn up for the purpose of
laying such pavement, remove or cause to be removed all wrought iron or
steel water service pipes now in place from the City water mains to a point
designated in the Plumbing ordinance where the curb box shall be located,
and at once replace the same with Type "K" copper pipe, or cause the same
to be so replaced, all at their own expense, one such service pipe to be laid
for each lot or part of lot or tract of land having at the time such change is
made a separate water service; and that such owners or persons in control
of such property along the line of improvement to be made shall make
or cause to be made such change in the water service pipes hereinbefore
mentioned within five days from the time the street surface in front of their
respective properties shall be first torn up to start on such improvement;
and any person or persons failing, neglecting or refusing to comply with the
provisions of this section shall, upon conviction forfeit and pay any sum not
less than $10 nor more than $50.
§ 38-414 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 38-417
1:1430
ARTICLE V
Poles, Wires, And Conductors
§ 38-501. [Ch. 38, Sec. 108] Permit to erect, maintain, etc. -
required: countersigning.
No person shall erect, replace, construct, maintain, or use any pole, line,
or wire, or electric conductor of any description whatsoever with the City
without first having obtained a permit therefor from the City Engineer.
§ 38-502. [Ch. 38, Sec. 109] Same - privileges granted to City.
All applications for permits to erect poles in the streets and alleys of the
City shall provide that the City may use the poles to be so erected and
may attach thereto such necessary crossarms, wires, or other electrical
appliances as may be deemed necessary for the electrical service of the
City, and no permit shall be issued by the City Engineer for the erection
of such poles, in which the application and permit does not provide for the
privileges required by the City as herein contained.
§ 38-503. [Ch. 38, Sec. 111] Supervision of poles, conduits, and
wires.
Said City Engineer shall have supervision under the general rules
prescribed herein of the setting of poles and all conduit work in streets,
alleys, and other public places throughout the City and of stringing and
attaching wires thereto, or therein, and of the attachment or connection of
wires to any building, public or private, within the City when such poles,
conduits, or wires are a part of any such general or isolated system within
said City.
§ 38-504. [Ch. 38, Sec. 113] Poles - material - uniformity - approval.
All poles set or reset by permission of the City Engineer shall be good strong
poles and when more than one pole is set they shall be of uniform size and
height as near as may be. All poles so set must meet the approval of the City
Engineer.
§ 38-505. [Ch. 38, Sec. 114] Rights reserved to City.
In case said City shall change the width or grade of any street, sidewalk,
or alley where said poles are or may be placed or when for any reason
the City Manager shall direct the same to be done, the parties owning or
controlling said poles shall remove and reset the same at such place and in
such manner as the City Engineer may direct, whether or not such provision
is specifically set forth in the grant of any such privilege.
§ 38-506. [Ch. 38, Sec. 115] Location of wires or conductors.
Wires or conductors shall in no case be placed at a greater distance from
the curbstone separating sidewalks from roadways than four feet, except in
§ 38-501 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-506
1:1431
crossing streets running transverse to the direction of the lines when such
crossing shall be made in the shortest straight line or in making necessary
connections with buildings and stations.
§ 38-507. [Ch. 38, Sec. 116] Conductors to be laid so as not to
impede traffic or passage upon sidewalks, etc.
The method employed in laying conductors shall be such that it will at no
time be necessary to remove so much of the pavement or to make such
excavation as to impede materially traffic or passage upon any sidewalk or
street.
§ 38-508. [Ch. 38, Sec. 117] Supervision of laying of wires and
excavations; maximum space for placing wires, etc.
The work of removal and replacement of the pavements in any and all of the
streets, avenues, highways, and public places in and through which the wire
of any company shall be laid shall be subject to the control and supervision
of the City Engineer. Excavations in any and all of the unpaved streets,
avenues, highways, or public places shall also be subject to like control and
supervision.
§ 38-509. [Ch. 38, Sec. 118] Maintenance of poles.
Every pole in any public street or alley of the City used for the support
of telegraph, electric light, telephone, or other wires shall be kept and
maintained in a sound and safe condition by the person using the same.
§ 38-510. [Ch. 38, Sec. 119] Weak, defective, etc., poles.
When any pole mentioned in this article is found to be weak, decayed, or
unsafe for the purpose for which it is used, the City Engineer shall forthwith
notify the person owning or using such pole to forthwith remove such pole
from the public streets and alleys of the City. Any person who shall use any
pole for the stringing of wires in the public streets and alleys of the City that
is decayed or defective or found to be weak for the use for which it is put
shall be fined for such offense not less than $5 nor more than $25 for each
pole so used, and every person who shall fail to remove any pole used or
owned by him for five days after such person is notified by the City Engineer
that such pole is in an unsafe condition and to remove same shall for each
pole he so fails to remove be fined not less than $25 nor more than $100.
§ 38-511. [Ch. 38, Sec. 120] Consolidation of systems of poles of
various electrical systems.
Whenever in the judgment of the City Manager any pole or system of poles
in or along any of the streets or alleys of said City can be dispensed with
and the wires thereon can be attached to other poles or system of poles
in said City without danger, it shall be the duty of the person, firm or
corporation owning, operating or maintaining said unnecessary poles upon
§ 38-506 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 38-511
1:1432
written notice from the City Engineer to remove the same within 30 days
after such notice.
§ 38-512. [Ch. 38, Sec. 121] Abandoned poles and wires - removed
upon notice - penalty.
All poles or wires which have been abandoned for use shall be taken down
and removed, and any person, firm, or corporation owning, maintaining, or
having used any such pole or wire who shall refuse or neglect to remove the
same within 30 days after being given written notice so to do by the City
Manager shall be fined not less than $10 nor more than $100. Each day any
such wire or pole is allowed to remain after the expiration of said 30 days
shall be considered a separate offense under this section.
§ 38-511 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-512
1:1433

ARTICLE VI
Driveways
§ 38-601. [Ch. 38, Sec. 122] Direction and supervision of location,
construction, and maintenance.
The location, construction, and maintenance of driveways shall be under
the direction and supervision of the City Engineer and the location and
construction of the same shall be in accordance with the plans and
specifications set up by the City Engineer.
§ 38-602. [Ch. 38, Sec. 123] Permit and specifications for driveways.
A. No person shall construct, build, establish or maintain any driveway
over, across or upon any public sidewalk or parkway without first
obtaining a permit to do so from the City Engineer.
B. Where a proposed driveway is for parking lot, garages, gas stations and
other commercial uses, such driveway may be established, built,
constructed and maintained upon permit, provided that all other
requirements of this article dealing with driveways shall be fully
complied with subject to the following limitations:
(1) A driveway approach which is proposed to be constructed shall be
designed with the proposed volume and type of vehicles which will
be using it as design criteria. The design shall be such that a
vehicle entering or leaving the premises may do so without leaving
the proper traffic lane on the street or driving over the curb outside
of the drive approach areas. In no case shall the opening for
residential property be more than 16 feet at the property line for a
single driveway and 20 feet at the property line for a double
driveway. In multifamily, commercial and industrial areas the
openings shall be no more than 35 feet at the property line if one
driveway is requested and no more than 30 feet at the property line
if two driveway openings are requested. In residential areas, only
one driveway opening will be allowed if the lot width is less than
100 feet. [Ord. No. 1990-16]
(2) On a corner lot in one and two family areas, no portion of a
driveway approach shall be constructed within six feet of the
intersection of the property line extended and the curbline of the
intersecting street. On a corner lot in multifamily, commercial and
industrial areas, the driveway openings shall be established by
reasonable and practical design procedures so that the driveway
opening will have no adverse effect on the smooth flow of traffic on
the street. In industrial or commercial installations which require
multiple driveway openings, the location and number of the
openings shall be established by good traffic engineering criteria.
The design and location of the driveway must be approved by the
City Engineer prior to its construction. [Ord. No. 1980-25]
§ 38-601 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-602
1:1435
§ 38-603. [Ch. 38, Sec. 125] Application for permits; submission of
plans and specifications to traffic engineer. [Ord. No. 1980-25]
Application for a permit for any curb cuts allowable under this article shall
be made to the City Engineer and shall contain the name and address or
the person making application, the location and dimensions of the proposed
driveway, the use to which it is to be devoted, and whether in the building
thereof it will be necessary to cut down or alter a street curb or elevate or
depress the existing grade of the walk or parkway.
§ 38-604. [Ch. 38, Sec. 126] Nonconformance to curb cut
provisions.
In any case of nonconformance with the curb cut provisions of this article
where construction work such as widening, resurfacing or other substantial
alterations or extensions are to be made, the improvement shall be designed
so as to comply with these limitations.
§ 38-605. [Ch. 38, Sec. 127] Permit to be denied if pedestrian or
traffic hazard would result.
The City Engineer shall not issue any permit for any private driveway or for
breaking or for removing any street curbing where the proposed opening
would create an unnecessary hazard to pedestrians using any sidewalk
intersects by such driveway, nor shall any permit be issued where the
proposed driveway would create a traffic hazard.
§ 38-606. [Ch. 38, Sec. 128] Investigation of application. [Ord. No.
1976-126]
Whenever an application for a permit for a driveway opening is filed, the
City Engineer shall cause an investigation to be made of the proposed
location prior to issuing a permit therefor.
§ 38-607. [Ch. 38, Sec. 129] Granting permit; prevention of soil or
aggregate erosion or overloaded sewers. [Ord. No. 1976-126]
All driveways on the public right-of-way shall be constructed of portland
cement concrete or bituminous concrete as a condition to the issuance of
a permit. The City Engineer may require, as a condition to the issuance
of a permit, that appropriate curbing or retaining walls be constructed on
the sides of such driveways whenever the physical conditions require the
(3) The City Engineer shall charge an amount as set forth in the
Schedule of Fees for each such permit issued. If any person, firm or
corporation shall begin construction of a public sidewalk without
said permit, the City Engineer shall charge a permit fee as set forth
in the Schedule of Fees, for such permit. No person, firm or
corporation may be issued any permit under this chapter if any
permit fees requested by this section remain unpaid. [Ord. No.
2018-89]
§ 38-602 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 38-607
1:1436
construction of such curbing and retaining walls to prevent erosion and
overloading of sewers.
§ 38-608. [Ch. 38, Sec. 130] Existing driveways causing soil erosion
or overloading sewers - ordering property owners to repair or
reconstruct.
Wherever existing driveways shall be so constructed or maintained as to
cause soil erosion or to overload adjacent sewers, the City Engineer shall
upon determination of the fact thereof order the property owner using such
driveway to repair or reconstruct the same so as to prevent soil erosion or
overloading of adjacent sewers.
§ 38-609. [Ch. 38, Sec. 131] Same - 60 days' notice to be given.
The property owner using any driveway under the provisions of the
preceding section shall be given 60 days' notice in writing to make the
necessary changes in such driveway.
§ 38-610. [Ch. 38, Sec. 132] Same - failure of owner to comply with
notice: driveway to be blocked off.
In the event that the property owner shall refuse to repair or reconstruct the
driveway within 60 days after notice, as provided in the preceding section,
the City Manager shall block off such driveway so as to prevent soil erosion
and overloading of adjacent sewers.
§ 38-611. [Ch. 38, Sec. 133] Cutting and replacing curbing for
access to lot.
A. Whenever the curbing of any pavement is to be cut to afford access to
any lot, no part of the cut shall be within 18 inches of the property line
extended. However, this subsection shall not be construed to prohibit
curb cut or apron repair for an existing joint driveway or to prevent
creation of a joint driveway for abutting property owners upon vacation
of an alley or street, provided creation or maintenance of curb cuts
therefor is otherwise approved by the City Engineer. [Ord. No.
1978-2]
B. Openings for driveways. Openings for driveways shall be made by:
(1) Removing and replacing the entire curb and gutter with a new curb
and gutter which has a curb laydown molded for the width of the
opening and in accordance with the engineering standards of the
City of Bloomington; or
(2) With a concrete saw, cutting the curb back from the too diagonally
at each end of the cut to a point above the low line of the gutter,
thence horizontally between the diagonal cuts. [Ord. No.
1976-27]
C. All openings for driveways shall be made so that:
§ 38-607 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-611
1:1437
§ 38-612. [Ch. 38, Sec. 134] Same - penalty.
Any person, firm or corporation violating or failing to comply with any of the
provisions of this section shall be fined in a sum not less than $10 nor more
than $100 for each offense. Each day that such violation or noncompliance
continues shall be a separate offense.
§ 38-613. [Ch. 38, Sec. 135] Regulations concerning curbing. [Ord.
No. 1976-126]
No person shall have or maintain an entrance or driveway for vehicles from
the paved streets or street into his or their premises, crossing an uncut
curbing or by means of any curb cut not authorized by the City Engineer.
Such authorization shall terminate with the termination of occupancy or
use of any premises except those used for single family residences. When
an unauthorized curb cut exists, this section shall not be deemed complied
with unless the owner of such premises presents a written contract to the
City Engineer by which such unauthorized curb cut shall be removed with
a period of time found reasonable by the City Engineer in light of the
availability of qualified labor, the extent of the repairs and the time of year
§ 38-614. [Ch. 38, Sec. 136] Same - paving.
Driveways constructed under the provisions of the above section shall be
paved for their full width from the gutter line to the sidewalk.
§ 38-615. [Ch. 38, Sec. 137] Permission granted.
Permission shall be granted as provided in this article only upon the further
condition that applicant agree in writing to reconstruct the curb and gutter
to its former condition as is practicable in the event that such paved portion
be not regularly used for either a public or private driveway for a continuous
period of one year.
§ 38-616. [Ch. 38, Sec. 137.1] Replacing curbing at entrances to
vacated alleys or streets.
(1) The flow of water in the gutter is not directed; and
(2) A smooth transitional surface between street and driveway results.
[Ord. No. 1976-27]
A. Calculation of costs.
(1) Property owners who sign any petition requesting the vacation of
any public street or alley in the City shall be responsible for paying
the cost of repairing the entrances to such street or alley if it is
vacated by the City. Repairs to entrances required by this section
shall include the following improvements across the entire right-ofway
of the vacated street or alley:
(a) Construction or replacement of curbing; and
§ 38-611 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 38-616
1:1438
(b) Removal of all paving in the parkway; and
(c) Construction, replacement or repair of sidewalks.
(2) Said cost shall be determined by the City Engineer before such
petition is submitted to the City Clerk and shall be payable to the
City of Bloomington at the time of filing such petition with the City
Clerk. Such payment shall be refunded to such property owners if
the City fails to vacate such street or alley within 60 days from the
date that such petition was filed with the City Clerk. [Ord. No.
1978-2]
B. If one or more petitioners for vacation of a street or alley seek to retain
access to some portion of it after vacation, he shall submit a request for
a curb cut at such location to the City Engineer as required in this
article. The City Engineer shall include the cost of any approved curb
cut in his calculation of costs referred to in Subsection A above. [Ord.
No. 1978-2]
§ 38-616 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-616
1:1439

ARTICLE VII
Housemovers
§ 38-701. [Ch. 38, Sec. 138] Housemovers - license - penalty.
No person, firm, or corporation shall remove any building along the public
streets, alleys, or public places within said City unless he shall have
obtained a license as a housemover, under a penalty of not less than $10 nor
more than $200 for each offense.
§ 38-702. [Ch. 38, Sec. 139] License fee - bond - condition. [Ord.
No. 2018-89]
Any person may obtain a license as a housemover upon the payment of a
license fee as set forth in the Schedule of Fees per annum and the execution
to the City of a bond in the sum of $5,000 with a corporate surety to be
approved by the Corporation Counsel, conditioned among other things that
said party applying for such license will pay any and all damages which
may happen to any tree, pavement, street or sidewalk, or to any telegraph,
telephone, electric light or electric street care pole or wire within said
City, whether such damage or injury shall be inflicted by said party or his
agent, employees, or workmen and conditioned also that said party will save
and indemnify and keep harmless the City from all liabilities, judgments,
costs, and expenses which may in any wise accrue against said City in
consequence of the granting of such license or any permit, and will in all
things comply with the Ordinances of the City and all permits granted to
him. Said license shall expire December 31st of the year in which it was
issued. License fees shall not be prorated.
§ 38-703. [Ch. 38, Sec. 140] Moving building - permit required.
No person shall remove any building or structure from one place to another
along the public streets of the City without having first obtained from the
Building Official a permit therefor.
§ 38-704. [Ch. 38, Sec. 141] Permit - application.
A. Before any permit for the removal of any building shall be granted, the
licensed housemover who proposes to do the work shall make
application in writing to the Building Official, stating the building
proposed to be removed, where it is located, the place to which it is
proposed to remove it, the route to be taken, and the time probably
required for such removal.
B. The person desiring to remove said building shall bear and be liable for
all expense to which the City is put on account of said removal, and
before the issuance of any such permit, shall deposit with the Building
Official a sum to be fixed in each case by the Building Official and the
Building Official may further require a bond to cover such expense. In
the event said cash deposit exceeds such expense, the surplus shall be
§ 38-701 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-704
1:1441
§ 38-705. [Ch. 38, Sec. 142] Permit - what it shall specify - penalty.
Every permit for the removal of any building shall prescribe the conditions
upon which said permit is granted, the route to be taken, and the limit of
time for the removal; and any person who shall fail, neglect, or refuse to
comply with the conditions of such permit shall be fined not less than $5
nor more than $100 for each offense, and every day any such building shall
remain on any street, alley, or public place after the expiration of the time
specified in any permit for the removal of the same, shall be a separate
offense under this section.
§ 38-706. [Ch. 38, Sec. 143] Frame buildings - when may be moved -
how value of determined.
No frame building in the City of Bloomington shall be removed unless such
building is worth 35% of the cost of a similar new building. The Building
Official shall determine as to the value of any such building, and his decision
shall be subject to the approval of the City Manager; provided that this
section shall not apply to any person removing a building upon his own
premises and not going upon the premises of any other person or upon any
street, alley, or public place in making such removal.
§ 38-707. [Ch. 38, Sec. 144] Wooden buildings - moving in fire
limits.
No wooden building within or without the fire limits shall be moved to any
lot or part of a lot within the fire limits.
§ 38-708. [Ch. 38, Sec. 145] Notice.
No building shall be allowed to be removed along any street without at least
24 hours' notice to any company operating any bus line along said street
and to the Police Department and the Fire Department; and during the time
such building is being removed the person or persons engaging in removing
the same shall work night and day until such building is off such street.
returned to the depositor, but if such expense exceeds such deposit, the
depositor shall pay the difference to the City immediately upon demand.
C. Upon issuing such permit, the Building Official may direct the route to
be taken, the maximum time to be consumed in said removal, and any
other requirements that may be deemed necessary.
D. The work of removal shall be done in such a manner as to meet the
approval of the Building Official; and the erection, construction,
alteration and repair of the building to be removed shall be subject to
all the provisions of this code.
§ 38-704 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 38-709
1:1442
§ 38-709. [Ch. 38, Sec. 146] Signals.
Every person removing any building or who makes any excavation or piles
any lumber or building material upon any of the public streets of the City
shall, in addition to the other requirements of the Code of said City, keep
early twilight until dawn a red light or lights hung out upon and about
the same sufficient to give ample warning of such building, excavation or
obstruction.
§ 38-710. [Ch. 38, Sec. 147] Iron stakes, etc. - prohibited on paved
streets.
It shall be unlawful for any housemover or other person to drive iron or
other stakes in any asphalt pavement within said City, and into any brick
pavement unless the top course of the brick be first removed, under a
penalty of not exceeding $100 for each offense, and a forfeiture of any
license as housemover the person convicted may hold, and such forfeiture
shall be entered up as a part of the penalty upon any such conviction.
§ 38-711. [Ch. 38, Sec. 148] Trees not to be cut.
No housemover shall be permitted to cut or injure any tree standing in or
along any street, alley or other public place within the City without the
consent of the City Forester or the consent of the owner of the property on
which said tree is located, under a penalty not exceeding $50.
§ 38-712. [Ch. 38, Sec. 149] Obstruction of streets deemed
nuisance.
Any housemover failing or neglecting to remove any building from any
street, alley or public place within the time allowed and limited in the
permit for the removal shall be deemed to be guilty of maintaining a
nuisance. Every day such building shall remain on any street, alley or public
place beyond the time as fixed and limited in the permit shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense.
§ 38-713. [Ch. 38, Sec. 150] Same - notice to be given generally.
Whenever any license housemover engaged to move any house or building
through or past wires, cables or other electrical conductors owned and
operated by the City, or by any person or corporation and shall have secured
a permit from the Building Official for such removal in accordance with the
provisions of this article, he shall serve notice in writing upon the person
or corporation owning, using or operating any such wire, cable or other
electrical conductor through which he desires to pass, specifying the time
the house or building he is removing will reach such wire, cable or other
electrical conductor to be cut or otherwise removed or disposed of so as
to allow such person or corporation not less than 24 hours before the time
at which it is desired to cut such wire, cable or other electrical conductor
or otherwise dispose of same and shall pay such owner of the same their
reasonable expense for such work of cutting, removing and adjusting; and
§ 38-709 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-713
1:1443
any person violating this provision of this section shall be fined any sum not
less than $10.
§ 38-714. [Ch. 38, Sec. 151] Notice to be given when building left
standing at night.
Whenever any house or building is being moved upon or along any street,
alley or public way in the City, and it becomes necessary in the removal of
the same that such house or building shall be left standing upon any street,
alley or public way during the night time, the person so moving the house
or building shall notify the Chief of the Fire Department of the location of
such building so left standing on the street.
§ 38-715. [Ch. 38, Sec. 152] Housemovers not to cut wires, etc.
No license housemover by himself or by any servant, agent or employee
shall cut, remove or otherwise interfere with or disturb any wire, cable
or other electrical conductor strung upon, across or along any street or
public way, whether such wire, cable or other electrical conductor is used or
operated by the City or by some person or corporation legally authorized to
use, operate and maintain such wires, cables or other electrical conductors;
nor shall any such licensed housemover while engaged in moving any house
or building through, by or under any such wire, cable or other electrical
conductor, unreasonably delay or prolong the passing of such house or
building or unreasonably or unnecessarily impede or obstruct the use of any
such wire, cable or other electrical conductor by the person or corporation
owning, using or operating same.
§ 38-716. [Ch. 38, Sec. 153] Penalty.
Every person violating any of the provisions of this article, where no other
penalty is provided shall be fined not less than $5 for each offense.
§ 38-713 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 38-716
1:1444
ARTICLE VIII
Numbering
§ 38-801. [Ch. 38, Sec. 154] Numbering of buildings on streets -
plan.
The several buildings that are now or that may hereafter be erected in the
City shall be numbered by the City Engineer according to the following plan,
viz:
A. First. Front Street shall be the base or diving line for numbering houses
on all streets or avenues running north or south, and Main Street shall
be the base or dividing line for all streets or avenues running east or
west.
B. All streets and avenues running north and south and crossing and being
north of Front Street shall be designated by the prefix "North"; and the
portion of all streets and avenues crossing and being south of Front
Street shall be designated by the prefix "South." All streets and avenues
running east and west and crossing and-being east of Main Street shall
be designated by the prefix "East" and that portion of said streets lying
west of Main Street shall receive in connection with their present
designation of the prefix "West."
C. The first number on each side of Front Street shall be 101 and progress
north and south therefrom at the rate of 100 numbers to each block.
The first number upon each side of Main Street shall be 101 and
progress east and west therefrom at the rate of 100 numbers to each
block.
D. The odd numbers shall be used upon the east side of all streets running
north and south, north of Front Street, and upon the south side of all
streets running east and west, east of Main Street, and upon the west
side of all streets running north and south, south of Front Street, and
upon the north side of all streets running east and west, west of Main
Street.
E. The even numbers shall be used upon the west side of all streets
running north and south, north of Front Street, and upon the north side
of all streets running east and west, east of Main Street, and upon the
east side of all streets running north and south, south of Front Street,
and upon the south side of all streets running east and west, west of
Main Street.
F. It shall be the duty of the City Engineer in pursuance of this section to
establish and assign all house numbers on the streets, avenues and
thoroughfares of the City, and he shall prepare the necessary maps and
records of the numbers so assigned by him, and said maps and records
shall be evidence of the number so assigned by him; and he shall on
demand furnish each owner or occupant of a house, or such person as
may be employed in numbering the houses or buildings with the
§ 38-801 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-801
1:1445
§ 38-802. [Ch. 38, Sec. 155] Size of figures.
The figures of every number shall be of no less dimensions than 2 1/2 inches
in length; each figure shall be legible and placed in a conspicuous position
on the front side or above the front door of every building.
§ 38-803. [Ch. 38, Sec. 156] Duty of owner or occupant to number -
notice - neglect - penalty.
Any person or persons, being the owner or owners, occupant or occupants,
of any building or buildings now erected or which may hereafter be erected,
and being upon and fronting on any of the streets of the City of
Bloomington, who shall neglect or refuse to number his or their building
or buildings in conformity with the provisions of this article for more than
30 days after they have been notified to do so by the officer appointed to
perform that duty shall forfeit and pay the sum of $3 and a like amount for
every day after the first conviction such neglect or refusal shall continue.
necessary information as to the number belonging to each house, and
all numbering shall be strictly in conformity with the directions and
regulations of said City Engineer.
§ 38-801 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 38-803
1:1446
ARTICLE IX
Soliciting On Streets
DIVISION 1
Soliciting Funds on Sidewalks and Public Ways
§ 38-901. [Ch. 38, Sec. 157] Soliciting funds prohibited except for
certain purposes; permit. [Ord. No. 2000-184]
No person shall solicit funds from the general public upon the sidewalks
or public ways of the City unless a permit has been issued by the City
Manager authorizing such solicitation. "Person" shall mean any individual,
firm, partnership, corporation, company, association or joint stock
association, church, religious sect, religious denomination, society,
veterans' group, organization or league and includes any trustee, receiver,
assignee, agent, or other similar representative thereof. "Public ways" shall
not include any municipal street used for vehicular travel.
§ 38-902. [Ch. 38, Sec. 158] Application for permit.
A. An application for such permit shall be made upon forms provided by
the City. Such application shall be sworn to and filed with the City Clerk
at least 15 days prior to the time for which the permit is desired and
shall contain the following information, or in lieu thereof, a detailed
statement of the reason or reasons why such information cannot be
furnished:
(1) The name and address or headquarters of the applicant;
(2) If the applicant is not an individual, the names and addresses of the
applicant's principal officers and managers and a copy of the
resolution, if any, authorizing such solicitation, certified to as a true
and correct copy of the original by the officer having charge of
applicant's records;
(3) A full statement of the character and extent of the charitable, civic,
educational or religious work being done by the applicant within
the City;
(4) The purpose for which such solicitation is to be made, the total
amount of fund proposed to be raised thereby, and the use or
disposition to be made of any receipts therefrom;
(5) A specific statement, supported by reasons and, if available, figures
showing the need for the contributions to be solicited;
(6) The names and addresses of the person or persons who will be in
direct charge of conducting the solicitation and the names of all
individuals connected or to be connected with the proposed
solicitation;
§ 38-901 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-902
1:1447
§ 38-903. [Ch. 38, Sec. 159] Investigation of application.
The City Manager shall cause such investigation to be made of the
application and the applicant as he deems necessary in order for him to
perform his duties under this article.
§ 38-904. [Ch. 38, Sec. 160] Issuance of permit; findings.
The City Manager shall issue a permit whenever he shall find the following
facts to exist:
(7) An outline of the method or methods to be used in conducting the
solicitation and the time when it is desired to make such
solicitation;
(8) The estimated expense of the solicitation, the estimated amount of
any fees or expenses to be paid to any person in connection with
such solicitation, and the names and addresses of all such persons;
(9) A financial statement of the last preceding solicitation from the
public upon the streets of the City by the applicant, giving the date
of the solicitation, the amount of money then raised, the expense of
the solicitation and the final distribution thereof; and
(10) Such other information as might be reasonably required by the
Manager in order for him to determine the kind and character of
the proposed solicitation and whether it is in the interest of, and
not inimical to, the public welfare.
B. If, while any application is then pending, there is any change in fact,
policy or method, that would alter the information given in the
application, the applicant shall notify the City Clerk in writing thereof
within 24 hours after such change.
A. That the purpose for which the solicitation is to be made is a legitimate
health, welfare, educational, civic or religious one which will affect,
service or benefit the entire City;
B. That the solicitation from the general public is reasonably required for
the financing of such purpose;
C. That the officers and managers of the applicant and the person or
persons who will be in direct charge of or connected with the
solicitation are all responsible and reliable persons of good character or
reputation for honesty and integrity;
D. That the method and time of the solicitation proposed are reasonably
designed and planned so as not to inconvenience the general public
using the streets, sidewalks and public ways of the City;
E. That neither applicant nor any of its officers, managers or members
connected with the solicitation has engaged in any fraudulent
§ 38-902 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 38-904
1:1448
§ 38-905. [Ch. 38, Sec. 161] Permit fee. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
The permit fee shall be as set forth in the Schedule of Fees. $0.25 shall be
charged for each facsimile copy of the permit that is desired.
§ 38-906. [Ch. 38, Sec. 162] Form of permits; signing;
nontransferable.
Permits issued under this Division shall bear the name and address of the
person by whom the solicitation is to be made, the number of the permit, the
date issued, the date on which the solicitation is permitted, and a statement
that the permit does not constitute an endorsement by the City or by any
of its departments, officers or employees of the purpose or of the person
conducting the solicitation. All permits must be signed by the City Manager.
They shall be nontransferable.
§ 38-907. [Ch. 38, Sec. 163] Credentials of solicitors; copy; showing
on request.
§ 38-908. [Ch. 38, Sec. 164] Report of solicitation required.
It shall be the duty of all persons issued permits under this Division to
furnish to the City Manager, within 30 days after the solicitation a detailed
transaction or enterprise, and that the solicitation will not be a fraud
upon the public;
F. That the cost of raising the funds will be reasonable and that the
solicitation is promoted solely by a desire to finance the cause
described in the application and not for any private profit; and
G. That the statements made in the application are true.
A. All persons to whom permits have been issued under this Division shall
furnish proper credentials to their agents and solicitors for such
solicitation. Such credentials shall include the name of the permit
holder, the date, a statement describing said holder's charitable
activity, a description of the purpose of the solicitation, the signature of
the permit holder or the holder's chief executive officer, and the name,
address, age, sex and signature of the solicitor to whom such
credentials are issued and the specific period of time during which said
solicitor is authorized to solicit on behalf of the permit holder. A copy of
such proposed credentials must be filed with the application for a
permit and must be approved by the City Manager as conforming to the
requirements of this section and a facsimile copy of the permits must be
shown upon request to all persons solicited and to any police officer of
the City.
B. No agent or solicitor shall solicit contributions for any charitable, civic,
education or religious purpose for any person in the City, unless such
person has been granted a permit under the provisions of this article.
§ 38-904 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-908
1:1449
report and financial statement showing the amount raised by the
solicitation, the amount expended in collecting such funds, including a
detailed report of the wages, fees, commissions, and expenses paid to
any person in connection with such solicitation and the disposition of the
balance of the funds collected.
§ 38-909. [Ch. 38, Sec. 165] Same - continued.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Division or filing or
causing to be filed an application for a permit containing false or fraudulent
misstatements shall be punished under the provisions of § 1-106 of this
Code.
§ 38-910. through § 38-920. (Reserved)
§ 38-908 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 38-910
1:1450
DIVISION 2
Sales from Vehicles, Carts, Etc.
§ 38-921. [Ch. 38, Sec. 166] (Reserved) [Repealed 6-8-1988 by Ord.
No. 1988-44]
§ 38-922. [Ch. 38, Sec. 166.1] Definitions.
LICENSE YEAR — A license year for purposes of this Division shall be from
the period of January 1 to December 31 each year.[Ord. No. 1998-44]
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle used for the displaying, storing or
transporting of articles offered for sale by a vendor which is required to be
licensed and registered with the Secretary of State of Illinois. The term is to
include trailers, trucks and automobiles.[Ord. No. 1998-44]
SITE — The total area occupied by a street and sidewalk vendor, including
the stand and auxiliary tables, the place where the employees stand and
the place where goods and equipment are stored or displayed.[Ord. No.
1998-44]
STAND — Any table, showcase, bench, rack, pushcart, wagon or any other
wheeled vehicle or device which may be moved without the assistance of
a motor and which is not required to be licensed and registered with the
Secretary of State of Illinois.[Ord. No. 1998-44]
STREET AND SIDEWALK VENDOR — Any person engaged in the selling,
or offering for sale, of food, beverages, goods wares or merchandise on
the public streets, sidewalks or rights-of-way from a stand, motor vehicle
or from his person by locating the same in a fixed location for a period of
time rather than by going from place to place within the City.[Ord. No.
1998-44]
§ 38-923. [Ch. 38, Sec. 166.2] License required; application; fees.
A. License required. No person may engage in the business of a street and
sidewalk vendor without first obtaining a license to do so. [Ord. No.
1998-44]
B. Exception. Persons with sidewalk cafe permits as provided in Division 3
of this article or who are registered as solicitors as provided in Chapter
33, § 33-102, of this Code shall not be required to obtain a vendor's
license. [Ord. No. 2006-6]
C. Application. An application for a vendor's license shall be made in
writing to the City Clerk which shall set forth the following:
(1) The name of the individual applying for the license.
(2) The residence, telephone number and driver's license number of
the applicant.
(3) The address of the principal place of business of the applicant and
its telephone number.
§ 38-921 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-923
1:1451
§ 38-924. [Ch. 38, Sec. 166.3] Investigation of applicant. [Ord. No.
1998-44]
Upon receipt of an application for a license, the City Clerk shall cause a
copy of the application to be sent to the Police Chief who shall report back to
the City Clerk within 15 days whether the applicant meets the requirements
for issuance of the license.
(4) The State of Illinois sales tax identification number to be used by
the applicant.
(5) If the applicant is employed by another person or entity, the name
of the employer, its address and telephone number.
(6) The type of goods, wares or merchandise to be sold or offered for
sale.
(7) The location where the applicant plans to sell his goods, wares or
merchandise.
(8) Whether the applicant has been convicted of a criminal offense or
ordinance violation (other than traffic or parking offenses) in any
jurisdiction and, if so, a list of such convictions with date and
prosecuting jurisdiction.
(9) For sites abutting property upon which there is located a structure
which is occupied by a single business, a signed consent by said
occupant that the same approves of the vendor being outside their
business. For other sites, a signed consent by the owner(s) of the
property abutting the requested location that they approve of the
vendor being outside of their property. [Ord. No. 1998-44]
D. Fees:
(1) For locations in downtown business district, the applicant shall pay
to the City Clerk prior to filing an application a fee in an amount as
set forth in the Schedule of Fees per license year which shall be
prorated for any full calendar months which have expired during
the license year and which will be refunded if the license is denied.
(2) For locations outside the downtown business district, the applicant
shall pay to the City Clerk prior to filing an application, a fee in an
amount as set forth in the Schedule of Fees per calendar year or
part thereof which will be refunded if the license is denied.
(3) Should the applicant plan to operate for a period of less than one
week whether in the downtown business district or elsewhere, the
applicant shall pay to the City Clerk prior to filing an application, a
fee in an amount as set forth in the Schedule of Fees. [Ord. No.
2018-89]
§ 38-923 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 38-925
1:1452
§ 38-925. [Ch. 38, Sec. 166.4] License issuance.
Upon receipt of the report from the departments referred to in § 38-924, the
City Clerk shall issue the license unless she shall find that:
§ 38-926. [Ch. 38, Sec. 166.5] License transference. [Ord. No.
1998-44]
No license issued pursuant to this Division may be transferred, sold or
assigned to another person, corporation or entity.
§ 38-927. [Ch. 38, Sec. 166.6] Location requirements and
restrictions.
A. The applicant is under the age of 18.
B. The applicant has been convicted within the last five years of any felony.
C. The applicant or his employer has had a license issued pursuant to this
chapter revoked for cause.
D. The location requested by the applicant is improper for a street and
sidewalk vendor as set forth in § 38-927 of this Division or that another
person is licensed for said location. [Ord. No. 1998-44]
A. Minimum requirements for vendor locations. No street and sidewalk
vendor's license shall be issued for any location which does not meet
the following criteria:
(1) For sidewalk locations, the paved pedestrian area must be at least
10 feet wide.
(2) For street locations, the paved street must be at least 32 feet wide.
(3) Locations on a street corner shall not be within 30 feet of the
intersection of the street curblines. Further, locations shall not be
within 30 feet of another licensed location.
(4) The location shall not be within 100 feet of a park, playground or
school.
(5) No location shall be granted adjacent to or within a designated bus
stop.
(6) No location shall be granted within 150 feet of property which has
a valid building permit if the construction on said property would
endanger the health and safety of those patronizing the vendor.
(7) Licensees whose sites abut property upon which there is located a
structure which is occupied by a single business shall have written
consent of said occupant. Otherwise, the licensee shall have the
written consent of the property owner(s) abutting his site. [Ord.
No. 1998-44]
§ 38-925 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-927
1:1453
§ 38-928. [Ch. 38, Sec. 166.7] Posting license. [Ord. No. 1998-44]
Every license issued under this Division shall be permanently affixed to the
stand or vehicle of the sidewalk or street vendor, respectively, by its own
adhesive in a prominent location.
§ 38-929. [Ch. 38, Sec. 166.8] Prohibited acts.
B. Assignment of sidewalk locations in the downtown business district.
(1) As used in this Division, the phrase "downtown business district"
shall mean the following described territory or district: Locust
Street, Main to Center, Madison Street, Locust to Olive, Prairie
Street, Locust to Olive, Olive Street, Center to East.
(2) No person shall hold more than two licenses in the district. Any
locations remaining unlicensed shall be assigned to applicants on a
first-come basis. Persons renewing their licenses will be given
preference to relocate at their prior site if they apply for renewal
prior to November 1 before the year for which the license is
requested. [Ord. No. 1998-44]
C. Assignment of other locations. Upon applying for a license under this
Division for a street location or a sidewalk location outside of the
downtown business district, the applicant shall state the location where
he desires to locate. Thereafter, persons renewing their license for the
succeeding year will be given preference to relocate at their prior site if
they apply for renewal prior to February 1 of the year for which the
license is requested. [Ord. No. 1998-44]
A. No licensee shall sell or offer for sale goods, wares or merchandise
other than at the location approved by the City. [Ord. No. 1998-44]
B. No one shall engage in the business of a street and sidewalk vendor
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. [Ord. No. 1998-44]
C. No licensee shall leave any stand unattended. [Ord. No. 1998-44]
D. No licensee shall store, park or leave any stand on any street, sidewalk
or public right-of-way. [Ord. No. 1998-44]
E. No licensee shall park any motor vehicle other than in a lawful parking
place in conformance with City and State parking regulations. [Ord.
No. 1998-44]
F. All licensee selling food and beverages for immediate consumption shall
have available for public use their own 32 gallon litter receptacle which
is available for the patrons' use. [Ord. No. 1998-44]
G. No licensee shall leave his location without first picking up, removing
and disposing of all trash or refuse from the sales made by him. No
licensee shall dispose of trash or refuse in the public receptacles. [Ord.
No. 1998-44]
§ 38-927 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 38-929
1:1454
§ 38-930. [Ch. 38, Sec. 166.9] Marking of vehicles.
Any motor vehicle used by licensee's to make sales by going from place
to place within the City of Bloomington shall be conspicuously and
permanently marked with the following information:
§ 38-931. [Ch. 38, Sec. 166.10] Revocation and suspension of
license.
Any street and sidewalk vendor's license may be revoked or suspended for a
period not to exceed 30 days by the City Manager if the City Manager shall
find after a hearing that:
H. No licensee shall solicit or conduct business with persons in motor
vehicles. [Ord. No. 1998-44]
I. No licensee shall sell anything other than which he stated in his license
application. [Ord. No. 1998-44]
J. No licensee shall occupy a site which is greater than 50 square feet in
size or which leaves less than eight feet for pedestrian travel. When set
up by the licensee, a stand shall be placed at the property line and not
at the curbline. [Ord. No. 1998-44]
K. No licensee shall sell food or beverages without first obtaining a license
to do so from the County Health Department. [Ord. No. 1998-44]
L. No licensee whose location is beneath any tree shall cook food at the
licensed site. Only warming of food shall be permitted. [Ord. No.
1998-44]
M. No licensee shall deface, mar, mark, damage or destroy the public rightof-
way. All stains from cooking, wheels, spillage or any other cause shall
be removed within two days. All stands shall provide a protective pad
under their site to protect the sidewalk. [Ord. No. 1998-44]
A. The name and license number of the person owing or operating such
vehicle;
B. Words, lettering, pictures or designs allowing persons to readily
identify such vehicle and its use;
C. The admonition to motorists to be watchful for children in the area of
such vehicle; and
D. Which parked and in use shall have in operation flashing amber lights
visible from the front and rear of such vehicle. [Ord. No. 2006-6]
A. The licensee has violated any of the provisions of this chapter, the laws
of the State or the ordinances of the City while engaged in the business
of a street and sidewalk vendor.
§ 38-929 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-931
1:1455
§ 38-932. [Ch. 38, Sec. 167] (Reserved) [Repealed 6-8-1998 by Ord.
No. 1998-44]
§ 38-933. through § 38-940. (Reserved)
B. The licensee has been convicted of any offense set forth in Section 168
of this Division.
C. The licensee has knowingly furnished false or misleading information or
withheld relevant information on any application for a license or in an
investigation into any such license. Prior to holding a hearing
concerning the question of whether a license issued pursuant to this
chapter shall be revoked or suspended, the City Manager shall give at
least 10 days' written notice to the licensee setting forth the alleged
violations specifically. The licensee may present evidence at such
hearing and cross-examine witnesses. [Ord. No. 1998-44]
§ 38-931 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 38-933
1:1456
DIVISION 3
Sidewalk Cafes
§ 38-941. [Ch. 38, Sec. 167.1] Definitions.
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively
ascribed to them when used in this article:
FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — Any business that provides prepared
food for immediate consumption, as defined in Chapter 39, § 39-1601, of the
Bloomington City Code.
PERMIT AREA — The sidewalk area designated on the permit specifying the
area of operation of the sidewalk cafe.
PERMITTEE — The person or entity operating a food service establishment
who has received a permit allowing for the operation of a sidewalk
cafe.[Ord. No. 2006-6]
SIDEWALK CAFE — A use of public sidewalk by a food service
establishment for the serving of food and beverages on the sidewalk
immediately adjacent to the food service establishment, which use will be
characterized by the sidewalk use of tables, and chairs and umbrellas.
§ 38-942. [Ch. 38, Sec. 167.2] Permits required, fee.
§ 38-943. [Ch. 38, Sec. 167.3] Application.
Application for a sidewalk cafe permit shall be made on forms supplied by
the City Clerk, and submitted to the Director of Public Works, together with
the required fee, and shall, at minimum, include the following:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a sidewalk cafe without a
sidewalk cafe permit.
B. The sidewalk cafe permit shall allow a food service establishment
located in the B-3 Central Business District of the City to operate a
sidewalk cafe subject to the requirements of this Code.
C. Subject to the requirements of the Code, the permit holder shall, as part
of the right granted pursuant to the permit, be entitled to remove or
exclude persons from the permit area during hours of business
operation and such permittee is authorized to give notice to any such
person to prevent such entry. No cover charge nor minimum purchase
may be required for admittance to a sidewalk cafe area in the public
right-of-way.
D. The fee for a sidewalk cafe permit shall be fee in an amount as set forth
in the Schedule of Fees. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
E. The sidewalk cafe permit shall expire annually on December 31 of each
year and an application must be made for a sidewalk cafe permit each
year. [Ord. No. 2006-6]
§ 38-941 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-943
1:1457
§ 38-944. [Ch. 38, Sec. 167.4] Review of applications.
A. The name, address, and telephone number of the owner of the property
and the establishment related to the permit. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
B. A drawing or sketch which will include the dimensions of the proposed
permit area and which shows the location and type of the tables, chairs,
trash receptacles and other equipment proposed to be used, location of
ingress and egress, the curbline and any existing public or utility-owned
equipment facilities in or adjacent to the area proposed which are
visible to the eye, including but not limited to parking meters, trees,
manhole covers and utility poles or openings.
C. A statement as to whether the applicant intends to serve alcoholic
beverages and if yes, a copy of a valid Class R or Class T liquor license.
[Ord. No. 2015-26]
D. An operations plan specifying the proposed dates, days and hours of
operation of the sidewalk cafe, the hours of operation of the adjacent
establishment, scheduled maintenance of the permit area, maximum
seating capacity, and method of providing security and maintenance.
[Ord. No. 2015-26]
E. An original of a certificate of insurance listing the required coverage
amounts and policy periods of the permittee's general liability policies.
F. An executed waiver of liability in a form approved by the City Attorney.
G. Any other information related to the requirements of this chapter that
the Director of Public Works may require. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
A. The Director of Public Works shall review the application for a sidewalk
cafe permit and determine whether to issue the permit. No permit shall
be issued pursuant to this article unless the Director of Public Works
has determined the following:
(1) There are no outstanding fines, fees, taxes or other charges due
and owed to the City by the applicant or the owners of the real
property on which the establishment is located.
(2) The applicant has supplied all of the information required on or by
the application, and any additional information requested by the
Director of Public Works.
(3) All of the requirements of this article have been met.
B. The Director of Public Works may impose conditions upon the issuance
of a sidewalk cafe permit in order to protect the use of adjacent right-ofway
for its intended purpose, to prevent congestion of vehicular or
pedestrian traffic flow and to otherwise carry out the purpose and
intent of this article and this Code.
§ 38-943 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 38-944
1:1458
§ 38-945. [Ch. 38, Sec. 167.5] Regulations.
C. The Director of Public Works may deny an application for a sidewalk
permit if the operation of a sidewalk cage in the location described in
the permit would not be compatible with the use of surrounding
property or that it is not in the interest of public safety or would
otherwise unreasonably interfere with public use of the sidewalk,
provided that the presence of another sidewalk cafe in close proximity
to the proposed location shall not be cause to deny the permit unless
there are public safety concerns.
D. The Director of Public Works shall not issue a sidewalk cafe permit to
any person who has had a sidewalk cafe permit revoked for any of the
reasons stated in § 38-950. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
A. A sidewalk cafe is permitted only on sidewalks. The permit area shall be
limited to the area immediately adjacent to the establishment
requesting the permit, or on sidewalks contiguous to the sidewalk
adjacent to the establishment.
B. No permit shall be issued for sidewalks abutting Madison Street and
East Street between Locust Street on the north and Kentucky Alley on
the south.
C. No permit will be allowed if seats or equipment in the sidewalk cafe
result in the need for additional rest rooms or additional parking and
unless such additional rest rooms or parking are provided, except that
no alcoholic beverages may be sold or consumed after 10:00 p.m. [Ord.
No. 2015-26]
D. The hours when service is permitted at the sidewalk cafe shall be
during business hours of the permittee provided however that alcoholic
beverages may only be served or consumed within the permit area
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Monday through
Saturday, and 12:00 noon to 10:00 p.m. on Sunday. [Ord. No. 2015-26]
E. Any person making use of a sidewalk cafe shall do so in a reasonable
manner with due regard for the health and safety of persons and
property. No permittee shall make any physical alteration to public
property without the written permission of the Director of Public Works.
A permittee shall owe a duty to the City of Bloomington and third
persons to maintain the permit area in a clean, safe and sanitary
condition. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
F. The permittee shall keep the permit area free of litter, cans, bottles and
spills at all times. The permittee shall promptly collect and dispose of all
litter, trash and other waste materials associated with the sidewalk
cafe, including material in the adjacent public right-of-way or property
originating from the sidewalk cafe. The permittee shall dispose of any
such waste in their own trash containers only.
§ 38-944 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-945
1:1459
G. No cooking or food preparation shall be permitted at any time within
the permit area.
H. Upon the expiration or other termination of a sidewalk cafe use permit,
the permittee shall immediately remove all tables, chairs, furnishings,
equipment and other items of personal property from the permit area.
Any such items remaining upon the public right-of-way may be removed
and disposed of by the City of Bloomington at the sole cost and expense
of the permittee.
I. No live entertainment or sound amplification equipment shall be
allowed at any time within the permit area. This provision shall not
prohibit ambient background music. For purposes of this provision,
"ambient background music" shall mean quiet music that is played at
minimal volume such that it is not audible from adjoining property or
public rights-of-way.
J. Furniture.
(1) Only the following types of furniture or other equipment may be
located in an sidewalk cafe:
(a) Tables and chairs.
(b) Umbrellas.
(c) Waste receptacles.
(d) Busing carts.
(e) Temporary railings or landscaping used to demarcate the
boundaries of the permit area.
(2) Said furniture and other equipment shall be portable, shall not be
chained, bolted or otherwise secured together as a unit, shall not
be affixed to the surface of the permit area, and shall be removed
on a nightly basis.
K. The maximum allowable dimension for tables shall be 48 inches in
diameter, 48 inches in width or length, and 30 inches in height.
L. Tables shall be freestanding with detached chairs or seating, unless it is
determined that another design meets the intent of these regulations
and a specific exception is permitted in writing by the Director of Public
Works. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
M. Umbrellas shall have a maximum diameter of eight feet, a weighted
base and be fabric covered.
N. No signs, banners, sandwich boards or other like advertising, except for
advertising permitted by the Sign Code, shall be located in the permit
area.
§ 38-945 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 38-945
1:1460
§ 38-946. [Ch. 38, Sec. 167.6] Temporary nature of use.
§ 38-947. [Ch. 38, Sec. 167.7] Public property. [Ord. No. 2006-6]
The provisions of this section shall apply only to the locating of sidewalk
cafes on public property or public right-of-way and shall not apply to any
private property.
§ 38-948. [Ch. 38, Sec. 167.8] Indemnification; payment for
cleaning or damages.
O. Tables, chairs, umbrellas, and other permissible equipment shall be
located in the sidewalk cafe area so that there remains open, at all
times, a longitudinal walking space, the location of which shall be
determined by the Director of Public Works or designee, of a minimum
of four feet in width, with a cross-slope not to exceed Americans with
Disability Act (ADA) requirements. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
P. The placement of portable heaters must be reviewed and approved by
the City's Fire Inspector.
Q. The Director of Public Works may promulgate administrative rules
which relate to the requirements contained in this article. Such rules
shall be attached to the permit and be followed by the permittee. [Ord.
No. 2018-93]
A. The use of a public sidewalk as a sidewalk cafe shall be subject to
temporary suspension or termination at any time by the City in the
interest of the public health, safety and welfare. To the extent that a
permit area is needed by the City for the purposes for which it was
dedicated, or any other public purpose, the City may immediately
terminate the revocable use permit by sending written notice to the
permittee and assume full possession and control of the permit area.
The permittee shall remove all furniture from the right-of-way within
the time specified by the notice. If the furniture is not removed by the
permittee, the City shall be authorized to remove all furniture and other
objects of permittee from the permit area.
B. If such furniture is not removed by the permittee within seven days
after removal by the City, the property shall be presumed abandoned
and subject to disposal according to law. [Ord. No. 2006-6]
A. As an express condition of the issuance of the permit, each permittee
shall agree in writing to indemnify and hold harmless the City against
all claims, liability, loss, injury, death or damage whatsoever in
connection with or arising out of the use of the sidewalk cafe by anyone,
except where the claim is the result of the sole negligence of the City.
B. As an express condition of the issuance of the permit, the permittee
shall agree to, within seven days after the billing date, pay to the City
all costs associated with damage to the pavement or other City-owned
§ 38-945 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-948
1:1461
§ 38-949. [Ch. 38, Sec. 167.9] Insurance requirements. [Ord. No.
2006-6]
All persons, prior to receiving a permit, shall procure and maintain for
the duration of the permit, public liability and property damage insurance
pertaining to the permit area in a minimum amount of $1,000,000 per
person and $1,000,000 in the aggregate per occurrence and property
damage in a minimum amount of $1,000,000, which shall name the City of
Bloomington, its officers and employees as additional insureds and the same
shall provide that the policy shall not terminate or be canceled prior to the
expiration date without 30 days advance written notice to the City. Proof
of such insurance, issued by an insurance company licensed to do business
in the State of Illinois in the form of a certificate of insurance, shall be
attached to the application.
§ 38-950. [Ch. 38, Sec. 167.10] Revocation and suspension.
Any sidewalk cafe permit may be revoked or suspended for a period not to
exceed 30 days by the City Manager if the City Manager shall find after a
hearing that:
facilities located in or adjacent to the permit area caused by operation
of the food service establishment, or the cleaning of or trash removal
from the permit area or adjacent premises occasioned by the failure of
the permittee to clean or remove such trash.
C. The Director of Public Works is authorized to execute the agreements
required in Subsections A and B above after the form thereof has been
approved by the City Attorney. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
A. The Permittee has failed to operate the sidewalk cafe in accordance
with the regulations set forth in § 38-945 or any condition imposed on
the issuance of the permit by the Director of Public Works.
B. The Permittee has failed to operate the sidewalk cafe in compliance
with all codes pertaining to health and safety applicable within the City
of Bloomington, including but not limited to, Building, Plumbing,
Electrical and Fire Codes, Zoning Ordinances, McLean County Health
Ordinances and orders of the McLean County Health Department.
C. The Permittee has failed to operate the sidewalk cafe in compliance
with all codes and state laws pertaining to the sale, serving and
consumption of alcohol within the City of Bloomington including any
conditions placed on a license issued to Permittee for the sale of alcohol
and any order of the Bloomington Liquor Commission. [Ord. No.
2018-93]
§ 38-948 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 38-950
1:1462
ARTICLE X
Sidewalk Improvements - Special Assessment
§ 38-1001. [Ch. 38, Sec. 170] Authorization. [Ord. No. 1977-50]
In addition to any other manner authorized by law or by ordinance, sidewalk
improvements abutting other than commercial or industrial properties may
be made by special assessment of abutting properties as provided in this
article. For purposes of this article, the term "sidewalk improvements"
includes new construction, reconstruction and repair of sidewalks.
§ 38-1002. [Ch. 38, Sec. 171] Assessment.
§ 38-1003. [Ch. 38, Sec. 172] Limitations.
§ 38-1004. [Ch. 38, Sec. 173] Applications. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
Owners of properties for which sidewalk improvements are desired to be
made may request such improvements by making application therefor with
the Public Works Department. The application shall be on forms used by
A. A special assessment is hereby made of all other than commercial or
industrial properties abutting sidewalk improvements made pursuant
to this article. Except as provided in Subsection B of this section, said
assessment shall be in the amount of 50% of the cost of the
improvement. The remaining 50% of the cost of said improvement shall
be paid by the City of Bloomington as provided for herein. [Ord. No.
1979-171]
B. The City Manager may in his discretion waive the assessment when all
of the following conditions are met:
(1) Repair of the sidewalk is necessitated by the growth of one or more
trees has caused or will aggravate the deteriorated condition of the
sidewalk;
(2) The deteriorated condition of the sidewalk poses a hazard to
pedestrians using the sidewalk; and
(3) Failure to waive the assessment would cause serious financial
hardship to the abutting property owner. [Ord. No. 1979-17]
A. Appropriations. Sidewalk improvements authorized to be made by this
article are limited to those for which appropriations are made in each
fiscal year. This article shall not be construed to require any
appropriations. [Ord. No. 1977-50]
B. Nature of benefited property. Property eligible to be assessed pursuant
to this article is limited to property used principally for other than
commercial or industrial purposes, and shall not include property being
developed under Bloomington City Code Chapter 24 or Bloomington
City Code Chapter 44, § 44-204. [Ord. No. 1977-50]
§ 38-1001 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-1004
1:1463
the Department and, except as provided in § 38-1002B above, shall be
accompanied by a check for 50% of the estimated cost of the sidewalk
improvement abutting the property to be benefited thereby. Applications
shall be taken and processed in chronological order.
§ 38-1005. [Ch. 38, Sec. 174] Making of improvement.
A. Sidewalk improvements made pursuant to this article shall be made by
persons selected by the City of Bloomington. Improvements made in
any fiscal year shall not exceed the lesser of:
(1) Improvements requested; or
(2) Appropriations for such fiscal year.
B. Application made for sidewalk improvements under this article for
which appropriations have not been made shall be carried over into the
next fiscal year and receive chronological priority at that time. [Ord.
No. 1977-50]
§ 38-1004 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 38-1005
1:1464
ARTICLE XI
Parades
§ 38-1101. [Ch. 38, Sec. 175] Parade permits required.
§ 38-1102. [Ch. 38, Sec. 176] Parade permit applications. [Ord. No.
2000-13]
Each application for a parade permit must be in writing and must specify
at least the proposed date and time of the parade, the anticipated number
of walking groups or other units which will be in the parade, the name of
the sponsoring organization, the name of the person in charge of organizing
the parade, and the address and phone number where such person may
be contacted. Each application must be received by mail or be personally
delivered to the office of the Bloomington City Clerk at least 60 days prior
to the scheduled event if any part of a state highway within the City is to be
used as part of the proposed parade route and at least 30 days prior to the
scheduled event if the proposed route consists entirely of non-state streets
and/or highways. The sixty-day application time is necessary to enable the
required state permission to be obtained for parades which will use state
highways as part of the parade route. The failure to comply with this section
may result in the denial of the permit by the Special Events Committee.
§ 38-1103. [Ch. 38, Sec. 177] Parade rules and regulations. [Ord.
No. 2000-13]
The Special Events Committee is hereby granted authority to draft,
administer, and enforce the terms of a manual containing rules, regulations
and guidelines relating to the organization, implementation of plans,
regulation and control of all parades within the City of Bloomington. This
authority shall include the authorization to determine and direct the use
of all parade routes which shall be compatible with the public bus service
within the City of Bloomington. It shall be unlawful for any person
participating in a parade to throw candy to spectators. In the event candy
A. It shall be illegal for any person to participate in the organization of a
parade or otherwise to, participate in a parade for which a parade
permit has not been applied for and obtained from the Special Events
Committee of the City of Bloomington.
B. A "parade" is any organized or unorganized demonstration or other
grouping of individuals as pedestrians or as riders or drivers of vehicles
which use one or more sidewalks and/or streets and/or highways within
the City of Bloomington, which lasts in excess of 15 minutes and which
has the planned or unplanned effect of interrupting the free movement
of pedestrians or vehicular traffic in any manner including but not
limited to directly or indirectly causing the stopping of vehicular traffic
on streets and/or highways within the City of Bloomington which
intersect with streets and/or highways on which any part of the parade
activities take place. [Ord. No. 2000-13]
§ 38-1101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-1103
1:1465
is thrown from a parade vehicle, the driver of the vehicle shall be held
responsible. These prohibitions do not prohibit the distribution of candy by
walkers in parades at curbside.
§ 38-1104. [Ch. 38, Sec. 178] Traffic detours for parades. [Ord. No.
2018-93]
The determination of any parade route shall, when appropriate, also specify
detours for regular traffic, which detours shall be established by the use
of temporary street barricades and signs during a period of time before,
during and after the scheduled parade as specified by the Special Events
Committee. Unless otherwise specified by the Special Events Committee
personnel from the Department of Public Works shall be responsible for
setting up said detour(s) with the specified types of barricades and signs
but may specify to the Special Events Committee the name of a person
who will directly administer and be responsible to the organizer(s) for the
creation and maintenance of the detour and who may be contacted by
representatives of the Special Events Committee should that be advisable
for any reason related to the detour(s) or to the barricades or signs.
§ 38-1105. [Ch. 38, Sec. 179] Delegation of authority. [Ord. No.
2000-13]
Any aspect of these sections which grants authority to or specifies
responsibility of the Special Events Committee may be developed and
executed by any member of the Special Events Committee or by any other
person to whom the Special Events Committee grants or assigns such
authority and responsibility.
§ 38-1106. [Ch. 38, Sec. 179A] Penalty for violation of this chapter.
[Ord. No. 2000-13]
Unless otherwise provided for, any person who violates any of the provisions
of this chapter 38 shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $1,000.
Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 38-1103 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 38-1106
1:1466
ARTICLE XII
Complete Streets
§ 38-1201. [Ch. 38, Sec. 180 through Ch. 38, Sec. 180.2] Complete
streets.
A. Definition. Vehicular, public transportation, bicycle and pedestrian
modes are integral to the transportation system, and the City of
Bloomington views all transportation improvements as opportunities to
improve safety, access, and mobility for all travelers and to increase
quality of life within the City of Bloomington. [Ord. No. 2016-87]
B. Implementation.
(1) To best balance the needs of all users and provide increased
flexibility to design the City will use design guidelines in
accordance with the most up to date, relevant standards and best
practices available on all new or existing transportation routes.
(2) Design standard references may include but are not limited to:
(a) The Manual of Practice for the Design of Public Improvements
in the City of Bloomington, Illinois.
(b) Illinois Department of Transportation (IDOT) Bureau of Local
Roads and Streets (BLR) Manual.
(c) Illinois Department of Transportation (IDOT) Bureau of Design
and Environment (BDE) Manual.
(d) The Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
(e) The Illinois Supplement to the Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices.
(f) "Guide for the Planning, Design and Operation of Pedestrian
Facilities," American Association of State Highway and
Transportation Officials.
(g) "Urban Bikeway Design Guide," National Association of City
Transportation Officials.
(h) "A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets,"
American Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials.
(i) "Designing Walkable Urban Thoroughfares: A Context
Sensitive Approach: An ITE Recommended Practice," Institute
of Transportation Engineers.
(j) "Guide for the Development of Bicycle Facilities," American
Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
§ 38-1201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-1201
1:1467
§ 38-1202. [Ch. 38, Sec. 181 through Ch. 38, Sec. 181.2]
Applicability.
(k) "Public Rights-of-Way Accessibility Guidelines," United States
Access Board.
(l) "Complete Streets: Best Policy and Implementation Practices,"
American Planning Association.
(m) Pedestrian Safety Guide and Countermeasures Selection
System (FHWA-PEDSAFE).
(n) Complete Streets Complete Networks: A Manual for the
Design of Active Transportation (Active Transportation
Alliance).
(o) Other relevant federal, state, or local guidance, as appropriate.
[Ord. No. 2016-87]
C. The City of Bloomington will provide assistance to and coordinate with
local, regional, state, and federal agencies in developing and
implementing complementary Complete Streets policies and to ensure
that all roadways and intersections within or directly adjacent to the
City of Bloomington meet the local community standards adopted in
accordance with this ordinance. [Ord. No. 2016-87]
A. All public transportation projects under the City of Bloomington's
jurisdiction will be designed to improve safety, access, and mobility for
users of all ages and abilities, including pedestrians, bicyclists, public
transportation vehicles and their passengers, motorist, transporters of
commercial goods, persons with disabilities, older adults, and children,
Review for consistency with and the potential incorporation of elements
to advance the Complete Streets goals will be evaluated and, if
warranted, applied to new construction as well as reconstruction of
roadway improvement projects and into all phases of roadway projects
including, but not limited to, scoping, programming, planning, design,
construction, maintenance, and operations. [Ord. No. 2016-87]
B. Exemption.
(1) The implementation of Complete Streets practices may not be
required if the City of Bloomington determines that one or more of
the following conditions exists:
(a) The project occurs on a roadway where specified users are
prohibited by law;
(b) The project involves ordinary maintenance activities such as
cleaning, sealing, spot repairs, patching, and surface
treatments;
§ 38-1201 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 38-1202
1:1468
§ 38-1203. [Ch. 38, Sec. 182 through Ch. 38, Sec. 182.1]
Accountability.
In order to evaluate the City of Bloomington's progress toward
implementation of a comprehensive Complete Streets policy, the City will
prepare an annual report detailing its progress in this regard, which shall
contain the following information:
§ 38-1204. [Ch. 38, Sec. 183 through Ch. 38, Sec. 183.1]
Severability. [Ord. No. 2016-87]
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or clause of this ordinance
or its application to any person or circumstance is held to be invalid by
any court of competent jurisdiction or administrative agency, the invalidity
of that provision or application shall not affect, impair, or invalidate any
remaining section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or clause of this
ordinance or its application.
(c) The cost of accommodations for a particular mode is
excessively disproportionate to the need for accommodation
and potential benefit of accommodation;
(d) There is clear and quantifiable evidence of a lack of need or
lack of increased safety benefits; and/or
(e) The street surface is considered a historic street surface.
(2) The City of Bloomington may consult local, regional, state, and
federal plans and leaders, as appropriate, in assessing exemptions.
(3) Exemptions to the Completes Streets policy must be documented in
writing, submitted to the Director of Public Works and approved by
the City Manager. In the event that consensus cannot be reached
between the City Manager and the Director of Public Works, the
City Council may make the final determination for an exemption.
[Ord. No. 2017-113]
A. Total miles of on-street bicycle routes and lanes;
B. Total miles of off-street paths and trails;
C. Linear feet of pedestrian accommodation;
D. Number of ADA compliant curb ramps;
E. Annual crash data and comparisons to benchmarks;
F. Exemptions to the Complete Street Policy granted and reason for
exemption;
G. Other relevant data. [Ord. No. 2016-87]
§ 38-1202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-1205
1:1469
§ 38-1205. [Ch. 38, Sec. 184 through Ch. 38, Sec. 184.1] Private
development. [Ord. No. 2016-87]
Review for Complete Streets consistency will be added to the existing
private development review process. This includes application of the
Complete Streets elements of each development at the City staff and
administrative level. The Complete Streets project checklist shall be used
to assist with and document the Complete Streets review. Complete Street
improvements shall be required at the cost of the developer. Exemptions
must be documented in writing and approved by the City Manager.
§ 38-1206. [Ch. 38, Sec. 185 through Ch. 38, Sec. 185.1] Effective
date. [Ord. No. 2016-87]
This ordinance shall take effect September 1, 2016.
§ 38-1205 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 38-1206
1:1470
Chapter 39
TAXATION
§ 38-1206 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-1206
1:1471

ARTICLE I
Tax on Fire Insurance Companies
For State law as to authority of City to tax fire insurance companies, see
111. Rev. Stat. 1959, Ch. 24, Sec. 33-1.
§ 39-101. [Ch. 39, Sec. 1] All companies not incorporated under
laws of Illinois to pay tax. [Ord. No. 2017-28]
All companies, corporations, and associations not incorporated under the
laws of the State of Illinois, and which are engaged in the City in effecting
fire insurance shall pay to the Finance Director on or before the 15th day of
July in each and every year the sum of 2% of the gross receipts received by
their agency in said City during the year immediately preceding the first of
July prior to the day when said money must be paid over to said Director.
§ 39-102. [Ch. 39, Sec. 2] Duty of agents. [Ord. No. 2017-28]
Every person who shall act in the City as agent, or otherwise, for or on
behalf of any such corporation, company, or association shall, on or before
the 15th day of July of each year, render to the Finance Director of the City
a full, true, and just account, verified by his oath, of all the premiums which
during the year ending on every first day of July preceding said report shall
have been received by him or any other person for him in behalf of any such
corporation, company, or association and shall specify in said report the
amounts received for fire insurance. Such agents shall at the time of making
such report pay over to the said Finance Director the sum or sums of money
herein specified. Any default by not fully complying with any requirements
of this article shall not relieve any company, corporation, or association
from the payment of any risk that may be undertaken in violation of this
article.
§ 39-103. [Ch. 39, Sec. 3] Insurance broker not to place insurance
until article complied with.
No insurance broker in the City shall place any insurance with any company,
association, or corporation not incorporated under the laws of this State,
which shall be in default for not reporting or making payment as provided
in this article until it shall have complied with all the requirements of this
Division.
§ 39-104. [Ch. 39, Sec. 4] Penalty.
Any person, corporation, or association violating any of the provisions of
this article shall be fined not more than $200 for each offense, and it shall
thereafter be unlawful for the company, corporation, or association which
any agent violating any of said provisions represents or for which he does
business to further carryon its business in said City.
§ 39-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-104
1:1473

ARTICLE II
Public Utility Tax
§ 39-201. [Ch. 39, Sec. 5] Requiring customers and users of
electricity for heat, light, and power furnished by the City of
Bloomington, Illinois, to pay the tax required to be paid by Sec. 469
of Chapter 120, Ill. Rev. Stat. 1959.
That in addition to all other sums payable to said City for electricity for
heat, light, and power furnished by the City, by its customers or users of
said electricity and water, there is hereby charged against and shall be paid
by each such customer or user of electricity a sum equal to the tax imposed
on and required to be paid by said City under the provisions of an Act by
the General Assembly entitled, "An Act in relation to a tax upon persons
engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling
electricity for use or consumption as amended, approved March 11, 1957,"
on account of the receipt by said City of electricity rates and charges from
such customers and the sums herein charged against and required to be
paid by each such customer shall be added to the bills for such electricity
and be payable at the same time and in the same manner as now provided
by ordinance fixing rates for electric current and be subject to the same
penalties.
§ 39-202. [Ch. 39, Sec. 6] Not to effect any increase in existing rate.
Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to effect an increase in the
heretofore existing rate on charges of said City for electric current and
water, but this ordinance is intended solely to require the customers and
users of electricity and water supplied by the City to bear the burden
imposed upon said City by the provisions of said Act.
§ 39-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-202
1:1475

ARTICLE III
(Reserved)
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-202
1:1477

ARTICLE IV
(Reserved)
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-202
1:1479

ARTICLE V
(Reserved)
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-202
1:1481

ARTICLE VI
Taxes on Automobile Rental Use Tax
§ 39-601. [Ch. 39, Sec. 17] Imposition of tax. [Ord. No. 1982-1]
A tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege of using in the City of
Bloomington an automobile which is rented from a renter outside Illinois
and which is titled or registered with an agency of this state's government
in the City of Bloomington at the rate of 1% of the rental price of such
automobile while this Ordinance is in effect, in accordance with the
provisions of Section 8-11-8 of the Illinois Municipal Code.78
§ 39-602. [Ch. 39, Sec. 18] Filing of report. [Ord. No. 1982-1]
Every such person engaged in such business in the City of Bloomington
shall file on or before the last day of each calendar month, the report to
the State Department of Revenue required by Sections 2 and 3 of "An Act
in Relation to the Tax upon Persons Engaged in the Business of Selling
Tangible Personal Property to Purchasers for Use or Consumption"
approved June 29, 1933, as amended.
§ 39-603. [Ch. 39, Sec. 19] Collection of tax. [Ord. No. 1982-1]
The tax provided for in this Ordinance shall be collected from the persons
whose Illinois address for titling or registration purposes is given as being
in the City of Bloomington.
§ 39-604. [Ch. 39, Sec. 20] Payment of tax. [Ord. No. 1982-1]
At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the State Department
of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the renting of
automobiles during the preceding month.
78.Editor's Note: See 65 ILCS 5/8-11-8.
§ 39-601 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-604
1:1483

ARTICLE VII
Automobile Renting Occupation Tax
§ 39-701. [Ch. 39, Sec. 21] Imposition of tax. [Ord. No. 1982-2]
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of renting
automobiles in the City of Bloomington at the rate of 1% of the gross
receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while this
Ordinance is in effect in accordance with the provisions of Section 8-11-7 of
the Illinois Municipal Code.
§ 39-702. [Ch. 39, Sec. 22] Filing of report. [Ord. No. 1982-2]
Every such person engaged in such business in the City of Bloomington
shall file on or before the last day of each calendar month the report to the
State Department of Revenue required by Sections 2 and 3 of "An Act in
Relation to a Tax upon Persons Engaged in the Business of Selling Tangible
Personal Property to Purchasers for Use or Consumption approved June 29,
1933, as amended.
§ 39-703. [Ch. 39, Sec. 23] Payment of tax. [Ord. No. 1982-2]
At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the State Department
of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the renting of
automobiles during the preceding month.
§ 39-704. [Ch. 39, Sec. 24] Filing of copy of article. [Ord. No.
1982-2]
The City Clerk is hereby directed to transmit to the State Department of
Revenue a certified copy of this Ordinance not later than five days after the
effective date of this Ordinance.
§ 39-701 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-704
1:1485

ARTICLE VIII
Tax Upon the Use and Privilege of Renting a Hotel or Motel Room
§ 39-801. [Ch. 39, Sec. 25] Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, whenever any of the following words,
terms, or definitions are used herein, they shall have the meaning ascribed
to them in this section:
HOTEL ROOM or MOTEL ROOM — A room within a structure offered for
rental on a daily basis and containing facilities for sleeping. One room
offered for rental with or without an adjoining bath shall be considered as
a single hotel or motel room. The number of hotel or motel rooms within a
suite shall be computed on the basis of those rooms utilized for the purpose
of sleeping.[Ord. No. 2002-93]
OWNER — Any person having an ownership interest in or conducting the
operation of a hotel or motel room or receiving the consideration for the
rental of such hotel or motel room.[Ord. No. 2002-93]
PERSON — Any natural person, trustee, court appointed representative,
syndicate, association, partnership, firm, club, company, corporation,
business trust, institution, agency, government corporation, municipal
corporation, district or other political subdivision, contractor, supplied,
vendor, vendee, operator, user or owner, or any officers, agents, employees
or other representative, acting either for himself or for any other person in
any capacity, or any other entity recognized by law as the subject of rights
and duties. The masculine, feminine, singular or plural is included in any
circumstance.[Ord. No. 2002-93]
§ 39-802. [Ch. 39, Sec. 26] Tax.
A. There is hereby levied and imposed a tax of 6% of the rent charged for
the privilege and use of renting a hotel or motel room within the City of
Bloomington for each twenty-four-hour period or any portion thereof for
which a daily room charge is made; provided, however, that the tax
shall not be levied and imposed upon any person who rents a hotel or
motel room for more than 30 consecutive days or to a person who works
and lives in the same hotel or motel. [Ord. No. 2002-93]
B. The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of said tax is to be
borne by the person who seeks the privilege of occupying the hotel or
motel room, said person hereinafter referred to as "Renter." [Ord. No.
2002-93]
C. The tax herein levied shall be paid in addition to any and all other taxes
and charges. It shall be the duty of the owner of every hotel or motel to
secure said tax from the renter of the motel or hotel room and to pay
over to the City Treasurer or any authorized representative of his office
said tax under procedures prescribed by the City Treasurer, or as
otherwise provided in this ordinance. [Ord. No. 2002-93]
§ 39-801 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-802
1:1487
§ 39-803. [Ch. 39, Sec. 27] Books and records. [Ord. No. 2002-93]
The City Treasurer, or his authorized representative, may enter the
premises of any hotel or motel for inspection and examination of records
in order to effectuate the proper administration of this ordinance, and
to assure the enforcement of the collection of the tax imposed. It shall
be unlawful for any person to prevent, hinder, or interfere with the City
Treasurer or his authorized deputy or representative in the discharge of
his duties in the performance of this ordinance. It shall be the duty of
every owner to keep accurate and complete books and records to which the
City Treasurer, or his authorized representative, shall at all times have full
access, which records shall include a daily sheet showing: (1) the number of
hotel or motel rooms rented during the twenty-four-hour period, including
multiple rentals of the same hotel or motel room where such shall occur, and
(2) the actual hotel or motel tax receipts collected for the date in question.
§ 39-804. [Ch. 39, Sec. 28] Transmittal of tax revenue.
D. Every person required to collect the tax levied by this ordinance shall
secure said tax from the renter at the time he collects the rental
payment for the hotel or motel room. Upon the invoice receipt or other
statement or memorandum of the rent given to the renter at the time of
payment, the amount due under the tax provided in this ordinance shall
be stated separately on said documents. [Ord. No. 2002-93]
A. The owner or owners of each hotel or motel room within the City of
Bloomington shall file tax returns showing tax receipts received with
respect to each hotel and motel room during each one calendar month
period commencing on and including January 1, and for each successive
calendar month period thereafter prescribed by the City Treasurer. The
returns shall be due on or before the 25th day of the calendar month
succeeding the end of the monthly filing period and the returns shall
indicate for what period the return is to be filed; i.e., return for January
tax receipts due on or before the 25th day of February. [Ord. No.
2017-28]
B. The first taxing period for the purpose of this ordinance shall
commence on January 1, 2003, and the tax return payment for such
period shall be due on or before the last day of February, 2003.
Thereafter, reporting period and taxes shall be paid in accordance with
the provisions of this ordinance. At the time of filing said tax returns,
the owner shall pay to the City Treasurer all taxes due for the period to
which the tax return applies. [Ord. No. 2002-93]
C. The owner or owners filing tax returns will be entitled to withhold from
tax collections a service fee equal to 1% of the amounts collected and
timely remitted to the department. [Ord. No. 2002-93]
§ 39-802 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 39-805
1:1488
§ 39-805. [Ch. 39, Sec. 29] Collection. [Ord. No. 2014-21]
Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax as herein provided or
required, or to file any tax return, the penalties, interest, and collection
procedures set forth in Article XV shall apply in addition to any other rights
and remedies provided to the City by law or ordinance.
§ 39-806. [Ch. 39, Sec. 30] Proceeds of tax and fines. [Ord. No.
2002-93]
All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under this ordinance,
including penalties, shall be transferred to the City General Fund to be
retained until lawfully appropriated and expended by ordinance by the City
Council of the City of Bloomington.
§ 39-807. [Ch. 39, Sec. 31] Penalties. [Ord. No. 2002-93]
Any person found willfully guilty of failing to pay, collect, report, and
transmit said hotel or motel tax to the City Treasurer in accordance with the
terms of this ordinance shall, except when otherwise specifically provided,
upon conviction thereof be punished by a fine of not less than $200 nor
more than $300 for the first offense, and not less than $300 nor more than
$500 for the second and each subsequent offense in any 180-day period;
provided, however, that all actions seeking the imposition of fines only shall
be filed as quasi criminal actions subject to the provisions of the Illinois
Code of Civil Procedure (735 ILCS 5/1 et seq.).
§ 39-808. [Ch. 39, Sec. 32] Severability. [Ord. No. 2014-21]
If any provision of this ordinance, or the application thereof to any person
or circumstances, is held invalid, the remainder of this ordinance and the
application of such provisions to other persons or circumstances shall not
be affected thereby.
§ 39-809. [Ch. 39, Sec. 33] Rules and regulations. [Ord. No.
2017-28]
The Finance Director is authorized to adopt, promulgate and enforce rules
and regulations pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this
article.
§ 39-805 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-809
1:1489

ARTICLE IX
Gross Receipts Utility Tax
§ 39-901. [Ch. 39, Sec. 36] Imposition of tax.
A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the following occupations or
privileges:
§ 39-902. [Ch. 39, Sec. 37] Exclusions. [Ord. No. 1989-14]
No tax is imposed by this Ordinance with respect to any transaction in
interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which such business may
not, under the Constitution and Statutes of the United States, be made
the subject of taxation by the State of Illinois or any political subdivision
thereof; nor shall any persons engaged in the business of distributing,
supplying, furnishing or selling gas, water or electricity, or engaged in
the business of transmitting messages be subject to taxation under the
A. Originating in the City or receiving in the City intrastate or interstate
telecommunications by a person under the provisions of the Simplified
Municipal Telecommunications Tax Act, 35 ILCS 636/5-1 et seq., or any
successor statute, as the same may from time to time be amended, at
the rate of 6% of the gross charges for such telecommunications
purchased at retail from a retailer. The tax hereby imposed shall be
collected from the taxpayer by a retailer maintaining a place of
business in this State and shall be remitted by such retailer to the
Department, all as defined by said Act. The Illinois Department of
Revenue shall have full power to administer and enforce the provisions
of this ordinance.
B. Distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas for use or consumption
within the corporate limits of the City of Bloomington, and not for
resale, at the rate of 3.75% of the gross receipts, or such greater
amounts as may be authorized from time to time under Section 8-11-2
of the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2, or any successor
statute, as the same may from time to time be amended.
C. Distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling water, including the City's
own municipal water system, for use or consumption within the
corporate limits of the City of Bloomington, and not for resale, at the
rate of 3.75% of the gross receipts, or such greater amounts as may be
authorized from time to time under Section 8-11-2 of the Illinois
Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2, or any successor statute, as the
same may from time to time be amended; provided, however, that this
tax shall not apply to any surcharge imposed upon water rates pursuant
to Bloomington City Code Chapter 27, Section 44(c).
D. The rates set forth in Subsections A, B and C were increased by
ordinance on April 28, 2014, and the increased amounts shall be
designated for funding employer contributions to the Police and Fire
Pensions. [Ord. No. 2014-38]
§ 39-901 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-902
1:1491
provisions of this Ordinance for such transactions as are or may become
subject to taxation under the provisions of the "Municipal Retailers'
Occupation Tax Act" authorized by Section 8-11-1 of the Illinois Municipal
Code, as heretofore or hereafter amended.
§ 39-903. [Ch. 39, Sec. 38] Tax additional to other charges. [Ord.
No. 1989-14]
Such tax shall be in addition to the payment of money, or value of products
or services furnished to this municipality by the taxpayer as compensation
for the use of its streets, alleys or other public places or installation and
maintenance therein, thereon or thereunder of poles, wires, pipes or other
equipment used in the operation of the taxpayers' business or for their
respective franchise rights.
§ 39-904. [Ch. 39, Sec. 39] Definitions.
For the purposes of this Ordinance, the following definitions shall apply:
GROSS RECEIPTS — The consideration received for the transmission of
messages, or for distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas,
electricity or water for use or consumption and not for resale, as the case
may be; and for all services rendered in connection therewith valued in
money, whether received in money or otherwise, including cash, credit,
services and property of every kind and material and for all services
rendered therewith; and shall be determined without any deduction on
account of the cost of transmitting said messages without any deduction on
account of the cost of the service, produce or commodity supplied, the cost
of materials used, labor or service cost, or any other expenses whatsoever.
PERSON — Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, municipal
corporation, or political subdivision of this State, or a receiver, trustee,
conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court.[Ord.
No. 1989-14]
TRANSMITTING MESSAGES — In addition to the usual and popular
meaning of person to person communication, shall include the furnishing
for a consideration of services or facilities (whether owned or leased), or
both, to persons in connection with the transmission of messages where
such persons do not in turn receive any consideration in connection with
the transmission of messages where such persons do not in turn receive any
consideration in connection therewith, but shall not include such furnishing
of services or facilities to persons for the transmission of messages to the
extent that any such services or facilities for the transmission of messages
are furnished for a consideration, by such person to other persons, for the
transmission of messages.
§ 39-902 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 39-905
1:1492
§ 39-905. [Ch. 39, Sec. 40] When effective; applicability. [Ord. No.
1992-63]
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect immediately upon passage
and approval and the tax provided for herein shall be based on the gross
receipts, as herein defined, actually paid to the taxpayer for services billed
or after the 1st day of May, 1979. The increase in the tax provided for herein
imposed by Ordinance No. 1984-39 shall apply to and be based on the
gross receipts, as herein defined, actually paid to the taxpayer for services
rendered and billed on or after the first day of May, 1984.
§ 39-906. [Ch. 39, Sec. 41] Making of returns.
§ 39-907. [Ch. 39, Sec. 42] Over payments. [Ord. No. 1989-14]
If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due
under the provisions of this Ordinance, whether as a result of a mistake of
fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax
due, or to become due, under this Ordinance from the taxpayer who made
the erroneous payment; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more
than three years prior to the filing of a claim therefore shall be so credited.
§ 39-908. [Ch. 39, Sec. 43] (Reserved) [Ord. No. 2014-21]
A. On or before the last day of August, 1979, each taxpayer shall make a
return to the Finance Director for the months of May, June and July,
1979 stating:
(1) His name;
(2) His principal place of business;
(3) His gross receipts during those months upon the basis of which the
tax is imposed;
(4) Amount of tax;
(5) Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate
authorities may require.
B. On or before the last day of every third month thereafter, each taxpayer
shall make a like return to the Finance Director for a corresponding
three-month period.
C. The taxpayer making the return herein provided shall, at the time of
making such return pay to the City the amount of tax herein imposed;
provided that in connection with any return the taxpayer may, if he so
elects, report and pay an amount based upon his total billings of
business subject to the tax during the period for which the return is
made (exclusive of any amount previously billed) with prompt
adjustments of later payments based upon any differences between
such billings and the taxable gross receipts. [Ord. No. 2017-28]
§ 39-905 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-909
1:1493
§ 39-909. [Ch. 39, Sec. 44] Severability. [Ord. No. 1989-14]
Should a court of competent jurisdiction declare any word, sentence or
paragraph of this Ordinance to be invalid or unconstitutional, such
declaration shall in no way affect the remaining portion of said Ordinance.
§ 39-910. [Ch. 39, Sec. 45] When effective. [Ord. No. 1989-14]
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage
and approval; however, the effective date of the tax herein imposed shall be
as above set forth, namely May 1, 1979. The effective date of Ordinance No.
1984-39 increasing the tax provided for herein shall be May 1, 1984.
§ 39-909 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 39-910
1:1494
ARTICLE X
Electricity Tax
§ 39-1001. [Ch. 39, Sec. 46] Tax imposed.
A. A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the following occupations or
privileges: The privilege of using or consuming electricity acquired in a
purchase at retail and used or consumed within the corporate limits of
the municipality at the following rates, calculated on a monthly basis for
each purchaser:
(1) For the first 2,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month;
$0.4439 per kilowatt-hour;
(2) For the next 48,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month;
$0.2911 per kilowatt-hour;
(3) For the next 50,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month;
$0.2620 per kilowatt-hour;
(4) For the next 400,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month;
$0.2547 per kilowatt-hour;
(5) For the next 500,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month;
$0.2474 per kilowatt-hour;
(6) For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month; $0.2329 per kilowatt-hour;
(7) For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month; $0.2292 per kilowatt-hour;
(8) For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month; $0.2256 per kilowatt-hour;
(9) For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month; $0.2220 per kilowatt-hour; and
(10) For all electricity used or consumed in excess of 20,000,000
kilowatt-hours in a month; $0.2183 per kilowatt-hour. [Ord. No.
2014-38]
B. The rates set forth in Subsection A above shall be effective with respect
to the use or consumption of electricity between the later of this
Ordinance's effective date and the first billing cycle for which the
electric utility can collect such rates. [Ord. No. 2014-38]
C. The rates set forth in Subsection A above were increased by ordinance
on April 28, 2014, and these increased cents per kilowatt hour shall be
designated for funding employer contributions to the Police and Fire
Pensions. [Ord. No. 2014-38]
D. Any and all accounts of the City of Bloomington are exempt from the
taxes imposed by this article, as well as the accounts of the
§ 39-1001 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-1001
1:1495
§ 39-1002. [Ch. 39, Sec. 47] Exceptions. [Ord. No. 1998-32]
None of the taxes authorized by this article may be imposed with respect to
any transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which
the business or privilege may not, under the Constitution and statutes of
the United States, be made the subject of taxation by this State or any
political sub-division thereof; nor shall any persons engaged in the business
of distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling or transmitting gas, water,
or electricity, or engaged in the business of transmitting messages, or using
or consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at retail, be subject to
taxation under the provisions of this article for those transactions that are
or may become subject to taxation under the provisions of the Municipal
Retailers' Occupation Tax Act as authorized by 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1; nor shall
any tax authorized by this article be imposed upon any person engaged in
a business or on any privilege unless the tax is imposed in like manner and
at the same rate upon all persons engaged in businesses of the same class
in the municipality, whether privately or municipally owned or operated, or
exercising the same privilege within the municipality.
§ 39-1003. [Ch. 39, Sec. 48] Additional taxes. [Ord. No. 1998-32]
Such tax shall be in addition to other taxes levied upon the taxpayer or its
business.
§ 39-1004. [Ch. 39, Sec. 49] Collection. [Ord. No. 1998-32]
The tax authorized by this article shall be collected from the purchaser by
the person maintaining a place of business in this State who delivers the
electricity to the purchaser. This tax shall constitute a debt of the purchaser
to the person who delivers the electricity to the purchaser and if unpaid,
is recoverable in the same manner as the original charge for delivering
the electricity. Any tax required to be collected pursuant to this article and
any such tax collected by a person delivering electricity shall constitute
a debt owed to the municipality by such person delivering the electricity.
Persons delivering electricity shall collect the tax from the purchaser by
adding such tax to the gross charge for delivering the electricity. Persons
delivering electricity shall also be authorized to add to such gross charge an
amount equal to 3% of the tax to reimburse the person delivering electricity
for the expense incurred in keeping records, billing customers, preparing
and filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data to the municipality
upon request. If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax
from the purchaser, then the purchaser shall be required to pay the tax
directly to the municipality in the manner prescribed by the municipality.
Persons delivering electricity who file returns pursuant to this section shall,
at the time of filing such return, pay the municipality the amount of the tax
collected pursuant to this article.
Bloomington Normal Water Reclamation District (BNWRD) and any
other accounts exempt under State or Federal law. [Ord. No. 2016-06]
§ 39-1001 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 39-1005
1:1496
§ 39-1005. [Ch. 39, Sec. 50] Reports to municipality.
§ 39-1006. [Ch. 39, Sec. 51] Credit for overpayment. [Ord. No.
2014-21]
If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due
under the provisions of this article, whether as the result of a mistake of
fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax
due, or to become due, under this article from the taxpayer who made the
erroneous payment; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than
three years prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be so credited.
§ 39-1007. [Ch. 39, Sec. 52] Penalty. [Ord. No. 1998-32]
Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent return,
or who willfully violates any other provision of this article is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than $100
nor more than $200 in addition, shall be liable in a civil action for the
amount of tax due. (See 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2)
A. On or before the last day of each month, each taxpayer who has not paid
the tax imposed by this article to a person delivering electricity as set
forth in § 39-1004 and who is not otherwise exempted from paying such
tax shall make a return to the City Treasurer for the preceding month
stating:
(1) His name.
(2) His principal place of business.
(3) His gross receipts and/or kilowatt-hour usage during the month
upon the basis of which the tax is imposed.
(4) Amount of tax.
(5) Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate
authorities may require.
B. The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at the time of
making such return, pay to the City of Bloomington, the amount of tax
herein imposed; provided that in connection with any return, the
taxpayer may, if he so elects, report and pay an amount based upon his
total billings of business subject to the tax during the period for which
the return is made (exclusive of any amounts previously billed) with
prompt adjustments of later payments based upon any differences
between such billings, and the taxable gross receipts. [Ord. No.
1998-32]
§ 39-1005 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-1007
1:1497

ARTICLE XI
Home Rule Municipal Retailer's and Service Occupation Tax
§ 39-1101. [Ch. 39, Sec. 130] Imposition of tax.
§ 39-1102. [Ch. 39, Sec. 131] Collection. [Ord. No. 2008-13]
The taxes hereby imposed and all civil penalties that may be assessed as
an incident thereto shall be collected and enforced by the Department of
Revenue of the State of Illinois. The Department of Revenue shall have full
power to administer and enforce the provisions of this Ordinance.
A. A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
selling tangible personal property at retail in this municipality. Before
January 1, 2016, the tax under this Subsection A is imposed at the rate
of 1.5% of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such
business. On and after January 1, 2016, the tax imposed under this
Subsection A is 2.5% of the gross receipts from such sales made in the
course of such business. The tax under this Subsection A does not apply
to: the sale of an item of tangible personal property titled or registered
with an agency of this State's government; or food for human
consumption which is to be consumed off the premises where it is sold
(other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks, and food that has been
prepared for immediate consumption) and prescription and nonprescription
medicines, drugs, medical appliances and insulin, urine
testing materials, syringes and needles used by diabetics. This tax is
imposed in accordance with Section 8-11-1 of the Illinois Municipal
Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-1).
B. A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this municipality in
the business of making sales of service. Before January 1, 2016, the tax
imposed under this Subsection B at the rate of 1.5% of the selling price
of all tangible personal property transferred by such serviceman as an
incident to a sale of service. On and after January 1, 2016, the tax
imposed under this Subsection B is 2.5% of the selling price of all
tangible personal property transferred by such serviceman as an
incident to a sale of service. The tax under this Subsection B does not
apply to the sale of food for human consumption which is to be
consumed off the premises where it is sold (other than alcoholic
beverages, soft drinks, and food that has been prepared for immediate
consumption) and prescription and non-prescription medicines, drugs,
medical appliances and insulin, urine testing materials, syringes and
needles used by diabetics. This tax is imposed in accordance with
Section 8-11-5 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-5). [Ord.
No. 2015-62]
§ 39-1101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-1103
1:1499
§ 39-1103. [Ch. 39, Sec. 132] Copy of ordinance to Illinois
Department of Revenue. [Ord. No. 2008-13]
The City Clerk is hereby directed to file a certified copy of this Ordinance
with the Illinois Department of Revenue on or before the 30th day of March,
2008.
§ 39-1104. [Ch. 39, Sec. 133] Disposition of certain proceeds. [Ord.
No. 2015-62]
The City shall distribute 10% of the net proceeds collected after June
30, 2016, from the 2.5% rate under § 39-1101 to the County of McLean
for purposes of mental health and public safety in accordance with an
intergovernmental agreement to be entered into between the Town of
Normal, the City of Bloomington, and the County of McLean for such
purposes. For the purpose of this section, "net proceeds" means the amount
of the tax collected under § 39-1101 and remitted to the City by the
Department of Revenue.
§ 39-1103 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 39-1104
1:1500
ARTICLE XII
City of Bloomington Use Tax
§ 39-1201. [Ch. 39, Sec. 140] Nature of tax. [Ord. No. 1990-34]
This article shall be known and may be cited as the City of Bloomington Use
Tax. The tax herein imposed is in addition to all other taxes imposed by the
City of Bloomington, the State of Illinois, or any other municipal corporation
or political subdivision thereof.
§ 39-1202. [Ch. 39, Sec. 141] Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, when any of the following words or terms are
used herein, they shall have the meaning or construction ascribed to them
in this section.
CITY — The City of Bloomington, Illinois.
DEPARTMENT — The Finance Department of the City of Bloomington.
DIRECTOR — The Finance Director of the City of Bloomington.[Ord. No.
2017-28]
GROSS RECEIPTS — From the sales of tangible personal property at retail
means the total selling price or the amount of such sales, as hereinafter
defined. In the case of charge and time sales, the amount thereof shall be
included only as and when payments are received by the seller. Receipts or
other consideration derived by a seller from the sale, transfer or assignment
of accounts receivable to a wholly owned subsidiary will not be deemed
payments prior to the time the purchaser makes payment of such accounts.
LIKE KIND AND CHARACTER — Shall be liberally construed (including but
not limited to any form of motor vehicle for any form of motor vehicle, or
any kind of farm or agricultural implement for any other kind of farm or
agricultural implement), while not including a kind of item which, if sold at
retail by that retailer, would be exempt from tax hereunder as an isolated or
occasional sale.
PERSON — Any natural individual, firm, society, foundation, institution,
partnership, association, joint stock company, joint adventure, public or
private corporation, or a receiver, executor, trustee, conservator or other
representative appointed by order of any court.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL — The acquisition of the ownership of or title to
tangible personal property through a sale at retail.
PURCHASER — Any person who, through a sale at retail, acquires the
ownership of or title to tangible personal property for a valuable
consideration.
RECEIPTS — From sales of tangible personal property at retail with respect
to any period of time means the aggregate selling price, as herein defined,
received by seller during such period of time. In the case of charge and
time sales, receipts include consideration only as and when payments are
received by the seller.
§ 39-1201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-1202
1:1501
RESIDING WITHIN THE CITY OF BLOOMINGTON — Maintaining an actual
domicile (temporary or permanent) within the corporate limits of the City of
Bloomington or maintaining permanently or temporarily a place of business
within the City. A title or registration issued by a State of Illinois agency
bearing an address within the corporate limits of the City of Bloomington
shall create a rebuttable presumption that the purchaser of such titled or
registered property resides within the City of Bloomington.
RETAILER —
RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THE CITY — Or any
like term, shall mean and include any retailer:
SALE AT RETAIL — Any transfer of the ownership of or title to tangible
personal property to a purchaser, for the purposes of use or consumption.
"Sale at retail" includes any transfer made for resale unless made in
compliance with § 39-1207 of this article.
Every person engaged in the business of making sales at retail as
defined in this section.
A.
A person who is engaged in the business of leasing or renting motor
vehicles to others and who, in connection with such business sells any
used motor vehicle to a purchaser for his use and not for the purpose
of resale, is a retailer to the extent of the value of the vehicle sold. For
the purpose of this section, "motor vehicle" has the meaning prescribed
in Section 1.157 of the Illinois Vehicle Code,79 as now or hereafter
amended (nothing provided herein shall affect liability incurred under
this article because of the sale at retail of such motor vehicle to a
lessor).
B.
Having or maintaining within the City, directly or by a subsidiary, an
office, distribution house, sales house, warehouse or other place of
business, or any agent or other representative operating within the
City under the authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective
of whether such place of business or agent or other representative is
located here permanently or temporarily, or whether such retailer or
subsidiary is licensed to do business in the City; or
A.
Engaging in soliciting orders within the City from users by mean, of
catalogues or other advertising, whether such orders are received or
accepted within or without the City.
B.
Transactions whereby the possession of the property is transferred but
the seller retains the title as security for payment of the selling price
shall be deemed to be sales.
A.
"Sale at retail" shall be construed to include any transfer of the
ownership of or title to tangible personal property to a purchaser,
for use or consumption by any other person to whom such purchaser
B.
79.Editor's Note: See 625 ILCS 5/1-157.
§ 39-1202 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 39-1202
1:1502
SELLING PRICE — The consideration for a sale valued in money whether
received in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, property, other
than as hereinafter provided, and services, but not including the value of or
may transfer the tangible personal property without a valuable
consideration.
A person whose activities are organized and conducted primarily as a
not-for-profit service enterprise, and who engages in selling tangible
personal property at retail (whether to the public or merely to members
and their guests) is engaged in the business of selling tangible personal
property at retail with respect to such transactions, excepting only a
person organized and operated exclusively for charitable, religious or
educational purposes either:
To the extent of sales by such person to its members, students,
patients or inmates of tangible personal property to be used
primarily for the purposes of such person; or
(1)
To the extent of sales by such person of tangible personal property
which is not sold or offered for sale by persons organized for profit.
(2)
C.
The isolated or occasional sale of tangible personal property at retail
by a person who does not hold himself out as being engaged (or who
does not habitually engage) in selling such tangible personal property
at retail does not constitute engaging in a business of selling such
tangible personal property at retail within the meaning of this article;
provided that any person who is engaged in a business which is not
subject to the tax imposed by this article because of involving the
sale of or a contract to sell real estate or a construction contract
to improve real estate, but who, in the course of conducting such
business, transfers tangible personal property to users or consumers
in the finished form in which it was purchased, and which does not
become real estate, under any provision of a construction contract or
real estate sale or real estate sales agreement entered into with some
other person arising out of or because of such nontaxable business, is
engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property at retail to
the extent of the value of the tangible personal property so transferred.
If, in such a transaction, a separate charge is made for the tangible
personal property so transferred, the value of such property, for the
purpose of this article, shall be the amount so separately charged, but
not less than the fair market value of such property.
D.
A person who holds himself or herself out as being engaged (or who
habitually engages) in selling tangible personal property at retail is a
person engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property
at retail hereunder with respect to such sales (and not primarily in a
service occupation) notwithstanding the fact that such person designs
and produces such tangible personal property on special order for the
purchaser and in such a way as to render the property of value only to
such purchaser.
E.
§ 39-1202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-1202
1:1503
credit given for traded-in tangible personal property where the item that is
traded-in is of like kind and character as that which is being sold, and shall
be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of the property
sold, the cost of materials used, labor or service cost or any other expense
whatsoever, but shall not include charges that are added to the price by the
seller on account of the seller's duty to collect, from the purchaser, the tax
imposed upon the purchaser under this article or on account of a tax liability
imposed upon the seller or the purchaser under any other ordinance of the
City of any other unit of local government or under any law of the State of
Illinois upon or in connection with such sale, purchase or use.
TANGIBLE PERSONAL PROPERTY —
Items which are titled or registered with the State are motor vehicles,
aircraft, motorboats, sailboats exceeding 12 feet in length,
snowmobiles and implements of husbandry and special mobile
equipment for which the owner decides to apply for an optional title.
For the purposes of this article:
The term "motor vehicle" includes passenger cars, trucks,
buses, motorcycles and any kind of vehicle which is required
to be titled under the Illinois Vehicle Code (Ill. Rev. State.,
1979, ti. 95 1/2 P1-146),80 (including house trailers for which a
display certificate of title is required).
(a)
The term "implement of husbandry" means every vehicle
designed and adopted exclusively for agricultural, horticultural
or livestock raising operations, including farm wagons, wagon
trailers or like vehicles used in connection therewith, or for
lifting or carrying an implement of husbandry provided that no
farm wagon, wagon trailer or like vehicle having a capacity of
more than 400 bushel. or a gross weight of more than 36,000
pounds, shall be included hereunder (Ill. Rev. State., 1979, ti.
95 1/2, P1-130.
(b)
The term "special mobile equipment" means every vehicle not
designed or used primarily for the transportation of persons
or property and only incidentally operated or moved over a
highway, including but not limited to: ditch digging apparatus,
well boring apparatus and road construction and maintenance
machinery such as asphalt spreaders, bituminous mixers,
bucket loaders, tractors other than truck tractors, ditches,
levelling graders, finishing machines, motor graders, road
rollers, scarifiers, earth moving carryalls and scrapers, power
shovels and drag lines, and self-propelled cranes and earth
moving equipment. The term does not include house trailers,
dump trucks, truck mounted transit mixers, cranes or shovels,
or other vehicles designed for the transportation of persons or
(c)
(1)
A.
80.Editor's Note: See 625 ILCS 5/1-146.
§ 39-1202 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 39-1202
1:1504
TAX COLLECTOR — A "retailer" maintaining a place of business in the City
or a retailer authorized by the Department to collect the tax herein imposed
pursuant to § 39-1202 hereof.
USE —
§ 39-1203. [Ch. 39, Sec. 142] Imposition of tax; collection by
sellers.
property to which machinery has been attached (Ill. Rev. Stat.,
1979, ch. 95 1/2, ¶1-191).
Any item of tangible personal property which is titled or registered with
an agency of the State of Illinois.
B.
The exercise by any person of any right or power over tangible personal
property incident to the ownership of that property, except that it does
not include the sale of such property in any form as tangible personal
property in the regular course of business to the extent that such
property is not first subjected to a use for which it was purchased,
and does not include the use of such property by its owner for
demonstration purposes.
A.
"Use" does not mean the interim use of tangible personal property by
a retailer before he sells such tangible personal property and does not
mean the physical incorporation of tangible personal property, to the
extent not first subjected to a use for which it was purchased, as an
ingredient or constituent, into other tangible personal property:
(1) Which is sold in the regular course of business; or
Which the person incorporating such ingredient or constituent
therein has undertaken at the time of such purchase to cause to be
transported:
In interstate commerce to destinations outside the State of
Illinois; or
(a)
(b) To designate outside the City and within the State of Illinois.
(2)
B.
Provided that the property purchased is deemed to be purchased for
the purpose of resale, despite first being used, to the extent to which it
is resold as an ingredient of an internationally produced or by-product
of manufacturing. [Ord. No. 1990-34]
C.
A. Imposition of tax. A tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege of using, in
the City, any item of tangible personal property which is purchased at
retail from a retailer after August 31, 1990, and which is titled or
registered to a purchaser residing within the City of Bloomington with
an agency of the State of Illinois, at a rate of 3/4% of the selling price of
such tangible personal property. [Ord. No. 2009-25]
§ 39-1202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-1203
1:1505
§ 39-1204. [Ch. 39, Sec. 143] Exemptions.
B. The tax imposed hereunder and the obligation to pay the same is upon
the purchaser. The tax imposed hereunder shall be collected from the
purchaser by the Tax Collector, as defined in § 38-1201 hereof, and
remitted to the Department as provided herein. The Tax Collector shall
be liable to the City for the amount of tax he is required to collect.
Retailers shall collect the tax from purchasers by adding the tax to the
selling price of tangible personal property, when sold for use, in the
manner prescribed by the Department. Whenever possible, the tax
imposed by this article shall, when collected, be stated as a distinct
item separate and apart from the selling price of the tangible personal
property. The Department may adopt and promulgate reasonable rules
and regulations for the adding of such tax by retailers to selling prices
by prescribing bracket systems for the purpose of enabling such
retailers to add and collect, as far as practicable, the amount of such
tax. The tax hereby imposed and not paid to a retailer pursuant to this
section shall be paid to the Department directly by any person
purchasing or using such property within the City pursuant to
§ 39-1207 hereof. If any seller collects an amount (however designated)
which purports to constitute taxes measured by receipts which are not
subject to such tax, or if any seller, in collecting an amount (however
designated) which purports to constitute taxes measured by receipts
which are subject to tax under this chapter, collects more from the
purchaser than the actual tax liability on the transaction, the purchaser
shall have a legal right to claim a refund of such amount from such
seller. However, if such amount is not refunded to the purchaser for any
reason, the seller is liable to pay such amount to the Department. This
paragraph does not apply to an amount collected by the seller on
receipts, which are subject to tax under this chapter as long as such
collection is made in compliance with the tax collection brackets
prescribed by the Department in its rules and regulations.
C. When the City has entered into an Intergovernmental Agreement with
any other municipality or county to collect such other governmental
unit's use tax, the Tax Collector shall upon notice from the Department
collect such tax for sales at retail within the City.
D. Affidavit of exemption. Each purchaser at retail claiming an exemption
from the tax imposed by this article shall complete at the time of
purchase an Affidavit of Exemption on forms provided by the
Department. It shall be a violation of this article to supply false or
misleading information on such affidavit. The Tax Collector shall
provide such affidavit to the purchaser and submit any completed
affidavit to the Department along with the appropriate tax return
information. [Ord. No. 1995-60]
A. Purchases or uses of tangible personal property under the following
circumstances shall not be subject to the tax imposed by this article:
§ 39-1203 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 39-1204
1:1506
(1) The proceeds from the sales of motor vehicles of the first division,
or any motor vehicle of the second division which is on the van
configuration designed for the transportation of not less than seven
nor more than 16 passengers, as defined in Section 1-146 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code (Ill. Rev. Stat. ch. 95°, @ 1-146, et seq.) which
are used for automobile renting as defined in the Automobile
Renting Occupation and Use Tax Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. ch. 120, @
170);81
(2) The proceeds from the sale of personal property by a teacher
sponsored organization affiliated with an elementary or secondary
school located in Illinois;
(3) The proceeds of that portion of the selling price of a passenger car
the sale of which is subject to the Replacement Vehicle Tax;
(4) The proceeds of the sale of personal property to an Illinois County
Fair Association for use in conducting, operating or promoting the
County Fair;
(5) The proceeds from the sale of personal property by a corporation,
society, association, foundation, institution or organization which is
organized and operated as a not-for-profit service enterprise for the
benefit of persons 65 years of age or older if such personal property
was not purchased by the enterprise for the purpose of resale by
the enterprise;
(6) The proceeds from the sale of personal property for any not-forprofit
music or dramatic arts organization which establishes, by
such proof as the Department may require by rule, that it has
received an exemption under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal
Revenue Code and which is organized and operated for the
presentation of live public performances of musical or theatrical
works on a regular basis;
(7) Sales to any governmental body, or to any corporation, society,
association, foundation, or institution organized and operated
exclusively for charitable, religious or educational purposes or any
not-for-profit corporation, society, association, foundation,
institution or organization which has not compensated officers or
employees and which is organized and operated primarily for the
recreation of persons 55 years of age or older;
(8) The proceeds from sales of tangible personal property to interstate
carriers for hire for use as rolling stock moving in interstate
commerce or lessors under leases of one year or longer executed or
in effect at the time of purchase to interstate carriers for hire for
use as rolling stock moving in interstate commerce;
81.Editor's Note: See 35 ILCS 155/1 et seq.; and the municipal tax in 65 ILCS 5/11-8-7 and 5/
11-8-8 and Arts. VI and VII of this chapter.
§ 39-1204 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-1204
1:1507
(9) The proceeds from sales to owners, lessors or shippers of tangible
personal property which is utilized by interstate carriers for hire
for use as rolling stock moving in interstate commerce; The rolling
stock exemption applies to rolling stock used by an interstate
carrier for hire, even just between points in Illinois, if such rolling
stock transports, for hire, persons whose journeys or property
whose shipments originate or terminate outside Illinois;.
(10) The proceeds from the sale of tangible personal property to a
common carrier by rail which receives the physical possession of
such property in Illinois, and which transports such property, or
shares with another common carrier in the transportation of such
property, out of Illinois on a standard uniform bill of lading showing
the seller of the property as the shipper or consignor of such
property to a destination outside Illinois, for use outside Illinois;
(11) However, such tax is not imposed upon the privilege of engaging in
any business in interstate commerce or otherwise, which business
may not, under the Constitution and statutes of the United States,
be made the subject of taxation by the City; nor is such tax imposed
upon the sale of a motor vehicle in this City, to a nonresident even
though said motor vehicle is delivered to said nonresident in this
City, if said motor vehicle is not to be titled to a resident of this City;
(12) The proceeds from the sales of motor vehicles of the first division
which are leased for a period in excess of 12 months to a lessee who
resides outside the corporate limits of the City of Bloomington or
the Town of Normal.
B. Any informal rulings, opinions or letters issued by the Department in
response to any inquiry or request for any opinion from any person
regarding the coverage and applicability of these exemptions to specific
devises shall be published, maintained as a public record, and made
available for public inspection and copying. If the informal ruling,
opinion or letter contains trade secrets or other confidential
information, where possible the Department shall delete such
information prior to publication.
C. If any seller collects an amount (however designated) which purports to
reimburse such seller for use tax liability measured by receipts which
are not subject to use tax, or if any seller, in collecting an amount
(however designated) which purports to reimburse such seller for use
tax liability measured by receipts which are subject to tax under this
article collects more from the purchaser than the seller's use tax
liability on the transaction is, the purchaser shall have a legal right to
claim a refund of such amount from such seller. However, if such an
amount is not refunded to the purchaser for any reason, the seller is
liable to pay such amount to the Department. This paragraph does not
apply to an amount collected by the seller as reimbursement of the
seller's purchaser tax liability on receipts which are subject to tax
under this article as long as such collection is made in compliance with
§ 39-1204 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 39-1204
1:1508
§ 39-1205. [Ch. 39, Sec. 144] Certificate of registration.
the tax collection brackets prescribed by the Department in its rules
and regulations. [Ord. No. 1991-6]
A. Every retailer maintaining a place of business in the City shall obtain a
certificate of registration as a Tax Collector from the Department no
later than 30 days after commencing such business or 30 days after the
effective date of this Ordinance, whichever occurs later.
B. Application for a certificate of registration shall be made to the
Department upon forms furnished by it. Each such application shall be
signed and verified by the applicant or a properly accredited agent,
which in the case of a corporation shall include the President, any vice
President, the secretary or treasurer or some other properly accredited
agent and shall state:
(1) The name of the applicant;
(2) His residence address and the address of his principal place of
business;
(3) The address of the principal place of business from which he
engages in the business of selling tangible personal property at
retail in the City and the addresses of all other places of business, if
any (enumerating such addresses, if any, in a separate list attached
to and made a part of the application), from which he engages in
the business of selling tangible personal property at retail in the
City;
(4) The applicant's most recent annual gross receipts from the retail
sale of tangible personal property whether or not incidental to the
sale of service as reported to the Illinois Department of Revenue;
(5) The applicant's estimated receipts from sales of tangible personal
property at retail in the City for the current calendar year; and
(6) Such other information as the Department may reasonable require.
C. After notice by the Director, an applicant of holder of a certificate of
registration hereunder shall, within 30 days, furnish a bond from a
surety company authorized to do business in the State of Illinois, or a
bond signed by two personal sureties who have filed with the
Department sworn statements disclosing net assets equal to a least
three times the amount of the bond to be required of such applicant, or
a bond secured by an assignment of a bank account or certificate of
deposit, stocks or bonds, conditioned upon the applicant paying the City
all monies becoming due under this article. The Department shall fix
the amount of such security in each case, taking into consideration the
amount of money expected to become due from the applicant under this
article. The amount of security required by the Department shall be
such as, in its opinion, will protect the City against failure to pay the
§ 39-1204 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-1205
1:1509
amount which may become due from the applicant under this article,
but the amount of the security required by the Department shall not
exceed three times the amount of the applicant's average monthly
tax collection and remission liability, or $50,000 whichever amount is
lower. No certificate of registration under this article shall be issued
by the Department until the applicant provides the Department with
satisfactory security as herein provided for.
D. Upon receipt of the application for a certificate of registration in proper
form, and upon approval by the Department of the security furnished by
the applicant, the Department shall issue to such applicant a certificate
of registration.
E. If the person so registered states that he operates other places of
business as a retailer in the City, the Department shall furnish him with
a sub-certificate of registration for each such place of business. All subcertificates
of registration for each such place of business. All subcertificates
of registration shall bear the same registration number as
appearing upon the certificate of registration to which such subcertificates
relate.
F. Where the same person engages in two or more businesses as a retailer
in the City, which businesses are substantially different in character or
engaged in under different trade names or engaged in under other
substantially dissimilar circumstances (so that it is more practicable,
from an accounting, auditing or bookkeeping standpoint, for such
business to be separately registered), the Department may require or
permit such a person (subject to the same requirements concerning the
furnishing of security as those that are provided for hereinbefore in this
section as to each application for a certificate of registration) to apply
for and obtain a separate certificate of registration for each such
business or for any of such businesses, under a single certificate of
registration supplemented by related sub-certificate of registration.
G. With respect to security other than bonds (upon which the Department
may sue in the event of a forfeiture), if the Tax Collector fails to pay,
when due, any amount whose payment such security guarantees, the
Department shall, after such liability is admitted by the Tax Collector or
established by the Department through the issuance of a final
assessment that has become final under the law, convert the security
which that Tax Collector has furnished into money for the City after first
giving the Tax Collector at least 10 days' written notice, by registered
or certified mail, to pay the liability or forfeit such notice, by registered
or certified mail, to pay the liability or forfeit such security to the
Department. If the security consists of stocks or bonds or other
securities which are listed on a public exchange, the Department sell
such securities through such public exchange. If the security consists of
a bank certificate of deposit, the Department shall convert the security
into money by demanding and collecting the amount of such bank
certificate of deposit from the bank which issued such certificate. If the
security consists of a type of stocks or other securities which are not
§ 39-1205 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 39-1205
1:1510
§ 39-1206. [Ch. 39, Sec. 145] Tax returns; payments; collection fees;
deposit of collection.
listed on a public exchange, the Department shall sell such security to
the highest and best bidder after giving 10 days' notice of the date, time
and place of the intended sale by publication in a daily newspaper of
general circulation in the City. If the Department realized more than the
amount of such liability from the security, plus the expenses incurred by
the Department in converting the security into money, the Department
shall pay such excess to the Tax Collector who furnished such security
and the balance shall be paid into the Corporation Fund of the City.
H. Every retailer maintaining a place of business in the City and making
sales of tangible personal property for use in the City shall, when
collecting the tax as provided in § 39-1202 of this article from the
purchaser, give the purchaser (if demanded by the purchaser) a receipt
therefor in the manner and form prescribed by the Department. Such
receipt shall be sufficient to relieve the purchaser from further liability
for the tax to which such receipt may refer. Each such retailer shall list
with the Department the names and addresses of all his agents
operating in the City and the location of any and all of his distribution or
sales houses, offices or other places of business in the City. [Ord. No.
1990-34]
A. Except as provided in this section, every retailer required or authorized
to collect the tax imposed by this article shall, on or before the last day
of each calendar month, file a return for the preceding calendar month
with the Department, stating:
(1) The name and tax identification number of the retailer;
(2) His residence address and the address of his principal place of
business and the address of the principal place of business (if that
is a different address) from which he engages in the business of
selling tangible personal property in the City;
(3) Total amount of receipts received by him during the preceding
calendar month from sales of tangible personal property in the City
by him during such preceding calendar month;
(4) Total amount received by him during the preceding calendar month
on charge and time sales of tangible personal property in the City
by him prior to the month for which the return is filed;
(5) Deductions allowed by law;
(6) Gross receipts which were received by him during the preceding
calendar month and upon the basis of which the tax upon
purchasers from him is imposed;
(7) The amount of tax due;
§ 39-1205 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-1206
1:1511
(8) The amount of penalty due, if any; and
(9) Such other reasonable information as the Department may require.
B. Notwithstanding any other provision in this article concerning the time
within which a retailer may file his return, in the case of any retailer
who ceases to engage in a kind of business which make him responsible
for filing returns under this article, such retailer shall file a final return
under this article with the Department not more than one month after
discontinuing such business.
C. Where the same person has more than one business registered with the
Department under separate registrations under this article, such
person may not file each return that is due as a single return covering
all such registered businesses, but shall file separate returns for each
such registered business.
D. Refunds to purchasers made by the retailer during the preceding return
period shall be allowed as a deduction under Subsection E of this
section, in case the retailer had theretofore included the receipts from
such sale in a return filed by him and has remitted the tax imposed by
this article with respect to such receipts.
E. Where the retailer is a corporation, the return filed on behalf of such
corporation shall be signed by the President, vice President, secretary
or treasurer or by the properly accredited agent of such corporation or
by the chief executive officer or highest ranking manager.
F. Except as provided in this section, the retailer filing the return under
this section shall, at the time of filing such return, pay to the
Department the amount of tax imposed by this article less a discount of
1.75% which is allowed to reimburse the seller for the expenses
incurred in collecting the tax, keeping records, preparing and filing
returns, remitting the tax and supplying data to the Department on
request.
G. All such deposits shall be credited against the Tax Collector's liabilities
under this article.
H. If the Tax Collector's average monthly liability to the Department under
this article was $25,000 or more during the preceding four complete
calendar quarters, he shall file a return with the Department each
month by the end of the month next following the month during which
such liability is incurred and shall make payments to the Department on
or before the 7th, 15th, 22nd and last day of the month during which
such liability is incurred in an amount equal to 1/4 of the Tax Collector's
actual liability for the month or an amount set by the Department not to
exceed 1/4 of the average monthly liability of the Tax Collector to the
Department for the preceding four complete calendar quarters
(excluding the month of highest liability and the month of lowest
liability in such four quarter period). The amount of such quarter
monthly payments shall be credited against the final tax liability on the
§ 39-1206 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 39-1206
1:1512
Tax Collector's return for that month. Once applicable, the requirement
of the making of quarter monthly payments to the Department shall
continue until such Tax Collector's average monthly liability to the
Department during the preceding four complete calendar quarters
(excluding the month of highest liability and the month of lowest
liability) is less than $9,000 or until such Tax Collector's average
monthly liability to the Department as computed for each calendar
quarter of the four preceding complete calendar quarter period is less
than $10,000. If any such quarter monthly payment is not paid at
the time or in the amount required by this section, then the 1.75%
Tax Collector's discount shall be reduced by 1.75% of the difference
between the minimum amount due as a payment and the amount of
such quarter monthly payment actually and timely paid, except insofar
as the Tax Collector has previously made payments for that month to
the Department in excess of the minimum payments previously due as
provided in this section. The Department shall make reasonable rules
and regulations to govern the quarter monthly payment amount and
quarter monthly payment dates for Tax Collectors who file on other
than a calendar monthly basis.
I. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, for the first
twelve-month period this tax is in effect, the Department may estimate
what the amount of liability from any Tax Collector would have been for
prior periods if the tax hereunder had been in effect for such periods
and direct the frequency of remittance of the tax and filing of returns in
accordance with the provisions of this section on the basis of such
estimates.
J. If any such payment or deposit provided for in this section exceed the
Tax Collector's present and probable future liabilities under this article,
the Department shall issue to the taxpayer no later than 60 days after
the date of payment a credit memorandum, which may be submitted by
the Tax Collector to the Department in payment of liability subsequently
to be remitted by the Tax Collector to the Department or be assigned by
the Tax Collector to a similar Tax Collector under this article, in
accordance with reasonable rules and regulations to be prescribed by
the Department.
K. Any deposit previously made by a Tax Collector who is required to make
quarter monthly payments under this article shall be applied against
the Tax Collector's liability to the Department under this article for the
month preceding the first month in which the Tax Collector is required
to make such quarter monthly payments. If the deposit exceeds that
liability, the Department may issue the Tax Collector a credit
memorandum for the excess.
L. The money received by the Department under the provisions of this
article shall be deposited in the General Funds of the City as directed by
the City Council.
§ 39-1206 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-1206
1:1513
M. The Department may require the Tax Collector to prepare and file with
the Department on a form prescribed by the Department within 15 days
after filing the State income tax return for his fiscal year an annual
information return for such fiscal year. Such annual return to the
Department shall include a statement of receipts as shown by the
retailer's last State income tax return. If the total receipts of the
business as reported in the State income tax return do not agree with
the receipts" reported to the Department for the same period. The
retailer shall attach to his annual return a schedule showing a
reconciliation of the two amounts and the reasons for the difference.
The retailer's annual return to the Department shall also disclose any
additional reasonable information" which the Department deems would
be helpful in determining the accuracy of the quarter-monthly, or
monthly returns filed by such seller as provided for in this section. The
provisions of this section concerning the filing of an annual information
return do not apply to a retailer who is not required to file an income tax
return with the United States Government.
N. If the annual information return by this section is not filed with and as
required, the Tax Collector shall be liable for a penalty equal to 1/6 of
1% of" the amount due from such Tax Collector under this article during
the period to be covered by the annual return for each month or
fraction of a month until such return is filed as required, the penalty to
be assessed and collected in the same manner as any other penalty
provided for this article.
O. The President, vice President, secretary or treasurer, chief executive
officer, proprietor, owner or highest ranking manager shall sign any
return required to be filed under this section to certify the accuracy of
the information contained therein. Any person who willfully signs any
such return containing false or inaccurate information shall be guilty of
a violation of this article and punished accordingly. The return forms
prescribed by the Department shall include a warning that the person
signing such return may be liable for a penalty as provided by this
article.
P. Any person engaged in the business of selling tangible personal
property at retail as a concessionaire or other type of seller at art
shows, flea markets and similar exhibitions or events may be required
to make a daily report of the amount of such sales to the Department
and to make a daily payment of the full amount of tax due. The
Department shall impose this requirement when it finds that there is a
significant risk of loss of revenue to the City at such an exhibition or
event. Such a finding shall be based on evidence that a substantial
number of concessionaires or other sellers who are not residents of the
City will be engaging in the business of selling tangible personal
property at retail at the exhibition or event, or other evidence of a
significant risk of loss of revenue to the City. The Department shall
notify concessionaires and other sellers affected by the imposition of
this requirement. In the absence of notification by the Department, the
§ 39-1206 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 39-1206
1:1514
concessionaires and other sellers shall file their returns as otherwise
required in this section.
Q. With respect to motor vehicles and aircraft, every retailer selling this
kind of tangible personal property shall file, with the Department, upon
a form to be prescribed and supplied by the Department" a separate
return for each such item of tangible personal property which the
retailer sells, except that where, in the same transaction, a retailer of
motor vehicles transfers more than one motor vehicle to another motor
vehicle retailer for the purpose of resale, such seller for resale may
report the transfer of all the motor vehicles involved in that transaction
to the Department on the same uniform invoice transaction reporting
return form.
R. Each transaction reporting return in the case of motor vehicles shall be
the same document as the Uniform Invoice referred to in Section 5-402
of the Illinois Vehicle Code82 and must show the name and address of
the seller, the name and address of the purchaser, the amount of the
selling price, including the amount allowed by the retailer for traded-in
property, if any; the amount allowed by the retailer for the traded-in
tangible personal property, if to the extent to which § 39-1201 of this
article allows an exemption for the value of traded-in property; the
balance payable after deducting such trade-in allowance from the total
selling price; the amount of tax due from the retailer with respect to
such transaction; the amount of tax collected from the purchaser by the
retailer on such transaction (or satisfactory evidence that such tax is
not due in that particular instance, if that is claimed to be the fact); the
place and date of the sale; a sufficient identification of the property
sold; such other information as is required in Section 5-402 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code, and such other information as the Department
may reasonably require.
S. Such transaction reporting return in the case of aircraft must show the
name and address of the retailer; the name and address of the
purchaser; the amount of the selling price including the amount
allowed by the retailer for traded-in property, if any; the amount
allowed by the retailer for the traded-in tangible, personal property, if
any, to the extent to which § 39-1203 of this Ordinance allowed an
exemption for the traded-in property; the balance payable after
deducting such trade-in allowance from the total selling price; the
amount of tax due from the retailer with respect to such transaction (or
satisfactory evidence that such tax is not due in that particular
instance, if that is claimed to be the fact); the place and date of the sale,
a sufficient identification of the property sold, and such other
information as the Department may reasonably require.
T. Such transaction reporting return shall be filed not later than 30 days
after the date of delivery of the item that is being sold, but may be filed
by the retailer at any time sooner than that if he chooses to do so. With
82.Editor's Note: See 625 ILCS 5/5-402.
§ 39-1206 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-1206
1:1515
§ 39-1207. [Ch. 39, Sec. 146] Resale number.
each such transaction reporting return, the retailer shall remit the
proper amount of tax due (or shall submit satisfactory evidence that the
sale is not taxable if that is the case), to the Department or its agents,
whereupon the Department shall issue) in the purchaser's name, a tax
receipt (or a certificate of exemption if the Department is satisfied that
the particular sales is tax exempt).
U. If the purchaser or user who would otherwise pay tax to the retailer
wants the transaction reporting return filed and the payment of tax or
proof of exemption made to the Department before the retailer is
willing to take these actions and such purchaser or user may certify to
the fact of such delay by the retailer, and may (upon the Department
being, satisfied of the truth of such certification) transmit the
information required by the transaction reporting return and the
remittance for tax or proof of exemption directly to the Department and
obtain his tax receipt or exemption determination, in which event the
transaction reporting return and tax remittance (if a tax payment was
required) shall be credited by the Department to the proper retailer's
account with the Department, but without the 1.75% discount provided
for in this section being allowed When the purchaser or user pays the
tax directly to the Department, he shall pay the tax in the same amount
and in the same form in which it would be remitted if the tax had been
remitted to the Department by the retailer.
V. Any retailer filing a return under this section shall also include (for the
purpose of paying tax thereon) the total tax, if any, imposed upon him
hereunder for the purpose or use of tangible personal property
purchased by him at retail from a retailer, but as to which the tax
imposed by this chapter was not collected from the retailer filing such
return, and such retailer shall remit the amount of such tax to the
Department when filing such return. [Ord. No. 1990-34]
A. If the purchaser is not registered with the Department as a Tax
Collector, but claims to be a re-seller of the tangible personal property
in such a way that the purchaser's purchase or use is not taxable under
this article or under some other tax, collection of which the Department
may administer, such purchaser (except in the case of an out-of-town
purchaser who will always resell and deliver the property to his
customers outside the City) shall apply to the Department for a resale
number. Such applicant shall state facts which will show the
Department why such applicant is not liable for tax under this article or
under some other tax law which the Department may administer and
shall furnish such additional information as the Department may
reasonably require.
B. Upon approval of the application, the Department shall assign a resale
number to the applicant and shall certify such number to him. The
Department may cancel any such number which is obtained through
misrepresentation, or which is used to make a purchase or use tax-free
§ 39-1206 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 39-1207
1:1516
§ 39-1208. [Ch. 39, Sec. 147] Payment by purchaser-lessor.
when the purchase in fact is not a purchase for resale, or which no
longer applies because of the purchaser's having discontinued the
making of resales of the property. Except as provided hereinabove in
this section, no purchase or use shall be made tax-free on the ground
of the retailer's sale being a sale for resale unless the purchaser has
an active registration number or resale number from the Department
and furnishes that number to the retailer in connection with certifying
to the retailer that any purchase or use by such purchaser is nontaxable
because of the retailer's sale being a sale for resale. [Ord. No.
1990-34]
A. When tangible personal property is purchased from a retailer in the
City by a purchaser who did not pay the tax imposed by this article to
the retailer, and who does not file returns with the Department as a
retailer under § 39-1205 of this article, such purchaser (by the last day
of the month following the calendar month in which such purchaser
makes any payment upon the selling price of such property) shall,
except as provided in this section, file a return with the Department and
pay the tax upon that portion of the selling price so paid by the
purchaser during the preceding calendar month. When tangible
personal property is purchased by a lessor, under a lease for one year or
longer, executed or in effect at the time of purchase to an interstate
carrier for hire, who did not pay the tax imposed by this article to the
retailer, such lessor (by the last day of the month following the calendar
month in which such property reverts to the use of such lessor) shall file
a return with the Department and pay the tax upon the fair market
value of such property on the date of such reversion. Such return shall
be filed on a form prescribed by the Department and shall contain such
information as the Department may reasonably require. Such return
and payment from the purchaser shall be submitted to the Department
sooner than the last day of the month after the month in which the
purchase is made to the extent that they may be necessary in order to
secure the title to a motor vehicle or the certificate of registration for an
aircraft.
B. When a purchaser pays a tax imposed by this article directly to the
Department, the Department (upon request therefor from such
purchaser) shall issue an appropriate receipt to such purchaser
showing that he had paid such tax to the Department. Such receipt shall
be sufficient to relieve the purchaser from further liability for the tax to
which such receipt may refer. A purchaser or user who is liable to pay
tax directly to the Department only occasionally and not on a frequently
recurring basis, and who is not required to file returns with the
Department as a retailer under § 39-1205 of this article, need not
register with the Department. However, if such a purchaser or user has
a frequently recurring direct tax liability to pay to the Department, such
purchaser or user shall be required to register with the Department on
forms prescribed by the Department and to obtain and display a
§ 39-1207 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-1208
1:1517
§ 39-1209. [Ch. 39, Sec. 148] Filing; penalties; suit for collections.
certificate of registration from the Department. In that event, all of the
provisions of § 39-1205 of this article concerning the filing of regular
monthly, quarterly or annual tax returns and all of the provisions of
this article concerning the requirements for registrants to post bond or
other security with the Department, as the provisions now exist or may
hereafter be amended, shall apply to such purchasers or users. [Ord.
No. 1990-34]
A. In case any person liable for payment of the tax imposed by this article
fails to file a return when and as herein required, but hereafter, prior to
the Department's issuance of a notice of tax liability under this section,
files a return and pays the tax, he shall also pay a penalty of 7.5% of the
amount of the tax.
B. In case any person liable for payment of the tax imposed by this article
files the return at the time required by this article but fails to pay the
tax, or any part thereof, when due, a penalty of 7.5% of the amount of
the tax unpaid when due shall be added thereto.
C. In case any person liable for payment of the tax imposed by this article
fails to file a return when and as herein required, but thereafter, prior to
the Department's issuance of a notice of tax liability under this section,
files a return but fails to pay the entire tax, a penalty of 7.5% of the full
amount of tax shown by such return shall be added thereto.
D. In case any person liable for payment of the tax imposed by this article
fails to file a return, the Department shall determine the amount of tax
due from him according to its best judgment and information, which
amount so fixed by the Department shall be prima facie correct and
shall be prima facie evidence of the correctness of the amount of tax
due, as shown in such determination. In making any such determination
of tax due, it shall be permissible for the Department to show a figure
that represents the tax due for any given period of six months instead of
showing the amount of tax due for each month separately. Proof of such
determination by the Department may be made at any hearing before
the Department or in any legal proceeding by a reproduced copy of the
Department's record relating thereto in the name of the Department
under the certificate of the Director. Such reproduced copy shall,
without further proof, be admitted into evidence before the Department
or in any legal proceeding and shall be prima facie proof of the
correctness of the amount of tax due, as shown therein. The
Department shall issue to the Tax Collector a notice of tax liability for
the amount of tax claimed by the Department to be due, together with a
penalty of 30% thereof.
E. However, where the failure to file any tax return required under this
article on the date prescribed therefor (including any extensions
thereof), is due to reasonable cause, the penalties imposed by this
article shall not apply.
§ 39-1208 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 39-1209
1:1518
§ 39-1210. [Ch. 39, Sec. 149] Records; audits.
F. In case of failure to pay the tax, or any portion thereof, or any penalty
provided for in this article, or interest, when due, the Department may
bring suit against the Tax Collector or the purchaser or user to recover
the amount of such tax or portion thereof, or penalty or interest; or, if
the Tax Collector or purchaser or user has died or become incompetent,
may file a claim therefore against his estate; provided that no such suit
with respect to any tax, or portion thereof, or penalty, or interest shall
be instituted more than six years after the date any proceedings in
court for review thereof have terminated or the time for the taking
thereof has expired without such proceedings being instituted, except
with the consent of the person from whom such tax or penalty or
interest is due; nor, except with such consent, shall such suit be
instituted more than six years after the date any return is filed with the
Department in cases where the return constitutes the basis for the suit
for unpaid tax or portion thereof, or penalty provided for in this article,
or interest: Provided that the time limitation period on the
Department's right to bring any such suit shall not run during any
period of time in which the order of any court has the effect of enjoining
or restraining the Department from bringing such suit. [Ord. No.
2014-21]
G. The collection of tax or penalty or interest by any means provided for
herein shall not be a bar to collection by and any other means or to any
prosecution under this article.
H. In addition to any penalty provided for in this article, any amount of tax
which is not paid when due shall bear interest at the rate of 2% per
month or fraction thereof from the date when such tax becomes past
due until such tax is paid or a judgment therefor is obtained by the
Department; provided, if an audit of a Tax Collector's books and records
is extended with the Tax Collector's consent, at the request of and for
the convenience of the Department, beyond the date on which the
statute of limitations upon the issuance of a notice of tax liability by the
Department otherwise would run, no interest shall accrue during the
period of such extension. [Ord. No. 1990-34]
A. Every person engaged in the business of selling tangible personal
property at retail in the City shall keep records and books of all such
sales, together with invoices, sales records, copies of bills of sale,
inventories prepared as of December 31 of each year or otherwise
annually as has been the custom in the specific trade and other
pertinent papers and documents. Every person who is engaged in the
business of selling tangible personal property at retail in the City and
who, in connection with such business, also engages in other activities,
shall keep such additional records and books of all such activities as will
accurately reflect the character and scope of such activities and the
amount of receipts realized therefrom.
§ 39-1209 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-1210
1:1519
§ 39-1211. [Ch. 39, Sec. 150] Process; service. [Ord. No. 1990-34]
Any resident of the City who incurs liability under this article and who
subsequently removes from the City or conceals his whereabouts, and any
person who incurs tax liability under this article as a purchaser in the
City and who removes from the City or conceals his whereabouts, shall
be deemed thereby to appoint the City Clerk his agent for the service of
B. All books and records and other papers and documents which are
required by this article to be kept shall be kept in the English language
and shall, at all times during business hours of the day, be subject to
inspection by the Department or its duly authorized agents and
employees. To support deductions made on the tax return form, or
authorized under this article, on account of receipts from isolated or
occasional sales, on account of receipts from sales to government
bodies or other exempted types of purchasers, on account of receipts
from sales in interstate commerce, and on account of receipts from any
other kind of transaction that is not taxable under this article, entries in
any books, records or other pertinent papers or documents of the Tax
Collector in relation thereto shall be in detail sufficient to show the
name and address of the Tax Collector's customer in each such
transaction, the character of every such transaction, the date of every
such transaction, the amount of receipts realized from every such
transaction, and such other information as may be necessary to
establish the nontaxable character of such transaction under this
article.
C. It shall be presumed that all sales of tangible personal property are
subject to tax under this article until the contrary is established, and
the burden of proving that a transaction is not taxable hereunder shall
be upon the person who would be required to remit the tax to the
Department if such transaction is taxable. In the course of any audit or
investigation or hearing by the Department with reference to a given
taxpayer, if the Department finds that the taxpayer lacks documentary
evidence needed to support the taxpayer's claim to exemption from the
tax hereunder, the Department is authorized to notify the taxpayer in
writing to produce such evidence, and the taxpayer shall have 60 days
subject to the right in the Department to extend, this period on request
for good cause shown or on its own motion from the date when such
notice is sent to the taxpayer by certified or registered mail (or
delivered to the taxpayer if the notice is served personally) in which to
obtain and produce such evidence for the Department's inspection,
failing which the matter shall be closed, and the transaction shall be
conclusively presumed to be taxable hereunder. Books and records and
other papers reflecting gross receipts received during any period with
respect to which the Department is authorized to issue notices of tax
liability as provided by §§ 39-1208 and 39-1209 of this article shall be
preserved until the expiration of such period unless the Department, in
writing, shall authorize their destruction or disposal prior of such
expiration. [Ord. No. 1990-34]
§ 39-1210 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 39-1211
1:1520
process or notice in any or judicial or administrative proceeding under this
article. Such process or notice shall be served by the Department to the City
Clerk by leaving, at the office of the City Clerk at least 15 days before the
return day of such process or notice, a true and certified copy thereof, and
by sending to the taxpayer by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid,
a like and true certified copy, with an endorsement thereon of the service
upon said City Clerk, addressed to such taxpayer or Tax Collector at his last
known address. Service of process of notice in the manner provided for in
this section, under the circumstances specified in this section, shall be of
the same force and validity as if served upon the taxpayer personally within
the City Proof of such service upon the taxpayer through the City Clerk as
his agent and by mailing to the last known address of the taxpayer may be
made in such judicial or administrative proceeding by the affidavit of the
Director, or by his duly authorized representative who made such service,
with a copy of the process or notice that was so served attached to such
affidavit.
§ 39-1212. [Ch. 39, Sec. 151] Rules and regulations. [Ord. No.
1990-34]
It shall be the duty of the Department to collect and receive the tax imposed
by this article. The Department shall keep an accurate and separate account
of all such tax payments received by it showing the name and address of
the person remitting the tax and the date of each payment. The Director
is hereby empowered to adopt and promulgate, and to enforce, rules and
regulations relating to any matter or thing pertaining to the administration
and enforcement of the provisions of the Article, including provisions for
re-examination, correction and amendment of all returns. The Director, or
any agent or employee designated in writing by him, is hereby authorized to
examine the books, papers and records of any Tax Collector during regular
business hours, in order to certify the accuracy of any return made, or if no
return was made, to ascertain the tax imposed by this article.
§ 39-1213. [Ch. 39, Sec. 152] Error; claim for credit; hearing.
A. Whenever it appears to a person paying or remitting the tax that an
amount of tax, interest or penalty has been paid in error to the
Department by him, whether such amount be paid through a mistake of
fact or error of law, not later than one year from the date upon which
such payment was made, such person may file a claim for credit or
refund with the Department on forms provided by said Department for
that purpose. [Ord. No. 1990-34]
B. A claim for credit or refund shall be considered to have been filed with
the Department on the date upon which it is received by the
Department, and receipt of any claim for credit filed under this section
shall be acknowledged by the Director of any designated person on his
behalf, said receipt to describe the claim in sufficient detail as to
identify it, and to state the date upon which the claim was received by
the Department. [Ord. No. 1990-34]
§ 39-1211 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-1213
1:1521
§ 39-1214. [Ch. 39, Sec. 153] Deficiency demand; notice; hearing.
C. As soon as practicable after a claim for credit or refund is filed, the
Director, or his designate, shall examine the same and determine the
amount of credit or refund due, if any, and shall issue a Notice of
Tentative Determination of Claim and notify the claimant of such
determination. If the claimant disagrees with the determination, he
shall file a protest and challenge thereto within the 20 days allowed.
The City Manager, or his designate, shall fix the time and place for a
hearing thereon, giving notice to the claimant thereof, not less than
seven days prior thereto. At any hearing held as herein provided, the
Tentative Determination of Claim shall be prima facie correct and the
burden shall be upon the claimant to prove that it is incorrect. Upon the
conclusion of the hearing, a decision shall be made by the City
Manager, or his designate, and notice thereof given to the claimant. In
the event no protest or challenge to the Tentative Determination of
Claim is filed within the twenty-day period hereinabove set forth, said
notice shall thereafter become and operate as a final determination.
[Ord. No. 1990-34]
D. The Director may in his discretion issue a letter of credit to a claimant
who may be able to use said credit in the foreseeable future, or a refund
certificate in lieu of a credit memorandum on application by a person
who cannot use said credit, or sell or assign the same. Refund
certificates shall be numbered serially as they are issued and shall be
paid in the order of their issuance from funds that are appropriated to
the Department for that purpose. [Ord. No. 1990-34]
A. If it shall appear to the Director that any person has violated any
provision of this article or any rule or regulation promulgated
hereunder, or if the amount of any tax payment is incorrect in that it
does not include all taxes payable for such calendar quarter or period,
or if the Director shall find that the collection of any taxes which have
accrued but are not yet due will be jeopardized by delay, and declares
said taxes to be immediately due and payable, or if it shall appear to the
Director that he has made any final assessment which did not include
taxes payable for the periods involved, or if it appears to the Director
that any person has, by reason of any act or omission or by operation of
law, become liable for the payment of any taxes, interest or penalties
not originally incurred by him, the Director may in any of the above
events determine and assess the amount of such taxes of deficiency, as
the case may be, together with the interest and penalties due and
unpaid, and immediately serve notice upon such person of such
determination and assessment and make a demand for payment of the
tax together with interest and penalties thereon. If the person incurring
any such liability has died, such assessment may at the discretion of the
Director be made against his personal representative. Such
determination and assessment by the director shall be final at the
expiration of 20 days from the date of the service of such written notice
thereof and demand for payment, unless such person shall have filed
§ 39-1213 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 39-1214
1:1522
§ 39-1215. [Ch. 39, Sec. 154] Investigation; hearing; evidence. [Ord.
No. 1990-34]
For the purpose of administering and enforcing the provisions of this article,
the City Manager, or any officer or employee of the Department or City
designated, in writing, by the City Manager thereof, may hold investigations
and hearings concerning any matters covered by this article and may
with the City Manager a written protest and a petition for a hearing,
specifying its objections thereto.
Upon the receipt of such petition within the 20 days allowed, the City
Manager, or his designate, shall fix the time and place for a hearing
and shall notify the petitioner thereof. The Director may amend his
determination and assessment at any time before it becomes final. In
the event of such amendment, the person affected shall be given notice
thereof and an opportunity to be heard in connection therewith. At
any hearing held as herein provided, the determination and the burden
shall be upon the protesting person to prove that it is incorrect. Upon
the conclusion of such hearing, a decision shall be made by the City
Manager, or his designate, either canceling, increasing, modifying or
affirming such determination or assessment and notice thereof given
to the petitioner. Such notice shall contain a statement by the City
Manager, or his designate, of the cost of the certification of the record
computed at the rate of $0.05 per 100 words, which cost shall be
charged to the petitioner if the determination or assessment is
affirmed. The record shall consist of the notices and demands caused to
be served by the Director, the written protest and petition for hearing,
the testimony introduced at such hearing, the exhibits produced at such
hearing, or certified copies thereof, the decisions of the City Manager,
or his designate, and such other documents in the nature of pleading
filed in the proceeding. [Ord. No. 1990-34]
B. Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax as herein provided, the
Corporation Counsel shall, upon the request of the Department, bring
or cause to be brought an action to enforce the payment of said tax on
behalf of the City in any court of competent jurisdiction. [Ord. No.
1990-34]
C. If the City Manager, after notice and hearing, shall find that any person
has willfully evaded payment or collection and remittance of the tax
imposed by this article, he may suspend or revoke all City licenses held
by such tax evader. Said person shall have an opportunity to be heard at
such hearing to be held not less than seven days after notice is given to
him of the time and place of the hearing to be held, addressed to him at
this last known place of business. Pending notice, hearing and finding,
any license issued by the City possessed by said person may be
temporarily suspended. Any suspension or revocation of any license
shall not release or discharge said person from his civil liability for the
payment or collection and remittance of the tax, nor from prosecution
for such offense. [Ord. No. 1990-34]
§ 39-1214 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-1215
1:1523
examine any books, papers, records or memoranda bearing upon the sales
or purchases of services of any such person, and may require the
attendance of such person or any officer or employee of such person, or
of any person having knowledge of such business, and may take testimony
and require proof for its information. In the conduct of any investigation
or hearing, neither the Department nor any officer or employee thereof
shall be bound by the technical rules of evidence, and no informality in
any proceeding, or in the manner of taking testimony, shall invalidate any
order, decision, rule or regulation made or approved or confirmed by the
Department. The City Manager, the Director, or any officer or employee of
the Department or City authorized by the City Manager or Director thereof,
shall have power to administer oaths to such persons. The books, papers,
records and memoranda of the Department, or parts thereof, may be proved
in any hearing, investigation, or legal proceeding by a reproduced copy
thereof under the certificate of the Director. Such reproduced copy shall,
without further proof, be admitted into evidence before the Department or
in any legal proceeding.
§ 39-1216. [Ch. 39, Sec. 155] Testimony; perjury. [Ord. No. 1990-34]
No person shall be excused from testifying or from producing any books,
papers, records or memoranda in any investigations or upon any hearing,
when ordered to do so by the City Manager or Department or any officer
or employee thereof, upon the grounds that the testimony or evidence,
documentary or otherwise, may tend to incriminate him or subject him
to a criminal penalty, but no person shall be prosecuted or subjected to
any criminal penalty for, or on account of, any transaction made or thing
concerning which he may testify or produce evidence, documentary or
otherwise, before the City Manager or Department or an officer or employee
thereof; provided, that such immunity be granted by the appropriate
executive branch of government and extend only to a natural person who in
obedience to a subpoena, gives testimony under oath or produces evidence,
documentary or otherwise, under oath. No person so testifying shall be
exempt from prosecution and punishment for perjury committed in so
testifying.
§ 39-1217. [Ch. 39, Sec. 156] Subpoenas; contempt.
A. The Department, the City Manager, or any officer or employee of the
City or Department designated, in writing, by the Director, shall at its or
his own instance, or on the written request of any other party to the
proceeding, issue subpoenas duces tecum requiring the production of
books, papers, records or memoranda. All subpoenas and subpoenas
duces tecum issued under the terms of this article may be served by any
person of full age. The fees of witnesses for attendance and travel shall
be the same as the fees of witnesses before the Circuit Court of this
State; such fees to be paid when the witness is excused from further
attendance. When the witness is subpoenaed at the instance of the City
or any other employee thereof, such fees shall be paid in the same
manner as other expenses of the Department, and when the witness is
§ 39-1215 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 39-1217
1:1524
§ 39-1218. [Ch. 39, Sec. 157] Privacy.
subpoenaed at the instance of any other party to any such proceeding,
the City may require that the cost of service of the subpoena or
subpoena duces tecum and the fee of the witness be borne by the party
at whose instance the witness is summoned. In such case, the City, in its
discretion, may require a deposit to cover the cost of such service and
witness fees. A subpoena or subpoena duces tecum issued as aforesaid
shall be served in the same manner as a subpoena issued out of a court.
B. Any circuit of this State, or any judge thereof, upon the application of
the City Manager or any officer or employee of the City, or upon the
application of any other party to the proceeding, may, in its or his
discretion, compel the attendance of witnesses, the production of
books, papers, records or memoranda and the giving of testimony
before the Department or any officer or employee thereof conducting
an investigation or holding a hearing authorized by this article 'by an
attachment for contempt, or otherwise, in the same manner as
production of evidence may be compelled before said court.
C. The Department or any officer or employee thereof, or any other party
in an investigation or hearing before the Department, may cause the
depositions of witnesses to be taken in the manner prescribed by law
for like depositions in civil actions in courts of this State, and to that
end compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books,
papers, records or memoranda. [Ord. No. 1990-34]
A. All information received by the Department from returns filed under
this article or from any investigation conducted under this article, shall
be confidential, except for official purposes, and any person who
divulges any such information in any manner, except in accordance with
a proper judicial order or as otherwise provided by law, shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed $500.
B. Nothing in this article prevents the Director from publishing or making
available to the public the names and addresses of persons filing
returns under this article, or reasonable statistics concerning the
operation of the tax by grouping the contents of returns for the
information in any individual return is not disclosed.
C. Nothing in this article prevents the Director from divulging to the
United States Government or the government of any state, or any
officer or agency thereof, for exclusively official purposes, information
received by the Department in administering this article providing that
such other governmental agency agrees to divulge requested tax
information to the Department.
D. The Department's furnishing of information derived from a Tax
Collector's return or from an investigation conducted, under this article
to the surety on a Tax Collector's bond that has been furnished to the
Department under this article, in order to support the Department's
§ 39-1217 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-1218
1:1525
§ 39-1219. [Ch. 39, Sec. 158] Services of notices.
§ 39-1220. [Ch. 39, Sec. 159] Corporations; officers. [Ord. No.
1990-34]
Any offices or employee of any corporation subject to the provisions of this
article who has the control, supervision or responsibility of filing returns
and collecting and making payment of the amount of tax herein imposed
and who willfully fails to file such return or to collect and make such
payment to the Department shall be personally liable for such amounts,
including interest and penalties thereon, in the event that after proper
proceedings for the collection of such amounts, as provided in this article,
such corporation is unable to pay such amounts to the Department; and
the personal liability of such officer or employee as provided herein shall
survive the dissolution of the Corporation.
§ 39-1221. [Ch. 39, Sec. 160] Violations; penalties. [Ord. No.
1990-34]
Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting, or
refusing to comply with, or resisting or opposing the enforcement of any of
the provisions of this article except when otherwise specifically provided,
upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not less than $50 nor
more than $10,000 for the first offense and not less than $1,000 no more
than $100,000 or five times the amount of tax imposed, if any, whichever
is higher, for the second and each subsequent offense in anyone 180-day
period, provided, however, that all actions seeking the imposition of fines
only shall be filed as quasi criminal actions subject to the provisions of
the Code of Civil Procedure (Ill. Rev. Stat., Ch. 110, P.1-101, et seq.).
Repeated offenses in excess of three within any 180-day period may also be
demand for payment from such surety under this bond, is an official
purpose within the meaning of this section.
E. The furnishing upon request of the City Auditor or his authorized
agents, for official use, or returns filed and information related thereto
under this article is deemed to be an official purpose within the
meaning of this section. [Ord. No. 1990-34]
A. Whenever notice is required by this Ordinance, such notice may be
given by United States registered or certified mail, addressed to the
person concerned at his last known address, and proof of such mailing
shall be sufficient for the purposes of this article. Notice of any hearing
provided for by this article shall be so given not less than seven days
prior to the day fixed for the hearing. Following the initial contact of a
person represented by an attorney, the Department shall not contact
the person concerned but shall only contact the attorney representing
the person concerned.
B. All hearings provided for in this article shall be at the City's office or at
a place designated by the hearing officer. [Ord. No. 1990-34]
§ 39-1218 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 39-1221
1:1526
punishable as a misdemeanor by incarceration in the County Jail for a term
not to exceed six months under the procedures set forth in Section 1-2-1.1
of the Illinois Municipal Code (Ill. Rev. Stat., Ch. 24, P.1-2-1.1) and under
the provisions of the Illinois Code of Criminal Procedures (Ill. Rev. Stat.,
Ch. 38, P100-1 et seq.) in a separate proceeding. A separate and distinct
offense shall be regarded as committed each day upon which said person
shall continue any such violation, or permit any such violation to exist after
notification thereof.
§ 39-1222. [Ch. 39, Sec. 161] Legislative interest; severability. [Ord.
No. 1990-34]
If any provision of this article or application thereof to any person or
circumstance is held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such invalidity
does not affect other provisions or applications of this article which can
be given effect without the invalid application or provision, and to this end
each such invalid provision or invalid application of this article is severable,
unless otherwise provided by this article. In particular, but without
limitation, each provision creating an exception to or an exemption or
exclusion from the imposition of the tax is severable. It is hereby declared
to be the legislative intent of the City Council that this article would have
been adopted had any such unconstitutional or otherwise invalid provision
or application not been included.
§ 39-1221 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-1222
1:1527

ARTICLE XIII
Home Rule Gas Use Tax
§ 39-1301. [Ch. 39, Sec. 170] Short title. [Ord. No. 2014-38]
The tax imposed by this article shall be known as the "Municipal Gas Use
Tax" and is imposed in addition to all other taxes imposed by the City of
Bloomington, the State of Illinois or any other municipal corporation or
political subdivision thereof.
§ 39-1302. [Ch. 39, Sec. 171] Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
PERSON — Any individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association,
joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company,
municipal corporation or political subdivision of this state, or a receiver,
trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of any
court.
PUBLIC UTILITIES ACT — The Public Utilities Act as amended (220 ILCS 5/
1-101 et seq.).
PUBLIC UTILITY — A public utility as defined in Section 3-105 of the Public
Utilities Act.
RETAIL PURCHASER — Any Person who purchases natural gas in a Sale at
Retail.
SALE AT RETAIL — Any sale of natural gas by a retailer to a Person for
use or consumption, and not for resale. For this purpose, the term "retailer"
means any Person engaged in the business of distributing, supplying,
furnishing or selling natural gas.[Ord. No. 2014-38]
§ 39-1303. [Ch. 39, Sec. 172] Tax.
A. Except as otherwise provided by this article, a tax is imposed on the
privilege of using or consuming natural gas in the City that is purchased
in a Sale at Retail at the rate of $0.019 per therm.
B. The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of the tax is on the
Retail Purchaser, and nothing in this article shall be construed to
impose a tax on the occupation of distributing, supplying, furnishing,
selling or transporting gas.
C. The Retail Purchaser shall pay the tax, measured by therms of gas
delivered to the Retail Purchase's premises, to:
(1) The Public Utility designated to collect the tax pursuant to
§ 39-1304 of this article on or before the payment due date of the
Public Utility's bill first reflecting the tax, or
(2) Directly to the City Treasurer on or before the 15th day of the
second month following the month in which the gas is delivered to
§ 39-1301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-1303
1:1529
§ 39-1304. [Ch. 39, Sec. 173] Collection of tax by public utility.
The Mayor, City Treasurer, City Manager and City Finance Director are
each authorized to enter into a contract for collection of the tax imposed
by this article with any Public Utility providing gas service in the City.
The contract shall include and substantially conform with the following
provisions:
the Retail Purchaser if no Public Utility has been designated to
collect the tax pursuant to § 39-1304 or if the gas is delivered by a
person other than a Public Utility so designated.
D. Nothing in this article shall be construed to impose a tax upon any
person, business or activity which, under the constitutions of the United
States or State of Illinois, may not be made the subject of taxation by
the City.
E. A person who purchases natural gas for resale and therefore does not
pay the tax imposed by this article with respect to the use or
consumption of the natural gas, but who later uses or consumes part or
all of the natural gas, shall pay the tax directly to the City Treasurer on
or before the 15th day of the second month following the month in
which the natural gas is used or consumed.
F. The tax shall apply to the first monthly bill on which the Public Utility is
capable of including this tax after adoption of this Ordinance on April
28, 2014.
G. If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due
under the provisions of this article, whether as a result of mistake of
fact or an error of law, then the provisions of Chapter 39, § 39-1507, of
the City Code shall apply.
H. No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this
article shall be commenced after the expiration of the statute of
limitations described in Chapter 39, § 39-1514, of the City Code.
I. To prevent multiple taxation, the use of gas in the City by a Retail
Purchaser shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this article if the
gross receipts from the Sale at Retail of such gas to the Retail
Purchaser are properly subject to a tax imposed upon the seller of such
gas pursuant to the City's municipal utility tax, as amended from time to
time, Chapter 39, Article IX of the Code, authorized pursuant to Section
8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-2).
J. The tax described in this article shall not apply to the use or
consumption of gas purchased at retail by a school district created and
operating under the School Code of the State of Illinois. [Ord. No.
2014-38]
A. The Public Utility will collect the tax from Retail Purchasers as an
independent contractor;
§ 39-1303 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 39-1304
1:1530
§ 39-1305. [Ch. 39, Sec. 174] Books and records. [Ord. No. 2014-38]
Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records, including original
source documents and books of entry, denoting the activities or transactions
that gave rise, or may have given rise to any tax liability or exemption under
this article. All such books and records shall, at all times during business
hours, be subject to and available for inspection by the City to the maximum
extent permitted by law. The rates set forth in § 39-1303 were increased by
ordinance on April 28, 2014, and the increased amount shall be designed
for funding employer contributions to the Police and Fire Pension.
B. The Public Utility will remit collected taxes to the City Treasurer no
more often than once each month;
C. The Public Utility will be entitled to withhold from tax collections a
service fee equal to 3% of the amounts collected and timely remitted to
the City Treasurer;
D. The Public Utility shall not be responsible to the City for any tax not
actually collected from a Retail Purchaser; and
E. Such additional terms as the parties may agree upon. [Ord. No.
2014-38]
§ 39-1304 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-1305
1:1531

ARTICLE XIV
City of Bloomington Telecommunications Tax
§ 39-1401. [Ch. 39, Sec. 200] Title. [Ord. No. 2000-104]
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "City of Bloomington
Telecommunications Tax Ordinance." The tax imposed by this chapter shall
be known as the "telecommunications tax" and is imposed in addition to all
other taxes imposed by the City of Bloomington, the State of Illinois or any
other municipal corporation or political subdivision thereof.
§ 39-1402. [Ch. 39, Sec. 201] Definitions.
When any of the following words or terms are used in this chapter, whether
or not capitalized, they shall have the meaning or construction ascribed to
them in this section:
AMOUNT PAID — The amount charged to the taxpayer's service address
located in the City regardless of where such amount is billed or paid.
BAD DEBT — Any portion of a debt that is related to a sale at retail,
for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or excludable, that
has become worthless or uncollectible as determined by applicable federal
income tax standards.
CITY — The City of Bloomington, Illinois.
DEPARTMENT or DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE — The Department of
Finance of the City.
DIRECTOR or FINANCE DIRECTOR — The Director of Finance of the
City.[Ord. No. 2017-28]
GROSS CHARGE —
The amount paid for the act or privilege of originating or receiving
telecommunications in the City, and for all services rendered in
connection therewith, valued in money, whether paid in money or
otherwise, including cash, credits, services and property of every kind
or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction on account of
the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of materials used, labor
or service costs or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is
extended, the amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid.
A.
However, "gross charge" shall not include:
Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made
pursuant to:
(a) The tax imposed by this chapter;
Additional charges added to a purchaser's bill pursuant to
Section 9-222 of the Illinois Public Utilities Act;
(b)
(1)
B.
§ 39-1401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-1402
1:1533
INTERSTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS — All telecommunications
originating in the City that terminate outside the State of Illinois and all
telecommunications originating outside the State of Illinois which terminate
in the City.
The tax imposed by the Illinois Telecommunications Excise Tax
Act;
(c)
The tax imposed by Section 4251 of the United States Internal
Revenue Code; or
(d)
The infrastructure maintenance fee imposed by Chapter 14 of
this Code;
(e)
Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside of
the City;
(2)
Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage
of data or information or subsequent retrieval or the processing of
data or information intended to change its form or content. This
Subsection E(3) applies, but is not limited, to the use of calculators,
computers, data processing equipment, tabulating equipment and
accounting equipment and also applies to the usage of computers
under a time-sharing agreement;
(3)
Charges for customer equipment, including equipment that is
leased or rented by the customer from any source, provided that
such charges are disaggregated and separately identified from
other charges;
(4)
Charges to business enterprises certified under Section 9-222.1 of
the Illinois Public Utilities Act to the extent of such exemption and
during the period of time specified by the Illinois Department of
Commerce and Community Affairs;
(5)
Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment
provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation
and its wholly owned subsidiaries, or between the wholly owned
subsidiaries, when the tax imposed under this chapter previously
was paid to a retailer, but only to the extent that the charges
between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries,
or between the wholly owned subsidiaries, represent an expense
allocation between the corporations and not the generation of
profit for the corporation rendering such service;
(6)
Bad debts; provided, however, that if any portion of a debt deemed
to be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the
tax on that portion of the debt paid during the reporting period; or
(7)
Charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated
telecommunication devices.
(8)
§ 39-1402 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 39-1402
1:1534
INTRASTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS — All telecommunications
originating in the City that terminate within the State of Illinois and all
telecommunications which originate within the State of Illinois and
terminate in the City.
ORIGINATING — Initiating the transmission of messages or information
and includes, but is not limited to, activating a mobile or portable
telecommunications device for the purpose of sending or accepting
messages or information.[Ord. No. 2000-104]
PERSON — Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability
company, or a receiver, trustee, guardian or other representative appointed
by order of any court, the Federal or State governments, including State
universities created by statute, or any City, town, county, or other political
subdivision of this State.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL — The acquisition, consumption or use of
telecommunications through a sale at retail.
RETAILER — Includes every person engaged in the business of making sales
at retail as defined in the definition of "sale at retail."
RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE —
Includes any retailer having or maintaining within the State of Illinois,
directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities, transmission
facilities, sales office, warehouse or other place of business, or an agent
or other representative operating within the State of Illinois under the
authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such
place of business, agent or other representative is located in the State of
Illinois permanently or temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary
is licensed to do business in Illinois.
SALE AT RETAIL — The transmitting, supplying or furnishing of
telecommunications and all services rendered in connection therewith for
consideration:
SERVICE ADDRESS — The location of telecommunications equipment from
which telecommunications are originated or at which telecommunications
are received by a taxpayer. If this location is not a defined location, as
in the case of mobile phones, paging systems, maritime systems, air-toground
systems and the like, "service address" shall mean the location of a
taxpayer's primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by
To persons other than the City, Federal and State governments, and
State universities created by statute; and
A.
Other than between a parent corporation and its wholly owned
subsidiaries, or between the wholly owned subsidiaries, but only when
the tax previously has been paid to a retailer and the gross charge made
by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater than
the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and
not for resale.
B.
§ 39-1402 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-1402
1:1535
telephone number, authorization code or location in Illinois where bills are
sent.
TAXPAYER — A person which individually, or through its agents, employees
or permittees, engages in the act or privilege of originating
telecommunications in the City or receiving telecommunications in the City
and that incurs a tax liability under this chapter.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS —
§ 39-1403. [Ch. 39, Sec. 202] Tax imposed.
In addition to the usual and popular meaning, includes, but is not
limited to, messages or information transmitted through use of local,
toll and wide area telephone service, private line services, channel
services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange
services, cellular mobile telecommunications service, specialized
mobile radio services, paging service or any other form of mobile
and portable one-way or two-way communications, or any other
transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave,
radio, satellite or similar facilities.
A.
The definition of "telecommunications" set forth in Subsection A shall
not include:
Value-added services in which computer processing applications
are used to act on the form, content, code and protocol of the
information for purposes other than transmission; or
(1)
Purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications service
provider for use as a component part of the service provided by it to
the ultimate retail consumer originating or terminating the taxable
end-to-end telecommunications. Carrier access charges, right of
access charges, charges for use of inter-company facilities, and all
telecommunications resold in § 39-1403D used as a component of,
or integrated into, end-to-end telecommunications service shall be
non-taxable as sales for resale.
(2)
B.
A. A tax is hereby imposed upon:
(1) The act or privilege of originating or receiving in the City intrastate
telecommunications by a person at a rate of 2 1/2% of the gross
charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a
retailer and charged to a service address in the City; and
(2) The act or privilege of originating or receiving in the City interstate
telecommunications by a person at a rate of 2 1/2% of the gross
charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a
retailer and charged to a service address in the City. [Ord. No.
2000-104]
§ 39-1402 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 39-1403
1:1536
§ 39-1404. [Ch. 39, Sec. 203] Collection of tax by retailers.
B. To prevent actual multi-state taxation of the act or privilege that is
subject to taxation under Subsection A(2) of this section, any taxpayer,
upon proof that the taxpayer has paid a municipal tax in another state
on the same event, shall be allowed a credit against the tax authorized
by Subsection A(2) to the extent of the amount of such municipal tax
properly due and paid in such other state which was not previously
allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter. [Ord. No.
2000-104]
C. The tax imposed by this chapter is not imposed on any act or privilege
to the extent that such act or privilege may not, under the Constitution
or statutes of the United States, be made the subject of taxation by the
City. [Ord. No. 2000-104]
D. Carrier access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of
inter-company facilities and all telecommunications resold in the
subsequent provision of, used as a component of or integrated into endto-
end telecommunications service are sales for resale and are not
subject to the tax imposed by this chapter. [Ord. No. 2000-104]
A. Collection.
(1) Any retailer maintaining a place of business in this state and
making or effectuating a sale at retail shall collect the tax imposed
by this chapter from the taxpayer and remit it to the department as
provided by § 39-1405 of this chapter.
(2) Any tax required to be collected pursuant to this chapter and any
tax collected by the retailer shall constitute a debt owed by the
retailer to the City.
(3) The retailer shall collect the tax from the taxpayer by adding the
tax to the gross charge for the act or privilege of originating
telecommunications when sold for use in the manner prescribed by
this chapter.
(4) The tax imposed by this chapter shall constitute a debt of the
purchaser to the retailer providing taxable services until paid and,
if unpaid, is recoverable at law in the same manner as the original
charge for taxable services. [Ord. No. 2000-104]
B. The Director shall, upon application, authorize the collection of this tax
by any retailer not maintaining a place of business in this state who, to
the satisfaction of the Director, furnishes adequate security to ensure
collection and payment of the tax. Such retailer shall be issued, without
charge, a permit to collect the tax imposed by this chapter. When so
authorized, it shall be the duty of the retailer to collect the tax upon all
of the gross charges for telecommunications originated in the City in
the same manner, and subject to the same requirements, as a retailer
maintaining a place of business in this state. [Ord. No. 2000-104]
§ 39-1403 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-1404
1:1537
§ 39-1405. [Ch. 39, Sec. 204] Filing returns and remittances by
retailers. [Ord. No. 2000-104]
On or before the last day of each calendar month, every retailer maintaining
a place of business in this state and every retailer authorized by the director
to collect the tax imposed by this chapter shall file with the department a
remittance return and remit all applicable tax for the preceding calendar
month. The return shall be filed on a form prescribed by the Director,
containing such information as the Director may reasonably require.
§ 39-1406. [Ch. 39, Sec. 205] Registration. [Ord. No. 2000-104]
Every retailer maintaining a place of business in this state shall register
with the department within 30 days after the effective date of this chapter
or the date of becoming such a retailer, whichever is later.
§ 39-1407. [Ch. 39, Sec. 206] Obligation of taxpayers to file returns
and pay tax.
§ 39-1408. [Ch. 39, Sec. 207] Resale numbers.
C. The tax authorized by this chapter shall, when collected, be stated as a
distinct item separate and apart from the gross charge for
telecommunications. [Ord. No. 2000-104]
D. For periods beginning on or after August 1, 2000, retailers may retain
1.75% of the tax they collect to reimburse them for expenses incurred
in connection with collecting and remitting the tax, less any charge
allowed by the Illinois Commerce Commission that permits them to
recover such expenses. This commission shall not be allowed for taxes
not timely remitted to the department. [Ord. No. 2000-104]
A. If a retailer fails to collect the tax imposed by this chapter from a
taxpayer, as required by § 39-1404, then the taxpayer shall pay the tax
directly to the department. [Ord. No. 2000-104]
B. On or before the last day of each calendar month, every taxpayer that
has not paid the tax imposed by this chapter to a retailer shall file with
the department a tax return and pay the tax upon the gross charges the
taxpayer paid to the retailer during the preceding calendar month. The
return shall be filed on a form prescribed by the Director, containing
such information as the director may reasonably require. [Ord. No.
2000-104]
A. If a person who originates telecommunications in the City claims to be a
reseller of telecommunications, that person shall apply to the
department for a resale number. The applicant shall state facts showing
why it is not liable for the tax imposed by this chapter on any purchases
of telecommunications and shall furnish such additional information as
the department may reasonably require. [Ord. No. 2000-104]
§ 39-1404 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 39-1408
1:1538
§ 39-1409. [Ch. 39, Sec. 208] Maintaining books and records. [Ord.
No. 2000-104]
Every retailer maintaining a place of business in this state, every retailer
authorized by the Director to collect the tax imposed by this chapter and
every taxpayer required by § 39-1407 to pay the tax directly to the
department shall keep accurate books and records of its business or activity,
including original source documents and books of entry denoting the
transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise, to any tax liability or
exemption. All such books and records shall be kept in the English language
and, at all times during business hours of the day, shall be subject to and
available for inspection by the department.
§ 39-1410. [Ch. 39, Sec. 209] Rules and regulations. [Ord. No.
2017-28]
The Finance Director is authorized to adopt, promulgate and enforce rules
and regulations pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this
article.
§ 39-1411. [Ch. 39, Sec. 210] Severability. [Ord. No. 2000-104]
If any provision of this chapter, or the application of any provision of
this chapter, is held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such occurrence
shall not affect other provisions of this chapter, or their application, that
can be given effect without the unconstitutional or invalid provision or
its application. Each unconstitutional or invalid provision, or application
of such provision, is severable, unless otherwise provided by this chapter.
In particular, if Subsection A(2) of § 39-1403 of this chapter is declared
B. Upon approval of the application, the department shall assign a resale
number to the applicant and shall certify the number to the applicant.
[Ord. No. 2000-104]
C. The department may cancel the resale number of any person if the
number:
(1) Was obtained through misrepresentation;
(2) Is used to originate telecommunications tax-free when such
telecommunications are not for resale; or
(3) Is no longer necessary because the person has discontinued
making resales. [Ord. No. 2000-104]
D. The act or privilege of originating telecommunications in the City shall
not be made tax-free on the ground of being a sale for resale unless the
person has an active resale number issued by the department and
furnishes that number to the retailer in connection with certifying to
the retailer that a sale is nontaxable as a sale for resale. [Ord. No.
2000-104]
§ 39-1408 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-1411
1:1539
unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, the tax imposed under Subsection
A(1) of § 39-1403 shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 39-1412. [Ch. 39, Sec. 211] Status of Illinois Municipal Code
Section 8-11-17. [Ord. No. 2000-104]
If Section 8-11-17 of the Illinois Municipal Code is repealed, or becomes
ineffective for any reason, § 39-901A and §§ 39-902 through 39-910 of
Chapter 39 of the Bloomington City Code (insofar as §§ 39-902 through
39-910 are applicable to taxes imposed by § 39-901A), declared ineffective
in favor of this article, shall be deemed to be in full force and effect as
of the date Section 8-11-17 is repealed or becomes ineffective during such
time that Section 8-11-17 is not in effect. This chapter shall be in full force
and effect at any time that Section 8-11-17 is deemed to be in effect or
authorizes the imposition of the tax imposed under this chapter.
§ 39-1411 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 39-1412
1:1540
ARTICLE XV
Tax Rights and Responsibility
§ 39-1501. [Ch. 39, Sec. 301] Title. [Ord. No. 2001-95]
This ordinance shall be known as, and may be cited as, the "Tax Rights and
Responsibility Ordinance."
§ 39-1502. [Ch. 39, Sec. 302] Scope. [Ord. No. 2014-21]
The provisions of this ordinance which are not inconsistent with the Articles
imposing the City's locally imposed and administered taxes, shall apply
as far as practicable, to the City's procedures and collection powers in
connection with all of the City's locally imposed and administered taxes.
§ 39-1503. [Ch. 39, Sec. 303] Definitions.
Certain words or terms herein shall have the meaning ascribed to them as
follows:
ACT — The "Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act."
CITY — The City of Bloomington, Illinois.
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES — The City's Mayor and City Council.
LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR — The City's Finance Director, is charged
with the administration and collection of the locally imposed and
administered taxes, including staff, employees or agents to the extent they
are authorized by the local tax administrator to act in the local tax
administrator's stead. The local tax administrator shall have the authority to
implement the terms of this ordinance to give full effect to this ordinance.
The exercise of such authority by the local tax administrator shall not be
inconsistent with this ordinance and the Act.[Ord. No. 2017-28]
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX or TAX — Each tax imposed
by the City that is collected or administered by the City not an agency or
department of the State. It does not include any taxes imposed upon real
property under the Property Tax Code or fees collected by the City other
than infrastructure maintenance fees.
NOTICE — Each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice or
communication in connection with each of the City's locally imposed and
administered taxes.
TAX ORDINANCE — Each ordinance adopted by the City that imposes any
locally imposed and administered tax.
TAXPAYER — Any person required to pay any locally imposed and
administered tax and generally includes the person upon whom the legal
incidence of such tax is placed and with respect to consumer taxes includes
the business or entity required to collect and pay the locally imposed and
administered tax to the City.[Ord. No. 2001-95]
§ 39-1501 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-1504
1:1541
§ 39-1504. [Ch. 39, Sec. 304] Notices.
Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given, the
notice is to be in writing mailed not less than seven calendar days prior
to the day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other scheduled act
of the local tax administrator. The notice shall be sent by the local tax
administrator as follows:
§ 39-1505. [Ch. 39, Sec. 305] Late payment.
Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to the
City pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it is:
§ 39-1506. [Ch. 39, Sec. 306] Payment.
Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in the
following order:
§ 39-1507. [Ch. 39, Sec. 307] Certain credits and refunds.
A. First class or express mail, or overnight mail, addressed to the persons
concerned at the persons' last known address, or
B. Personal service or delivery. [Ord. No. 2001-95]
A. Physically received by the City on or before the due date; or
B. Received in an envelope or other container displaying a valid, readable
U.S. Postmark dated on or before the due date, properly addressed to
the City, with adequate postage prepaid. [Ord. No. 2001-95]
A. First to the tax due for the applicable period;
B. Second to the interest due for the applicable period; and
C. Third to the penalty for the applicable period. [Ord. No. 2001-95]
A. The City shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid without
written protest at the time of payment in the event that a locally
imposed and administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or
unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, a
taxpayer shall not be deemed to have paid the tax voluntarily if the
taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts upon which to protest the taxes
at the time of payment or if the taxpayer paid the taxes under duress.
[Ord. No. 2001-95]
B. The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund shall be one
year after the end of the calendar year in which payment in error was
made. The City shall not grant a credit or refund of locally imposed and
administered taxes, interest, or penalties to a person who has not paid
the amounts directly to the City. [Ord. No. 2001-95]
§ 39-1504 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 39-1507
1:1542
§ 39-1508. [Ch. 39, Sec. 308] Audit procedure.
Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any local administered tax shall
comply with the notice requirements of this ordinance.
C. The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and
administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as
follows:
(1) The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator in writing a
claim for credit or refund together with a statement specifying:
(a) The name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject
to the claim;
(b) The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax
subject to the claim;
(c) The date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the
canceled check or receipt for the payment;
(d) The taxpayer's recalculation, accompanied by an amended or
revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and
(e) A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the
claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and penalties
overpaid, and, as applicable, related interest on the amount
overpaid; provided, however, that there shall be no refund and
only a credit given in the event the taxpayer owes any monies
to the City. [Ord. No. 2001-95]
(2) Within 30 days of the receipt by the local tax administrator of any
claim for a refund or credit, the local tax administrator shall either:
(a) Grant the claim; or
(b) Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement
as to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.
[Ord. No. 2017-28]
(3) In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in part,
a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or
credit shall not bear interest. [Ord. No. 2017-28]
A. Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:
(1) The tax;
(2) The time period of the audit; and
(3) A brief description of the books and records to be made available
for the auditor. [Ord. No. 2001-95]
§ 39-1507 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-1508
1:1543
§ 39-1509. [Ch. 39, Sec. 309] Appeals.
B. Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and if the
date and time selected by the local tax administrator is not agreeable to
the taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer
within 30 days after the originally designated audit and during normal
business hours. [Ord. No. 2001-95]
C. The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit
conducted. The audit shall be conducted not less than seven days from
the date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer and the local tax
administrator agreed to some other convenient time. In the event
taxpayer is unable to comply with the audit on the date in question, the
taxpayer may request another date within the 30 days, approved in
writing, that is convenient to the taxpayer and the local tax
administrator. [Ord. No. 2001-95]
D. Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the taxpayer's
business or activities, including original source documents and books of
entry denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have given
rise to any tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be kept
in the English language and shall be subject to and available for
inspection by the City. [Ord. No. 2001-95]
E. It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make available its
books and records for inspection by the City. If the taxpayer or Tax
Collector fails to provide the documents necessary for audit within the
time provided, the local tax administrator may issue a tax determination
and assessment based on the tax administrator's determination of the
best estimate of the taxpayer's tax liability. [Ord. No. 2001-95]
F. If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally
imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice of
the amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within 30
days of the City's determination of the amount of overpayment. [Ord.
No. 2001-95]
G. In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect local
governmental entity, the local tax administrator shall notify the local
governmental entity imposing such tax. [Ord. No. 2001-95]
A. The local tax administrator shall send written notice to a taxpayer upon
the local tax administrator's issuance of a protestable notice of tax due,
a bill, a claim denial, or a notice of claim reduction regarding any tax.
The notice shall include the following information:
(1) The reason for the assessment;
(2) The amount of the tax liability proposed;
(3) The procedure for appealing the assessment; and
§ 39-1508 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 39-1509
1:1544
§ 39-1510. [Ch. 39, Sec. 310] Hearing.
(4) The obligations of the City during the audit, appeal, refund and
collection process. [Ord. No. 2001-95]
B. A taxpayer who receives written notice from the local tax administrator
of a determination of tax due or assessment may file with the local tax
administrator a written protest and petition for hearing, setting forth
the basis of the taxpayer's request for a hearing. The written protest
and petition for hearing must be filed with the local tax administrator
within 45 days of receipt of the written notice of the tax determination
and assessment. [Ord. No. 2001-95]
C. If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed, the local tax
administrator shall fix the time and place for hearing and shall give
written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled for a date
within 14 days of receipt of the written protest and petition for hearing,
unless the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties.
[Ord. No. 2001-95]
D. If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed within the fortyfive-
day period, the tax determination, audit or assessment shall
become a final bill due and owing without further notice. [Ord. No.
2001-95]
E. Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full
payment of the contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of
the due date of the tax, the local tax administrator may reopen or
extend the time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing. In
no event shall the time for filing a written protest and petition for
hearing be reopened or extended for more than 90 days after the
expiration of the forty-five-day period. [Ord. No. 2001-95]
A. Whenever a taxpayer or a Tax Collector has filed a timely written
protest and petition for hearing under § 39-1509, above, the local tax
administrator shall conduct a hearing regarding any appeal. [Ord. No.
2001-95]
B. No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance
is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack of
preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance
granted shall not exceed 14 days. [Ord. No. 2001-95]
C. At the hearing the local tax administrator shall preside and shall hear
testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax determination,
audit or assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial
proceedings shall not apply. [Ord. No. 2001-95]
D. At the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax administrator shall make
a written determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the
hearing. The taxpayer or Tax Collector shall be provided with a copy of
the written decision. [Ord. No. 2001-95]
§ 39-1509 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-1511
1:1545
§ 39-1511. [Ch. 39, Sec. 311] Interest and penalties.
In the event a determination has been made that a tax is due and owing,
through audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be paid within
the time frame otherwise indicated. For any locally imposed tax under this
chapter 39 or the City that is not paid when required, or only partially paid,
or when no tax return is timely filed, the provisions of Subsections A and B
below shall be applicable.
§ 39-1512. [Ch. 39, Sec. 312] Abatement. [Ord. No. 2001-95]
The local tax administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate any
late filing penalty, late payment penalty or failure to file penalty if the
local tax administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay or
failure to make a filing.
§ 39-1513. [Ch. 39, Sec. 313] Installment contracts. [Ord. No.
2001-95]
The City may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for
the payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The local tax
administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the
taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the
local tax administrator that the payment is 30 days delinquent, the taxpayer
shall have 14 days to cure any delinquency. If the taxpayer fails to cure
the delinquency within the fourteen-day period or fails to demonstrate good
faith in restructuring the installment contract with the local administrator,
the installment contract shall be canceled without further notice to the
taxpayer.
A. Interest. The City hereby provides for the amount of interest to be
assessed on a late payment, underpayment, or nonpayment of the tax,
together with any unpaid interest assessed on such tax, to be 2% per
month.
B. Late filing and payment penalties. If a tax return is not filed within the
time and manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing
penalty, of 5% of the amount of tax required to be shown as due on a
return shall be imposed; if any tax is not paid within the time and
manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a late payment
penalty of 5% of the tax due shall be imposed. City shall not impose both
a late filing penalty and a late payment penalty for the same return. If
no return is filed within the time or manner provided by the controlling
tax ordinance and prior to the City issuing a notice of tax delinquency or
notice of tax liability, then a failure to file penalty shall be assessed
equal to 25% of the total tax due for the applicable reporting period for
which the return was required to be filed. A late filing or payment
penalty under this article shall not apply if a failure to file or pay penalty
is imposed by the controlling ordinance. [Ord. No. 2017-28]
§ 39-1511 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 39-1514
1:1546
§ 39-1514. [Ch. 39, Sec. 314] Statute of limitations.
The City, through the local tax administrator, shall review all tax returns
in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any amounts due
and owing. The taxpayer shall have 45 days after receiving notice of the
reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund or provide any tax still
due and owing:
§ 39-1515. [Ch. 39, Sec. 314A] Collection. [Ord. No. 2014-21]
In case of failure to pay any tax imposed under this chapter 39 or by
the City, or any portion thereof, or any penalty, or any penalty provided
for in this article, or interest, when due, the City may bring suit against
the Tax Collector or the purchaser or user to recover the amount of such
tax or portion thereof, or penalty and/or interest; or, if the Tax Collector
or purchaser or user has died or become incompetent, may file a claim
therefore against his estate; provided that no such suit with respect to any
tax, or portion thereof, or penalty, or interest shall be instituted more than
six years after the date any proceedings in court for review thereof have
terminated or the time for the taking thereof has expired without such
proceeding being instituted, except with the consent of the person from
whom such tax or penalty or interest is due; not, except with such consent,
shall suit be instituted more than six years after the date any return is filed
with the City in cases where the return constitutes the basis for the suit
for unpaid tax or portion thereof, or penalty provided for in this article, or
interest: Provided that the time limitation period on the City's right to bring
any such suit shall not run during any period of time in which the order of
any court has the effect of enjoining or restraining the City from bringing
such suit.
§ 39-1516. [Ch. 39, Sec. 314B] Tax liens.
A. No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than four
years maximum after the end of the calendar year for which the return
for the applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in which the
return for the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.
B. If any tax return is not filed or if during any four-year period for which a
notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by the City, the
tax paid was less than 75% of the tax due, the statute of limitations shall
be six years after the end of the calendar year in which return for the
applicable period was due or end of the calendar year in which the
return for the applicable period was filed.
C. No statute of limitations shall not apply if a fraudulent tax return was
filed by the taxpayer. [Ord. No. 2001-95]
A. The City shall have a lien for any tax imposed under this chapter 39 or
by the City, or any portion thereof, or for any penalty provided for in this
chapter, or for any amount of interest which may be due as provided for
in this chapter, upon all the real and personal property of any person to
§ 39-1514 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-1516
1:1547
§ 39-1517. [Ch. 39, Sec. 315] Voluntary disclosure. [Ord. No.
2001-95]
For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has not
received a written notice of an audit, investigation, or assessment from the
whom a final assessment or revised final assessment has been issued as
provided in this chapter, or whenever a return is filed without payment
of the tax or penalty shown therein to be due, including all such
property of such persons acquired after receipt of such assessment of
filing of such return. The taxpayer is liable for the filing fee incurred
by the City for filing the lien and the filing fee incurred by the City
to file the release of that lien. The filing fees shall be paid to the City
in addition to payment of the tax, penalty, and interest included in the
amount of the lien.
B. However, where the lien arises because of the issuance of a final
assessment or revised final assessment by the City, such lien shall not
attach and the notice hereinafter referred to in this section shall not be
filed until all proceedings in court for review of such final assessment or
revised final assessment have terminated or the time for the taking
thereof has expired without such proceedings being instituted.
C. The lien created by the issuance of a final assessment shall terminate
unless a notice of lien is filed within six years from the date all
proceedings in court for the review of such final assessment have
terminated or the time for the taking thereof has expired without such
proceedings being instituted and where the lien results from the filing
of a return without payment of the tax or penalty shown therein to be
due, the lien shall terminate unless a notice of lien is filed within six
years from the date when such return is filed with the City: Provided
that the time limitation period on the City's right to file a notice of lien
shall nor run:
(1) During any period of time in which the order of any court has the
effect of enjoining or restraining the City from filing such notice of
lien; or
(2) During the term of repayment plan that taxpayer has entered into
with the City, as long as taxpayer remains in compliance with the
terms of the repayment plan.
D. The procedures for notice and enforcement of such lien shall be the
same as that provided in the Retailers' Occupation Tax Act as now or
hereafter amended. The lien may be signed by the City Manager or City
Finance Director, or their designees.
E. Such lien authority is provided as authorized by the Illinois Municipal
Code, Article 8, Division 3.83 [Ord. No. 2014-21]
83.Editor's Note: See 65 ILCS 5/8-3-1 et seq.
§ 39-1516 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 39-1517
1:1548
local tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application with the
local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A taxpayer
filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of tax
due, along with interest of 1% per month, for all periods prior to the filing
of the application but not more than four years before the date of filing the
application. A taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure application may
not be liable for any additional tax, interest, or penalty for any period before
the date the application was filed. However, if the taxpayer incorrectly
determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the taxpayer is liable
for the underpaid tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid tax,
unless the underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the taxpayer,
in which case the application shall be deemed invalid and void. The payment
of tax and interest must be made by no later than 90 days after the filing
of the voluntary disclosure application or the date agreed to by the local
tax administrator. However, any additional amounts owed as a result of an
underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under this section must
be paid within 90 days after a final determination and the exhaustion of all
appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed to by the local tax
administrator, whichever is longer.
§ 39-1518. [Ch. 39, Sec. 316] Publication of tax ordinances. [Ord.
No. 2001-95]
Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or
standard publishing requirements. The posting of a tax ordinance on the
Internet shall satisfy the publication requirements. Copies of all tax
ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request at the City
Clerk's office.
§ 39-1519. [Ch. 39, Sec. 317] Internal review procedure.
The local tax administrator shall establish an internal review procedure
regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes. Upon a
determination by the local tax administrator that the lien is valid, the lien
shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is determined to be improper,
the local tax administrator shall:
§ 39-1520. [Ch. 39, Sec. 318] Application. [Ord. No. 2001-95]
This ordinance shall be liberally construed and administered to supplement
all of the City's tax ordinances. To the extent that any tax ordinance is in
conflict with or inconsistent with this ordinance, this ordinance shall be
controlling.
A. Timely remove the lien at the City's expense;
B. Correct the taxpayer's credit record; and
C. Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien. [Ord. No.
2001-95]
§ 39-1517 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-1521
1:1549
§ 39-1521. [Ch. 39, Sec. 319] Severability. [Ord. No. 2001-95]
If any section, paragraph or provision of this ordinance shall be held to be
invalid or unenforceable for any reason, the invalidity or unenforceability of
such section, paragraph or provision shall not affect any of the remaining
provisions of this ordinance.
§ 39-1522. [Ch. 39, Sec. 320] Rules and regulations. [Ord. No.
2017-28]
The local tax administrator may promulgate rules and regulations not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Article XV concerning the
enforcement and application of this Article XV.
§ 39-1521 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 39-1522
1:1550
ARTICLE XVI
Food and Beverage Tax
§ 39-1601. [Ch. 39, Sec. 325] Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, whenever any of the following words, terms or
definitions are used herein, they shall have the meaning ascribed to them in
this section:
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR — Any spirits, wine, beer, ale or other liquid
containing more than 1 1/2% of alcohol by volume, which is capable of being
consumed as a beverage by a human being.
BAR — Includes an establishment for the serving of alcoholic liquor.[Ord.
No. 2017-28]
PERSON — Any natural person, trustee, court appointed representative,
syndicate, association, partnership, firm, club, company, corporation,
business trust, institution, agency, government corporation, municipal
corporation, district or other political subdivision, contractor, supplier,
vendor, vendee, operator, user or owner, or any officers, agents, employees
or other representative, acting either for himself or herself or for any other
person in any capacity, or any other entity recognized by law as the subject
of rights and duties. The masculine, feminine, singular or plural is included
in any circumstance.
PREPARED FOOD ITEM FOR IMMEDIATE CONSUMPTION —
Includes any and all material, whether solid, semi-solid or liquid used
or intended to be used for human consumption and for nourishment of
the human body. The term defined herein includes any and all alcoholic
liquor beverages, except for alcoholic liquor purchased in the original
package for consumption off the premises where sold. The term shall
include and be limited to:
Food items purchased at a restaurant, bar or other establishment
where facilities are provided for on-premise consumption, but such
term shall not include food items not intended for immediate
consumption purchased from other areas of any such
establishment where such facilities providing on-premise
consumption utilize a separate means of collecting receipts for
such food purchased for immediate consumption and are physically
separated from such other areas in the establishment.
(1)
Food items purchased from concession stands, snack shops and
other establishments which sell food items primarily in individual
sized servings, such as ice cream cones, candy bars and
individually serve sandwiches, for immediate on-premise or offpremises
consumption; and
(2)
Food items which are purchased hot or are otherwise purchased
prepared for immediate on-premise or off-premise consumption
(3)
A.
§ 39-1601 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-1601
1:1551
RESTAURANT — Includes any public place kept, used, maintained,
advertised and held out to the public, as a place at which prepared food
items for immediate consumption are served and/or prepared, whether or
not consumed or intended to be consumed on the premises, but shall not
include coin-operated automatic food dispensing machines.
RETAILER — Any person or persons having a sufficient proprietary interest
in conducting a business which sells prepared food items for immediate
consumption or alcoholic liquor so as to entitle such person or persons to
all or a portion of the net receipts from the sale thereof.
§ 39-1602. [Ch. 39, Sec. 326] Imposition of tax.
§ 39-1603. [Ch. 39, Sec. 327] Liability for payment.
from catering establishments and restaurants with delivery
services, except food items prepared off the premises.
For purposes of this section, "food items prepared off the premises"
means food items which are grilled, broiled, baked, fried or cooked
in some other similar manner off the premises of the retailer. Such
term shall not include food items which are precooked and then heated
or warmed-up off the premises or food items which were previously
cooked or prepared and then reheated off the premises.
B.
A. There is hereby levied and imposed upon the privilege of purchasing
prepared food items for immediate consumption and alcoholic liquor
served or prepared at a restaurant bar or other establishment covered
by this article in the City of Bloomington, a tax of 2% of the purchase
price, exclusive of any other tax charged for such food items and/or
alcoholic liquor. [Ord. No. 2002-92]
B. Exempt from the tax imposed above are persons purchasing prepared
food items for immediate consumption served or prepared at:
(1) A restaurant owned by a church, grade school, junior high school or
high school within the City of Bloomington.
(2) Restaurants used primarily in conjunction with institutional living
establishments within the City of Bloomington, including but not
limited to dormitories, fraternities, sororities, residential care
facilities and hospitals;
(3) Premises or operations of not-for-profit organizations who serve
prepared food items for immediate consumption on an occasional
and irregular basis. [Ord. No. 2002-92]
A. The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of said tax shall be
borne by the person who seeks the privilege of occupying any such
restaurant, bar or other establishment covered by this article, said
person hereinafter referred to as "consumer." [Ord. No. 2002-92]
§ 39-1601 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 39-1603
1:1552
§ 39-1604. [Ch. 39, Sec. 328] Collection of tax. [Ord. No. 2002-92]
Every person required to collect the tax levied by this section shall secure
said tax from the consumer at the time he collects payment for the service
of food or alcoholic beverage. Upon the invoice receipt or other statement
or memorandum of the payment given to the consumer at the time of
payment, the amount due under the tax provided in this section shall be
stated separately on said documents or combined with the amount of the
Illinois Retailer's Occupation Tax Act.
§ 39-1605. [Ch. 39, Sec. 329] Rules and regulations. [Ord. No.
2017-28]
The Finance Director of the City of Bloomington may promulgate rules
and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this Article XVI
concerning the enforcement and application of this Article XVI. The term
"rules and regulations" includes, but is not limited to, a case by case
determination whether or not the tax imposed by this Article XVI applies.
§ 39-1606. [Ch. 39, Sec. 330] Filing of application. [Ord. No.
2002-92]
The owner of each restaurant, bar or other establishment covered by this
article shall complete a City of Bloomington Application for Registration
within 30 days of opening for business. The application shall be filed with
the Finance Division of the City.
§ 39-1607. [Ch. 39, Sec. 331] Filing of return.
B. All retailers shall jointly and severally have the duty to collect and shall
collect and account for the tax imposed in § 39-1602A from each
consumer at the time that the consideration for such purchase is paid.
Such retailers shall be the trustee for the City in the collection and
remittance of said taxes. [Ord. No. 2002-92]
A. All retailers shall pay to the City all taxes collected. The owner of each
restaurant, bar or other establishment covered by this article within the
City of Bloomington shall file monthly tax returns showing tax receipts
received during each monthly period on forms prescribed by the
Finance Director. The return shall be filed on or before the 25th day of
the calendar month next succeeding the month for which the return is
made and shall be accompanied by payment of all taxes due and owing
for the month covered by said return. [Ord. No. 2018-30]
B. The first taxing period for the purpose of this section shall commence
on January 1, 2003, and the tax return and payment for such period
shall be due on or before February 25, 2003. Thereafter, reporting
periods and tax payments shall be in accordance with the provisions of
this section. [Ord. No. 2002-92]
§ 39-1603 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-1607
1:1553
§ 39-1608. [Ch. 39, Sec. 332] Compensation for collection services.
[Ord. No. 2014-21]
As compensation for services rendered in the collection and payment of this
tax, retailers filing a tax return may retain an amount of money equal to 1%
of the tax due.
§ 39-1609. [Ch. 39, Sec. 333] Financial records.
§ 39-1610. [Ch. 39, Sec. 334] Failure to remit; licensing. [Ord. No.
2002-92]
Payment and collection of said tax may be enforced by action in any court of
competent jurisdiction and failure to collect, account for and pay over any
tax collected from purchasers of taxable items shall be cause for revocation
of any City license of such retailer or applicable to the premises thereof, in
addition to any other penalty provided in this Ordinance.
§ 39-1611. [Ch. 39, Sec. 335] Violations; penalties. [Ord. No.
2002-92]
Any retailer found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or
refusing to comply with, or resisting or opposing the enforcement of any of
the provisions of this chapter, except when otherwise specifically provided,
upon conviction thereof shall be deemed to have committed a misdemeanor
and punished by a fine of not less than $75 nor more than $5,000 for the
first offense, and not less than $150, nor more than $5,000 for the second
offense, and not less than $300 nor more than $5,000 for the third offense,
and not less than $1,000 nor more than $10,000 for the fourth and each
subsequent offense, or five times the amount of the tax imposed, if any,
whichever is higher, for the second and each subsequent offense. A separate
and distinct offense shall be regarded as committed each day upon said
C. Any payment made by check which is returned to the City because of
insufficient funds may result in the Finance Director requiring the
retailer to make future payments by cashier's check or money order.
[Ord. No. 2002-92]
A. All retailers shall cause complete and accurate books, records and
accounts showing the gross receipts for sales of taxable prepared food
items for immediate consumption and alcoholic liquor and the taxes
collected each day, which shall be made available in the City for
examination by the City upon reasonable notice and during customary
business hours. [Ord. No. 2002-92]
B. The financial records of any restaurant, bar or other establishment
covered by this article submitted pursuant to this article or any rule and
regulation promulgated thereunder shall be considered confidential
proprietary information and shall not be disclosed except as permitted
by law. [Ord. No. 2002-92]
§ 39-1607 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 39-1611
1:1554
retailer shall continue any such violation, or permit any such violation to
exist after notification thereof.
§ 39-1611 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-1611
1:1555

ARTICLE XVII
Package Liquor Tax
§ 39-1701. [Ch. 39, Sec. 350] Title. [Ord. No. 2003-57]
This article shall be known and cited as the City of Bloomington privilege
tax upon the privilege of purchasing alcoholic liquor at retail, and the
tax herein imposed shall be known and cited as the City of Bloomington
privilege tax upon the privilege of purchasing alcoholic liquor at retail.
§ 39-1702. [Ch. 39, Sec. 351] Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, whenever any of the following words, terms
or definitions are used herein, they shall have the meaning ascribed to them
in this section:
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR — Alcoholic liquor is defined in the same manner as
the term is defined in Chapter 6, § 6-101, of the the Bloomington City Code,
1960, as amended, except, however, the term shall not include alcoholic
liquor beverages purchased for immediate consumption on the premises
where sold.
CITY — City of Bloomington.[Ord. No. 2003-57]
LIQUOR ESTABLISHMENT — Any premises required to obtain a retail
liquor license pursuant to Chapter 6 of the Bloomington City Code, 1960, as
amended, and any premises which may sell alcoholic liquor at retail without
a City of Bloomington license.
OWNER — Any person or persons having a sufficient proprietary interest in
conducting the operation of a liquor establishment so as to entitle such a
person or persons to all or a portion of the net receipts thereof.
PERSON — Any natural person, receiver, administrator, executor,
conservator, assignee, trust in perpetuity, trust, estate, firm copartnership,
joint venture, club, company, business trust, domestic or foreign
corporation, association, syndicate, society or any group of individuals
acting as a unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit, or
otherwise, whenever the term "person" is used in any clause prescribing
and imposing a penalty, the term as applied to associations shall mean the
owners or part-owners thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers
thereof.
SALE AT RETAIL — Any transfer of the ownership of alcoholic liquor to a
purchaser for the purposes of use or consumption and shall include any
transfer to a purchaser for use or consumption by any other person to
whom such purchaser may transfer the alcoholic liquor without a valuable
consideration.
§ 39-1701 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-1703
1:1557
§ 39-1703. [Ch. 39, Sec. 352] Imposition of tax. [Ord. No. 2008-7]
There is hereby levied and imposed upon the privilege of purchasing
alcoholic liquor at any liquor establishment in the City, a tax of 4% of the
purchase price, exclusive of any other tax charged for such alcoholic liquor.
§ 39-1704. [Ch. 39, Sec. 353] Liability for payment.
§ 39-1705. [Ch. 39, Sec. 354] Collection of tax. [Ord. No. 2003-57]
Every person required to collect the tax levied by this article shall secure
said tax from the consumer at the time he collects payment for the sale of
alcoholic liquor at retail. The amount due under the tax provided in this
article shall be stated separately on the invoice receipt or other statement
or memorandum of the payment given to the consumer at the time of
payment, unless the person required to collect the tax does not have a cash
register that separately states such tax. In any event the person required to
collect the tax shall keep records that clearly support total liquor sales and
liquor taxes due hereunder.
§ 39-1706. [Ch. 39, Sec. 355] Rules and regulations. [Ord. No.
2017-28]
The Finance Director of the City of Bloomington may promulgate rules and
regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this article concerning
the enforcement and application of this article. The term "rules and
regulations" includes, but is not limited to, a case by case determination
whether or not the tax imposed by this article applies.
§ 39-1707. [Ch. 39, Sec. 356] Filing of return. [Ord. No. 2003-57]
The owner or owners of each liquor establishment within the City of
Bloomington shall file tax returns showing tax receipts received during each
monthly period on forms prescribed by the City Manager. The returns shall
be due on or before the 25th day of the calendar month succeeding the end
of the monthly filing period. At the time of filing said returns, the owner
shall remit to the City of Bloomington all taxes collected for the period to
which the tax return applies.
A. The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of said tax shall be
borne by the person who seeks the privilege of purchasing alcoholic
liquor at retail at any liquor establishment, said person hereinafter
referred to as "consumer."
B. The tax herein levied shall be paid in addition to any and all other taxes
and charges. It shall be the duty of the owner, manager or operator of
every liquor establishment to secure said tax from the consumer of a
liquor establishment and remit to the City of Bloomington said tax
under the rules and regulations prescribed by the City Manager and as
otherwise provided in this article. [Ord. No. 2003-57]
§ 39-1703 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 39-1708
1:1558
§ 39-1708. [Ch. 39, Sec. 357] Failure to pay, collect, or remit tax.
[Ord. No. 2014-21]
Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax as herein provided or
required, or to file any tax return, the penalties, interest, and collection
procedures set forth in Article XV shall apply in addition to any other rights
and remedies provided to the City by law or ordinance.
§ 39-1709. [Ch. 39, Sec. 358] Records.
§ 39-1710. [Ch. 39, Sec. 359] Exemptions. [Ord. No. 2003-57]
The tax imposed under this article shall not apply or be imposed upon
a person organized and operated exclusively for charitable, religious, or
educational purposes to the extent alcoholic liquor is purchased by such
person and used solely for the charitable, religious or educational purposes
of such person and is not resold for profit.
§ 39-1711. [Ch. 39, Sec. 360] Suspension or revocation of licenses
for failure to comply; hearing.
A. Every owner, manager, or operator of a liquor establishment in the City
of Bloomington shall keep books and records which, at a minimum,
include a daily sheet showing:
(1) The amount of taxable receipts within the twenty-four-hour period;
and
(2) The actual liquor establishment tax receipts collected for the date
in question.
B. The City Manager or his delegate shall at all reasonable times have full
access to said books and records.
C. The financial records of any liquor establishment submitted pursuant to
this article or any rule and regulation promulgated thereunder shall not
be available for public inspection in order to protect the owners' right
to privacy except when necessary in any action to enforce collection of
tax under this article. [Ord. No. 2003-57]
A. Procedure for persons not holding a City liquor license: If the City
Manager, after a hearing held by or for him, shall find that any person
has willfully avoided collection or remittance of the tax imposed by this
article, he may suspend or revoke all City licenses held by such person.
The owner, manager, or operator of the liquor establishment shall have
an opportunity to be heard and such hearing to be held not less than
five days after notice of the time and place of the hearing addressed to
the owner, manager, or operator at his last known place of business.
The suspension or revocation of any license shall not release or
discharge the owner, manager, or operator of the liquor establishment
from his civil liability for the collection or remittance of the tax nor for
prosecution of such offense. [Ord. No. 2003-57]
§ 39-1708 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-1711
1:1559
§ 39-1712. [Ch. 39, Sec. 361] Disposition of proceeds of tax. [Ord.
No. 2003-57]
All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under this article,
including penalties, shall be paid into the treasury of the City of
Bloomington, and shall be credited to and deposited in the general fund of
the City.
§ 39-1713. [Ch. 39, Sec. 362] Penalty. [Ord. No. 2003-57]
Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or
refusing to comply with or resisting or opposing the enforcement of any of
the provisions of this article, except when otherwise specifically provided,
upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $25
nor more than $500. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense.
B. Procedure for persons holding a City liquor license: If the Liquor
Commissioner, after a hearing held by or for him, shall find that any
person has willfully avoided collection or remittance of the tax imposed
by this article, he may suspend or revoke the retail liquor license held
by said person. The suspension or revocation of the retail liquor license
shall not release or discharge the owner, manager or operator of the
liquor establishment from his civil liability for the collection or
remittance of the tax nor for prosecution of such offense. [Ord. No.
2003-57]
§ 39-1711 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 39-1713
1:1560
ARTICLE XVIII
Local Motor Fuel Tax
§ 39-1801. [Ch. 39, Sec. 370] Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, whenever any of the following words, terms
or definitions are used herein, they have the meaning ascribed to them in
this section:
BULK USER — Any person who purchases motor fuel for storage in bulk
storage facilities located within the City, which facilities are owned, leased,
or controlled by the person, for subsequent dispensing into the supply tanks
of internal combustion engines operated by the person.
MOTOR FUEL — All volatile and inflammable liquid produced, blended, or
compounded for the purposes of, or which are suitable or practicable for,
operating motor vehicles.
RETAIL GASOLINE DEALER — Any person who engages in the business of
selling motor fuel in the City, to a purchaser for use or consumption, and
not for resale in any form.
SALE, RESALE or SELLING — Any transfer of ownership or possession, or
both, exchange, or barter, conditional or otherwise, in any manner or by any
means whatsoever for valuable consideration.[Ord. No. 2014-34]
§ 39-1802. [Ch. 39, Sec. 371] Imposition of tax.
§ 39-1803. [Ch. 39, Sec. 372] Collection by retail gasoline dealers.
A. There is levied and imposed upon the purchase of each gallon of motor
fuel, or fraction thereof, sold at retail within the corporate limits of the
City, irrespective of the unit of measure in which it is actually sold, a tax
at the rate of $0.08 per gallon from and after May 1, 2019.
B. The tax herein levied shall be paid in addition to any and all other taxes
and charges. The tax herein imposed is not based on the selling or
purchase price or gross receipts from the sale or purchase of motor
fuel.
C. The ultimate incident of and liability for payment of the tax is to be
borne by the retail purchaser of motor fuel. However, the local motor
fuel tax shall be collected by each retail gasoline dealer as set forth in
§ 39-1803. Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to impose a
tax upon the occupation of persons engaged in the retail sale of motor
fuel. [Ord. No. 2019-20]
A. Each retail gasoline dealer in the City shall have the duty to collect the
local motor fuel tax from each purchaser of motor fuel at the time the
consideration for such purchase is paid and to remit said collection to
the City in the time required by § 39-1804A. Any person filing a return
may retain 1% of the tax they collect to reimburse them for expenses
incurred in connection with collections and remitting the tax.
§ 39-1801 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-1803
1:1561
§ 39-1804. [Ch. 39, Sec. 373] Transmittal of tax revenue; credits
and refunds.
§ 39-1805. [Ch. 39, Sec. 374] Revenue to be used for transportation
infrastructure projects. [Ord. No. 2014-34]
The revenue produced by the tax imposed in § 39-1802 shall be used for
transportation infrastructure projects.
§ 39-1806. [Ch. 39, Sec. 375] Rules and regulations. [Ord. No.
2017-28]
The Finance Director shall cause the provisions of this article to be enforced
and administered and in order to do so is authorized to promulgate and
publish such rules and regulations and make such rulings and decisions not
in conflict with this article which he/she may deem necessary to administer
and enforce the provisions of this article.
§ 39-1807. [Ch. 39, Sec. 376] Penalty. [Ord. No. 2014-34]
Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax as herein provided or
required, or to file any tax return, the penalties, interest, and collection
B. Each retail gasoline dealer shall be the trustee for the City in the
collection and remittance of such local motor fuel taxes.
C. If any retail gasoline dealer fails to collect the local motor fuel tax, such
retail gasoline dealer shall remain liable for the local motor fuel tax not
collected and shall pay the amount of the local motor fuel tax due to the
City in accordance with this article.
D. Each retail gasoline dealer shall have the duty to maintain complete
and accurate books, records and accounts showing the gross receipts
for the sale of motor fuel and the taxes collected from the purchaser
thereof, which shall be available in the City for examination and for
audit by the City upon reasonable notice during customary business
hours. [Ord. No. 2017-28]
A. Each retail gasoline dealer in the City shall file tax returns showing the
gross receipts received during each calendar month period upon forms
provided by the City Finance Director. Returns for each calendar month
will be due on or before the 25th day of the next calendar month. (e.g.
the return for January shall be due on or before the 25th day of
February).
B. Every bulk user shall transmit to the Finance Department on or before
the 25th day of each calendar month, a sum of money equal to the
amount of motor fuel tax owing for the preceding month, accompanied
by a sworn monthly return in a format prescribed by the Finance
Director containing such information as the Finance Director may
reasonably require. [Ord. No. 2017-28]
§ 39-1803 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 39-1807
1:1562
procedures set forth in Article XV shall apply in addition to any other rights
and remedies provided to the City by law or ordinance.
§ 39-1807 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-1807
1:1563

ARTICLE XIX
Amusement Tax
§ 39-1901. [Ch. 39, Sec. 401] Definitions.
For the purposes of this Article XIX, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
AMUSEMENT — Includes the provision of exhibitive entertainment,
including, but not by way of limitation, the following activities and sports:
any theatrical, dramatic, musical or artistic performance; motion picture
show or movie; video or videotape; digital versatile disk (DVD); subscription
video programming services; carnival; and athletic contest, sport or game,
including, but not limited to, archery, shooting galleries and shooting
ranges, boxing, wrestling, skating, dancing, swimming, racing or riding
animals or vehicles, baseball, basketball, softball, football, tennis,
racquetball, handball, golf, hockey, track and field games, soccer, rugby,
bowling, billiards and pool games.
GROSS RECEIPTS — All fees or charges received or collected in the form
of admission fees or other charges for admission to or for the use or
rental of any amusement for the purpose of witnessing, participating in, or
utilizing any amusement regardless of whether such fees or charges are
characterized as admission fees, membership fees, use charges, rent, rental
or service charges, exclusive of any other fee or tax imposed by the United
States government, the State of Illinois, the City or any other governmental
unit. A fee or charge which entitles the patrons in regard to any amusement
operated within the corporate limits of the City to bona fide services in
addition to, or unrelated to, the witnessing or watching the amusement, will
not be subject to the tax provided for in this section, provided, however:
OWNER — Any Person having an ownership interest in or conducting the
operation of a place or business which provides amusements.
PERSON — Any natural individual, firm, organization, society, foundation,
institution, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture,
limited liability company, public or private corporation, receiver, executor,
Where a fee or charge is comprised of identifiable components,
packages or tiers, the tax provided for in this Article XIX will be
imposed on any such components, packages or tiers that (a) provide
solely for admission to any facility for the purposes of witnessing any
amusement, or (b) are a condition precedent to being granted
permission to witnessing or watching any amusement; and
A.
Where a single fee or charge for admission to any facility for the
purpose of witnessing any amusement also entitles the patron of the
amusement to the incidental use of appurtenant services or facilities,
the tax provided for in this Article XIX will be imposed on such fee
or charge, provided the predominant activity of the facility is an
amusement, unless an allocation order has been issued as provided for
in § 39-1906 of this Article XIX.
B.
§ 39-1901 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-1901
1:1565
trustee or other representative appointed by order of any court, or any
other entity recognized by law.
SUBSCRIPTION VIDEO PROGRAMMING SERVICE — A cable service or
video service, as such terms are defined in the Cable and Video Competition
Law of 2007, as amended, 220 ILCS 5/21-201.[Ord. No. 2017-28]
§ 39-1902. [Ch. 39, Sec. 402] Tax imposed.
§ 39-1903. [Ch. 39, Sec. 403] Books and records: inspection;
contents.
§ 39-1904. [Ch. 39, Sec. 404] Transmittal of tax revenue by owner.
A. From and after August 1, 2014 a tax is hereby imposed upon all persons
operating amusements within the corporate limits of the City, and upon
all persons operating places which provide amusements within the
corporate limits of the City in an amount equal to 4.0% of the gross
receipts for each amusement. This tax will be in addition to all other
fees and taxes imposed by law.
B. Any person subject to the amusement tax may separately itemize and
charge to patrons in addition to any admission fee or other charge, the
amount of amusement tax attributable to the admission fee or other
charge. In the event the tax imposed by this section is not shown or
collected as a separate charge, all admission fees or other charges shall
be deemed exclusive of the amusement tax specified hereinabove.
[Ord. No. 2014-33]
A. The Owner shall be subject to the audit, inspection and recordkeeping
provisions of Article XV, commonly referred to as the Tax Rights and
Responsibility Ordinance. To the extent reasonably possible, entry will
be conducted in a manner that is least disruptive to the business of the
place providing amusements.
B. It will be unlawful for any person to prevent, hinder, or interfere with
the City Finance Director, the City Treasurer or their duly designated
deputies or representatives in the discharge of their respective duties
in the performance of this subsection. It is the duty of every Owner
which provides amusements to keep accurate and complete books and
records to which the City Treasurer, the City Finance Director or their
respective deputies or representatives will at all times have full access.
[Ord. No. 2014-33]
A. Each owner which provides amusements must file tax returns showing
the gross receipts received during each calendar month period upon
forms provided by the City Finance Director. Returns for each calendar
month will be due on or before the 25th day of the next calendar month,
(e.g. the return for January shall be due on or before the 25th day of
February; the return for February shall be due on or before the 25th day
of March; etc.). Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event that the
§ 39-1901 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 39-1904
1:1566
§ 39-1905. [Ch. 39, Sec. 405] Registration. [Ord. No. 2014-33]
Every owner which provides amusements in the City will register with the
Finance Department by July 31, 2014 or the date of becoming such an
owner, whichever is later.
§ 39-1906. [Ch. 39, Sec. 406] Allocation orders.
owner of the place which provides amusements is allowed to file Illinois
Retailers' Occupation Tax and Illinois Service Occupation Tax returns
with the Illinois Department of Revenue at intervals which are greater
than monthly, that owner will be allowed to file tax returns relative to
the tax imposed by this Article XIX with the City at the same intervals.
At the time of the filing of said tax returns, the owner will pay to the City
Treasurer all taxes due for the period to which the tax return applies.
B. If, for any reason, any tax due pursuant to this § 39-1904 is not paid
when due, penalties and interest will be imposed in accordance with the
provisions of Article XV, § 39-1511, of this Chapter 39.
C. Any person filing a return may retain 1% of the tax they collect to
reimburse them for expenses incurred in connection with collections
and remitting the tax. [Ord. No. 2017-28]
A. A person, obligated to pay the tax provided for in this Article XIX may
apply for an allocation order by submitting a written application to the
Finance Department, on a form provided by the Finance Department,
together with an application fee in an amount established from time to
time by the Finance Director.
B. The Finance Director will select a reasonable time and place for a
hearing upon each application, provide the applicant with written
notice of the hearing date, by certified mail, not less than 15 days prior
to such hearing, and preside over the hearing. Any person or owner
may appear at the hearing or by attorney. The Finance Director will
forward written recommendations to the City Manager within 30 days
of the close of such hearing.
C. The Finance Director will not recommend, and the City Manager will
not issue an allocation order unless the applicant establishes, by clear
and convincing evidence at the hearing, that a specific portion or
portions of the fee or charge is attributable to nonamusement items,
services or facilities. An allocation order will set forth the specific
portion or portions of the fee or charge attributable to nonamusement
items, services or facilities and the specific portion or portions
attributable to an amusement. From and after the issuance of an
allocation order, the owner named in the allocation order will pay the
tax imposed under this Article XIX, with respect to the subject fee or
charge, based only upon the portion or portions of the subject fee or
charge attributable to the amusement. [Ord. No. 2017-28]
§ 39-1904 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-1907
1:1567
§ 39-1907. [Ch. 39, Sec. 407] Exemptions.
§ 39-1908. [Ch. 39, Sec. 408] Collection. [Ord. No. 2014-33]
Whenever any person shall fail to pay the tax imposed by this Article XV, the
City Attorney will, upon request of the City Manager, bring or cause to be
brought an action to enforce the payment of said tax on behalf of the City in
any court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 39-1909. [Ch. 39, Sec. 409] Suspension of licenses. [Ord. No.
2014-33]
If the City Manager, after a hearing held by him or for him by his designee,
shall find that any person has willfully avoided the payment of any tax
imposed by this Article XIX, he may suspend or revoke all City licenses held
by such tax evader. The person shall have an opportunity to be heard at
such hearing to be held not less than 15 days after being mailed notice, by
certified mail, of the time when and the place where the hearing is to be
held, addressed to said person at said person's last know place of business
or home address. Any suspension or revocation of any license(s) shall not
release or discharge the person from his civil liability for the payment of the
tax nor from prosecution for such offense.
§ 39-1910. [Ch. 39, Sec. 410] Penalties.
A. The provisions of this section do not apply to any amusement sponsored
and conducted by, and the proceeds of which inure exclusively and
solely to the benefit of, any bona fide religious, charitable, or not-forprofit
person or organization; provided, however, that such person or
organization has received an exemption from the State of Illinois and
the United States Internal Revenue Service exempting that person or
organization from the payment of state and federal income taxes.
B. The provisions of this section do not apply to any non-City operated
amusement whenever both of the following conditions exist:
(1) The amusement is operated or conducted by a park district, a
school district, a public or private university, any other unit of local
government, or interscholastic organization, whether individually
or jointly; and
(2) The place where the amusement is conducted is owned by a park
district, a school district, a public or private university, or any other
unit of local government, whether individually or jointly. [Ord. No.
2014-33]
A. Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting,
or refusing to comply with or unlawfully resisting or opposing the
enforcement of any of the provisions of this Article XIX, except when
otherwise specifically provided, upon conviction will be punished by a
fine of not less than $200 nor more than $750 for the first offense, and
§ 39-1907 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 39-1910
1:1568
§ 39-1911. [Ch. 39, Sec. 411] Rules and regulations. [Ord. No.
2017-28]
The Finance Director shall cause the provisions of this article to be enforced
and administered and in order to do so is authorized to promulgate and
publish such rules and regulations and make such rulings and decisions not
in conflict with this article which he/she may deem necessary to administer
and enforce the provisions of this article.
not less than $500 nor more than $750 for the second and each
subsequent offense in any 180-day period.
B. Each day upon which a person continues any violation of this Article
XIX, or permit any such violation to exist after notification thereof, will
constitute a separate and distinct offense.
C. Any person subjected to the penalties provided for by this § 39-1910 will
not be discharged or released from the payment of any tax due.
D. Notwithstanding any of the foregoing provisions of this section, the
penalties for late payment or late filing described in Article XV shall be
the exclusive remedies against an owner which files either the tax
return or tax payment after the due date but before the City issues a
notice of tax delinquency. After the City issues a notice of tax
delinquency, the Owner may be liable for both the failure to file penalty
described in Article XV and for the penalties for violating this chapter
as herein described. [Ord. No. 2014-33]
§ 39-1910 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-1911
1:1569

ARTICLE XX
Short Term Rental Tax Law
§ 39-2001. [Ch. 39, Sec. 425] Short title. [Ord. No. 2018-109]
This Article XX may be cited as the City of Bloomington Short Term Rental
Tax Law.
§ 39-2002. [Ch. 39, Sec. 426] Definitions.
DIRECTOR — The Finance Director of the City of Bloomington.
DWELLING — A building designed or used principally for residential
occupancy, including without limitation, single-family dwellings, two-family
dwellings, and multiple-family dwellings.
FINANCE DEPARTMENT — The Finance Department of the City of
Bloomington.
GROSS RENTAL CHARGE — The total consideration paid for the rental of a
Short-Term Residential Rental Unit.
GUEST — Any person who pays a Gross Rental Charge.
INTERMEDIARY — An organization, company, business or person that rents
a Short-Term Residential Rental Unit and collects the Gross Rental Charge
for that rental from a Guest via the Internet or other digital means.
OPERATOR — Any organization, company, business or person who owns or
operates a Short-Term Residential Rental Unit.
SHORT-TERM RENTAL TAX — The tax imposed under § 39-2003.
SHORT-TERM RESIDENTIAL UNIT — All or part of a dwelling within the
City that is rented to individuals or families who occupy overnight
accommodations for a period of less than 30 days.[Ord. No. 2018-109]
§ 39-2003. [Ch. 39, Sec. 427] Tax imposed.
§ 39-2004. [Ch. 39, Sec. 428] Collection by intermediary.
A. A tax is imposed on the privilege of renting a Short-Term Residential
Rental Unit within the City of Bloomington. The tax is imposed at a rate
of 6% of the Gross Rental Charge.
B. The tax imposed under this section is in addition to any and all other
taxes and charges.
C. The guest bears the liability for the payment of the tax. Each
Intermediary or Operator is required to collect the tax from the guest
and remit it as set forth under this Article XX.
D. The tax under this section is imposed on and after April 1, 2019. [Ord.
No. 2018-109]
§ 39-2001 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-2004
1:1571
§ 39-2005. [Ch. 39, Sec. 429] Collection by operator.
§ 39-2006. [Ch. 39, Sec. 430] Transmittal of tax.
§ 39-2007. [Ch. 39, Sec. 431] Recordkeeping; inspection of records.
§ 39-2008. [Ch. 39, Sec. 432] Proceeds. [Ord. No. 2018-109]
All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under this ordinance,
including penalties, shall be transferred to the City General Fund to be
retained until lawfully appropriated and expended by the City of
Bloomington.
A. Unless otherwise provided by law, each Intermediary that collects a
Gross Rental Charge for a Short-Term Rental from a Guest shall collect
and account for the Short-Term Rental Tax at the time that the Gross
Rental Charge is paid.
B. Any Intermediary who collects the Short-Term Rental Tax shall do as a
trustee for and on account of the City of Bloomington. [Ord. No.
2018-109]
A. For any Short-Term Rental, if the Short-Term Rental Tax is not collected
by an Intermediary under § 39-2004 then the Operator has the duty to
collect and account for the Short-Term Rental Tax at the time of the
Short-Term Rental.
B. Any Operator who collects the Short-Term Rental Tax shall do as a
trustee for and on account of the City of Bloomington. [Ord. No.
2018-109]
A. All Short-Term Rental Tax collected by an Intermediary or Operator in
any month must be paid over to the Finance Department by the 25th
day of the following month.
B. All payments under this section must be remitted in the form and
manner as required by the Director. [Ord. No. 2018-109]
A. Each Intermediary and Operator has a duty to maintain complete and
accurate books, records, and accounts show the Gross Rental Charges
and Short-Term Rental Tax collected from Guests.
B. The books, records, and accounts under this section must be available
in the City for examination and for audit by the City. Any examination by
the City may be made only after reasonable notice and may be made
only during customary business hours. [Ord. No. 2018-109]
§ 39-2004 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 39-2009
1:1572
§ 39-2009. [Ch. 39, Sec. 433] Rules and regulations. [Ord. No.
2018-109]
The Finance Director is authorized to adopt, promulgate, and enforce rules
and regulations pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this
Article XX.
§ 39-2010. [Ch. 39, Sec. 434] Penalties.
A. If, for any reason, any tax imposed by this Article XX is not paid or
remitted when due, then interest and penalties apply as set forth in
Article XV of this chapter.
B. The Corporation Counsel may bring any appropriate legal action to
enforce the provision of this Article XX. [Ord. No. 2018-109]
§ 39-2009 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-2010
1:1573
Chapter 40
TAXICABS
§ 39-2010 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 39-2010
1:1574
ARTICLE I
Purpose, Scope of Chapter and Definitions
§ 40-101. [Ch. 40, Sec. 101] Purpose and scope of chapter.
§ 40-102. [Ch. 40, Sec. 102] Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this chapter shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning. Additional definitions
pertaining to transportation network services, transportation network
companies and transportation network drivers are set forth in Article XII of
this chapter.
APPROVED — Reasonably acceptable to the Chief of Police of the City of
Bloomington or his or her designee.
CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT OF THE CITY OF BLOOMINGTON —
The area bounded by the following streets: Beginning at the intersection
of Locust and Roosevelt Streets, thence east on Locust to Prairie Street;
thence south to Douglas Street; thence east to Gridley Street; thence south
to Jefferson Street; thence east to McLean Street; thence south to Front
Street; thence west to Gridley Street; thence south to Olive Street; thence
west to Prairie Street; thence south to Jackson Street; thence west along
Jackson Street and an extension thereof to Main Street; thence north to
Kentucky Alley; thence west to Center Street; thence north to Olive Street;
thence west to Lee Street; thence north to Front Street; thence west to
Oak Street; thence north to Monroe Street; thence east to Roosevelt Street;
thence north to a point immediately south of Mulberry Street; thence east to
a point halfway between the Roosevelt Street right-of-way and the Madison
Street right-of-way; thence north to Locust Street.
CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT OF THE TOWN OF NORMAL — The area
bounded by the following streets: Starting at the point in the intersection
of Fell Avenue and West College Avenue, then South to the intersection of
A. The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety and
welfare through the regulation of transportation of passengers in
taxicabs, downtown shuttles and transportation network services
vehicles as defined in this chapter. The City Council finds that this
purpose is furthered by regulations that provide for the safe, affordable,
reliable and accessible transportation of passengers in vehicles
regulated hereunder.
B. This chapter regulates the transportation of passengers for hire in
vehicles which are not operated regularly upon established routes.
Excluded from coverage are motor vehicles operated for purposes of
mass transit by the Regional Transit Authority, shuttle services
operated by hotels, motels and apartment complexes as a courtesy to
their guests or tenants, school buses, emergency medical vehicles and
vehicles not for hire actually operated by the lessee. [Ord. No.
2015-68]
§ 40-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-102
1:1575
South Fell Avenue and the South right-of-way of the railroad, then North
Easterly along said right-of-way to the point of the North West corner of
the Parkinson Street, parking lot, then South to the center line of Parkinson
Street, then North Easterly along said street center line to the intersection
of South Linden Street, then South to the intersection of Linden and Taylor
Street, then East to the center of the intersection of South Oak Street, then
North to the point of the intersection of the North row of East College
Avenue and the North row of the railroad, then North Easterly along said
row to the Southern row of East Mulberry Street, the along said row
Westerly to the intersection of North Linden Street, then South along the
street center line to the intersection of E College Avenue, then West to the
point of beginning.
CERTIFICATE — A certificate of public convenience issued by the City
Manager authorizing the holder to conduct a taxicab or downtown shuttle
business in the City of Bloomington or such other areas to which this Code
applies pursuant to an intergovernmental cooperation agreement.
CITY MANAGER — The City Manager of the City of Bloomington or his or
her designee.
COUNCIL — The City Council of the City of Bloomington.
CRUISING — The driving of a taxicab on the streets, alleys or public places
of the City of Bloomington and other such areas to which this Code applies
pursuant to an intergovernmental cooperation agreement without a paying
passenger and apparently in search of, or soliciting prospective passengers
for hire.
DOWNTOWN SHUTTLE — A vehicle with an authorized load capacity of
from 12 to 70 persons that transports passengers in return for payment
when such transportation either commences or terminates within the
Central Business District of the City of Bloomington or the Town of Normal.
Downtown shuttles may only be operated on Thursdays, Fridays and
Saturdays between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 4:00 a.m. the following
morning. Downtown shuttles may also legally operate at such other dates
and times as provided in § 40-1001 of this chapter.
DRIVER — The operator of a vehicle.
DRIVER'S PERMIT — The written permission or license granted by the
City Manager to a person to drive a taxicab or downtown shuttle upon the
streets of the City of Bloomington and such other areas to which this Code
applies pursuant to an intergovernmental cooperation agreement.
HOLDER — A person to whom a certificate of public convenience has been
issued.
HORSE DRAWN VEHICLE — Any vehicle pulled by a horse or other animal
which may be hired for the transportation of passengers. Such vehicles will
be subject to all appropriate provisions of this chapter of the City Code and
to the provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code.
HUB — Public places in the City of Bloomington or such other jurisdiction
to which this chapter applies pursuant to an intergovernmental cooperation
§ 40-102 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 40-102
1:1576
agreement, designated by the respective corporate authority as reserved
for the exclusive use of downtown shuttles on dates when they may legally
operate.
IDENTIFICATION CARD — A card issued by the City Clerk's office
containing the photograph and identification information of a person
authorized to drive a taxicab or downtown shuttle in the City of Bloomington
or such other jurisdiction to which this chapter applies pursuant to an
intergovernmental cooperation agreement.
LICENSE YEAR — One calendar year beginning January 1 and ending
December 31st.
MANIFEST — A daily record prepared by a taxicab or downtown shuttle
driver of all trips made by said driver showing time and place of origin,
destination, number of passengers, and the amount of fare of each trip.
OPEN STAND — A public place alongside the curb of a street or elsewhere
in the City of Bloomington or other jurisdiction to which this chapter applies
pursuant to an intergovernmental cooperation agreement designated by
the respective corporate authority as reserved exclusively for the use of
taxicabs.
PERSON — Includes an individual, a corporation, limited liability company,
partnership, or other legal entity.
RATE CARD — A card or sign required to be displayed in or on each taxicab
which details the rates of fare then in force.
SEX OFFENDER — Any person convicted, adjudicated or otherwise found
to be a sex offender as that term is defined in the Sex Offender Registration
Act, 730 ILCS150/2. Said term shall include any person found to have
committed a sexual offense as described in said statute, regardless of
whether that person is required to register as a sex offender in Illinois. Said
term shall include convictions, adjudications or findings of a violation of any
substantially similar federal, uniform code of military justice, sister state,
or foreign country law. This term shall not be construed so as to violate
provisions of the Juvenile Court Act.
TAXICAB — Any vehicle used in the business of carrying passengers for
hire not operated regularly upon established routes. However, the following
shall not be considered taxicabs:
Vehicles carrying passengers for hire by a transportation network
company driver duly licensed and performing transportation network
company services pursuant to Article XII of this chapter;
A.
B. Emergency medical vehicles;
Shuttle services operated by hotels, motels and apartment complexes
as a courtesy to their guests or tenants;
C.
D. Mass transit operated by the City of Bloomington and Town of Normal;
E. Downtown shuttles as defined in this section;
§ 40-102 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-102
1:1577
TAXIMETER — A meter instrument or device attached to a taxicab which
measures mechanically and/or electrically the distance driven and the
waiting time upon which the fare is based.
WAITING TIME —
F. Charter buses.
The following times when a hired taxicab is not in motion, to wit:
Time commencing three minutes after arrival at the place to which
the taxicab has been summoned and ending with the passenger's
entry into the vehicle;
(1)
(2) Time consumed by ordinary traffic delays;
Time the taxicab is not in motion due to the request, act, or fault of
a passenger or passengers.
(3)
A.
It shall not include:
(1) Time lost due to inefficiency of the vehicle or its driver;
(2) Time consumed by premature response to a call;
(3) Any other time lost. [Ord. No. 2015-68]
B.
§ 40-102 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 40-102
1:1578
ARTICLE II
Certificates of Public Convenience
§ 40-201. [Ch. 40, Sec. 201] Certificate required. [Ord. No. 2015-68]
Except as provided in § 40-213 of this article, no person shall permit or
operate a taxicab or downtown shuttle owned or controlled by him to
be operated upon the streets of the City of Bloomington or such other
jurisdiction to which this chapter applies pursuant to an intergovernmental
agreement without having first obtained a certificate of public convenience
from the City Manager. Any person who has received a certificate of public
convenience who desires to drive a taxicab or downtown shuttle must also
have a driver's permit from the City of Bloomington as provided by this
chapter.
§ 40-202. [Ch. 40, Sec. 202] Application for certificate. [Ord. No.
2018-89]
An application for a certificate of public convenience shall be filed with the
City Clerk upon forms provided by the City of Bloomington. The fee for each
application shall be as set forth in the Schedule of Fees. The fee must be
paid prior to the processing of the application. Each application shall be
verified upon oath or affirmation and shall furnish the following information:
A. The full name of the applicant along with the business and residential
address of the applicant (if the applicant is a firm, limited liability
company or corporation, the applicant must include the names,
telephone number, email and physical addresses of the President,
secretary, treasurer and agent of the entity);
B. The financial status of the applicant, including a statement of assets
and liabilities; financial information shall also include the amount of all
unpaid judgments against the applicant and the nature of the
transactions or acts giving rise to said judgments;
C. The experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers;
D. Any facts which the applicant believes tend to prove that public
convenience and necessity would be benefited by the granting of a
certificate to the applicant;
E. The number of vehicles to be operated or controlled by the applicant,
including the number of seats in each proposed vehicle;
F. The color scheme or insignia to be used to designate the vehicle or
vehicles of the applicant;
G. If the applicant is a limited liability company or corporation, the chief
executive and Chief Financial Officers shall sign the application,
indicating their positions in the organization and verifying the
information stated therein;
§ 40-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-202
1:1579
§ 40-203. [Ch. 40, Sec. 203] Investigation. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
The Chief of Police shall cause an investigation to be made of the character,
fitness and qualifications of the applicant, and shall transmit the findings
to the City Manager. This investigation shall include a background check
conducted by the Illinois State Police and may require the fingerprinting of
the applicant or its officers. In addition to any other fee required by this
chapter, every person for whom a background investigation is required shall
pay a fee as set forth in the Schedule of Fees to the City of Bloomington for
costs of an initial background investigation and shall pay an additional fee
as set forth in the Schedule of Fees to cover the costs of fingerprinting if
deemed necessary by the City Manager.
§ 40-204. [Ch. 40, Sec. 204] Qualifications for issuance of
certificate.
H. If the applicant is a limited liability company or corporation, the
applicant must include the Articles of Incorporation for the entity and, if
the entity has existed for more than one year, a Certificate of Good
Standing issued by the Secretary of State;
I. If the applicant is a partnership, the name, telephone number, email
and physical address of each partner, along with information as to
whether any partner has been convicted of a felony and, if so, the
nature of the conviction and the jurisdiction in which it occurred; each
partner shall sign the application form;
J. Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony and, if so, the
nature of the conviction and the jurisdiction in which it occurred. If the
applicant is a corporation, limited liability company or other business
organization, whether any officer of the organization has ever been
convicted of a felony, and, if so, the nature of the felony and the
jurisdiction in which it occurred.
K. Whether the applicant, or, if the applicant is a partnership, corporation,
limited liability company, or other organization, whether any partner,
officer or person having more than 10% of the stock in said
organization, owes any outstanding fines, judgment debts, amounts for
water or other City services, taxes, fees or any other amounts to the
City of Bloomington or to such other municipality to which this chapter
applies pursuant to an intergovernmental cooperation agreement;
L. Applications lacking any of the information required in this section, or
lacking a signed verification as required by this section, will be
considered incomplete and will not be processed or accepted.
M. Certificate holders shall report any changes in information furnished in
their application for a Certificate of Public Convenience to the City
Clerk in writing within 10 days of the change. Failure to so report may
be cause for suspension or revocation of the certificate. [Ord. No.
2015-68]
§ 40-202 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 40-204
1:1580
A. No certificate of public convenience to engage in the business of
operating a taxicab or downtown shuttle shall be issued to or held by
any person:
(1) Who has been convicted of a felony within seven years of the date
of application or who has been released from incarceration for a
felony conviction within seven years prior to the date of
application; or
(2) Whose license to operate a taxicab or a downtown shuttle in any
jurisdiction has been suspended or revoked during the three years
prior to the date of application; or
(3) Who owes the City of Bloomington or such other municipality to
which this chapter applies pursuant to an intergovernmental
cooperation agreement any outstanding fines, judgment debts,
delinquent amounts for water or other City services, taxes, fees or
any other amounts. This provision may be waived by the City
Manager of the jurisdiction owed said amounts if the City Manager
finds the applicant has entered into a satisfactory payment
agreement providing for full payment to the jurisdiction of all
outstanding amounts. Any certificate or license issued pursuant to
such an agreement shall be probationary in the sense that it shall
be contingent upon full compliance with the agreement and shall
be terminated and revoked upon failure to comply therewith.
(4) Who has been found to have violated any of the provisions of this
chapter or of the ordinances of the City of Bloomington or such
other municipality to which this chapter applies pursuant to an
intergovernmental cooperation agreement more than three times
in the five years prior to the date of application.
(5) Who provides false or misleading information to the City on their
application and related documents. Failure to report any felony
conviction, regardless of when or where it occurred, shall be
deemed the providing of materially false information for purposes
of application of this section and will result in denial of a certificate.
B. No certificate of public convenience to operate a taxicab or downtown
shuttle business shall be issued to or held by any firm, corporation,
limited liability company or other entity if any officer thereof would be
ineligible for a license under the conditions specified in Subsection A
above.
C. No applicant who is a sex offender as that term is defined in § 40-102 of
this chapter shall be eligible to receive a certificate of public
convenience and necessity. If the applicant is a corporation or limited
liability company, no such entity having as its chief stock-holder,
President, secretary or any other officer a person who is a sex offender
as defined under § 40-102 of this chapter shall be eligible to receive a
certificate of public convenience and necessity. [Ord. No. 2015-68]
§ 40-204 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-205
1:1581
§ 40-205. [Ch. 40, Sec. 205] Liability insurance required.
§ 40-206. [Ch. 40, Sec. 206] Issuance.
A. Before any certificate of public convenience, license or permit to
operate a taxicab or downtown shuttle shall be issued or renewed, the
certificate holder owner shall file with the City Clerk proof of an
insurance policy issued by an insurance company licensed to do
business in the State of Illinois, providing insurance coverage for each
and every taxicab or downtown shuttle owned, operated, dispatched or
leased by the applicant against liability upon the owner in the minimum
amounts provided in this section.
B. For taxicabs, the minimum amount of insurance required shall be as
follows:
(1) $250,000 for bodily injury or death per person;
(2) $500,000 for bodily injury or death per accident; and
(3) $50,000 for property damage per accident.
C. For downtown shuttles, the minimum amount required shall be a
combined single limit for each accident of $1,000,000.
D. Such policy shall further provide that insolvency or bankruptcy of the
insured shall not release the insurance company from any payment due
under such policy; and, if by reason of such insolvency or bankruptcy,
an execution on a judgment against the insured is returned unsatisfied,
the judgment creditor shall have a right of action against the insurance
company to recover the amount of such judgment to the same extent
that the insured would have had to recover against the company had
the insured paid the judgment.
E. The policy shall provide that it cannot be cancelled until 30 days'
written notice of such cancellation shall have been given to the City
Clerk.
F. If the owner of any taxicab or downtown shuttle shall fail to provide
within 30 days after receipt of notice of cancellation another policy of
insurance complying with this section, then any license or certificate
issued for such taxicab or downtown shuttle shall automatically become
void and of no effect.
G. The cancellation or other termination of any insurance policies issued
for or in compliance with the provisions of this section shall
automatically terminate any certificate or license issued for the taxicab
or downtown shuttle covered by such insurance policy, unless another
policy complying with the provisions of this section shall be provided
and in full force and effect at the time of such cancellation or
termination. [Ord. No. 2015-68]
§ 40-205 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 40-206
1:1582
§ 40-207. [Ch. 40, Sec. 207] License fees.
A. The City Manager is authorized to issue a certificate of public
convenience to any qualified applicant for the operation of a taxicab or
downtown shuttle, provided that the applicant qualifies under § 40-204,
has paid all fees and has provided proof of the insurance required under
this article to the City Clerk. The certificate shall contain a
distinguishing number, name of the business, the address of the
business and the number of vehicles to be operated.
B. If an application for the issuance or renewal of a certificate is denied,
the City Manager shall issue a written notice of denial, together with
findings in support of the denial, to the applicant. The applicant may,
within 10 days of the mailing of the notice of denial, make a written
request for a hearing to appeal the denial. Failure to timely make such a
request will waive the right to appeal. The request must be submitted to
the office of the City of Bloomington Corporation Counsel located at 109
East Olive Street, Bloomington, Illinois 61701. Upon receipt of a timely
written request for a hearing, the Corporation Counsel's office shall
schedule a hearing on the appeal in the City of Bloomington
Administrative Court and shall mail notice of the date and time of a
hearing to the applicant. Said hearing shall be set for a date within 30
days of the Corporation Counsel's receipt of the request for an appeal.
If, at the appeal hearing, the applicant establishes by a preponderance
of the evidence that the denial was based upon incorrect findings, the
City Manager shall issue a certificate. If, at such hearing, the denial is
found to have been based upon correct findings, or if the applicant fails
to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that the findings forming
the basis for the denial were incorrect, the denial shall become final. An
applicant for a certificate of public convenience whose application is
denied shall not be eligible to reapply for a certificate for a period of
two years from the date of the denial, or from the date of any decision
upholding the denial. Any corporation, limited liability company or
other legal entity in which an applicant who has been denied a
certificate has an ownership interest of 25% or more shall likewise be
prohibited from applying for a certificate for a period of two years.
[Ord. No. 2015-68]
A. Payment. No certificate shall be issued or continued in operation unless
the holder thereof has paid an annual license fee as set forth in the
Schedule of Fees for the first taxicab or downtown shuttle and an
amount as set forth in the Schedule of Fees for each additional vehicle
operated under the certificate of public convenience. Said license fees
shall be paid prior to issuance of a new certificate and, in the case of
renewals, shall be paid in advance of the year for which the certificate
is to be renewed. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
B. Installments. At the option of the holder, the annual license fee above
stated may be paid in two installments in advance, the first half of said
year being payable on or before the first day of July of each year.
§ 40-206 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-207
1:1583
§ 40-208. [Ch. 40, Sec. 208] Number of taxicabs. [Ord. No. 2015-68]
Each holder may operate the number of taxicabs or downtown shuttles for
which the holder's certificate is issued. Additions to or reductions in the
number of taxicabs or downtown shuttles allowed for each holder shall be
made only in accordance with the procedure outlined for the issuance of a
certificate of public convenience.
§ 40-209. [Ch. 40, Sec. 209] Transfer of certificate.
§ 40-210. [Ch. 40, Sec. 210] Renewal of certificate. [Ord. No.
2015-68]
Certificates shall be subject to a yearly renewal and holders of certificates
shall file applications therefor not less than 30 days before the end of
each calendar year. All applications for renewal of existing certificates shall
contain the information required of applicants under § 40-202 of this article.
No person or entity shall be issued a renewed certificate who would not
have qualified for issuance of an initial certificate under the requirements
of this article. An annual review shall be made to determine whether the
holder is in compliance with all federal, state and City requirements and to
determine whether the holder is in compliance with or has violated, or is
responsible for the violations of others of any federal, state, or municipal
laws, ordinances or regulations.
§ 40-211. [Ch. 40, Sec. 211] Suspension or revocation of certificate.
C. Refund. No fees paid hereunder shall be repaid in whole or in part.
[Ord. No. 2015-68]
A. A Certificate of Public Convenience to operate a taxicab or downtown
shuttle company shall be non-assignable and non-transferable.
B. Prior to a change of ownership in an entity providing taxicab or
downtown shuttle service, the new owner must apply for, and obtain, a
certificate of public convenience to operate a taxicab or downtown
shuttle company. For partnerships, limited liability companies and
corporations, a change of ownership is defined as a change of more
than 25% of the ownership of the entity. An entity providing taxicab or
downtown shuttle services without the owner having obtained a
certificate of public convenience is in violation of the provisions of this
article. [Ord. No. 2015-68]
A. A certificate of public convenience may be revoked or suspended if the
holder no longer qualifies for a certificate under the factors listed in
§ 40-204 of this chapter.
B. A certificate of public convenience may be revoked or suspended if the
holder has:
(1) Violated any of the provisions of this chapter; or
§ 40-207 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 40-211
1:1584
(2) Knowingly allowed a driver to drive a taxicab or downtown shuttle
with a driver's license or permit that is suspended or revoked under
the Illinois Vehicle Code as amended from time to time; or
(3) Allowed a driver who is not licensed as a taxicab or downtown
shuttle driver pursuant to this chapter to drive a vehicle;
(4) Violated any ordinances of the City of Bloomington or the
ordinances of any other jurisdiction in which the holder operates
pursuant to an intergovernmental cooperation agreement, or has
violated any of the laws of the United States or the State of Illinois,
the violation of which unfavorably reflects on the fitness of the
holder to offer public transportation;
(5) Hired as a driver a sex offender within the meaning of § 40-102 of
this chapter; or
(6) Hired, or allowed a person to provide taxicab or downtown shuttle
service, who would not qualify for a driver's permit under the
provisions of Article IV of this chapter. It may be raised as a defense
to violation of this subsection if the driver has a current, valid
driver's permit and the certificate holder was unaware of any facts
that would disqualify the driver from driving under the provisions
of this chapter.
C. Revocation or suspension of a license shall not preclude the imposition
of a fine by an administrative court or by a court of competent
jurisdiction for violation of the Bloomington City Code or other such
jurisdiction to which this chapter applies pursuant to an
intergovernmental cooperation agreement.
D. No revocation or suspension shall require return by the City of any fee.
E. Prior to suspension or revocation, the holder shall have the right to
appeal pursuant to § 40-214 of this article.
F. In addition to the foregoing, the owner shall be responsible for all of the
acts of his employees, agents or drivers relating to the violation of or
non-compliance with any of the laws, rules or regulations relating to
operation of taxicabs or downtown shuttles or to the conduct of his
business to the extent that the holder's certificate may be suspended or
revoked by the City Manager for violations of such laws, rules or
regulations by his employees, agents or drivers. Certificate holders are
responsible for the acts of drivers receiving dispatch services or
otherwise driving at the direction of the holder regardless of whether
the vehicle driven is owned by the certificate holder, driver or some
other entity. Drivers shall also be held responsible for violations of law
occurring while they drive regardless of who owns the vehicle driven.
G. An applicant for a certificate of public convenience whose application is
revoked shall not be eligible to reapply for a certificate for a period of
two years from the date of the revocation, or from the date of any
§ 40-211 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-211
1:1585
§ 40-212. [Ch. 40, Sec. 212] Location of offices.
§ 40-213. [Ch. 40, Sec. 213] Election to be licensed via Article XII.
decision upholding the revocation. Any corporation, limited liability
company or other legal entity in which an applicant who has been
revoked a certificate has an ownership interest of 25% or more shall
likewise be prohibited from applying for a certificate for a period of two
years. [Ord. No. 2015-68]
A. No taxicab or downtown shuttle office, including any answering and
dispatching service, shall be located within any premises holding a
license for the sale of intoxicating beverages, other than at the
Bloomington-Normal Airport.
B. No taxicab or downtown shuttle office, including any answering or
dispatch service, shall share the same premises, telephone facilities,
vehicles or drivers with a transportation or shuttle service not licensed
under this chapter. Violation of this subsection will subject the
certificate holder entity to revocation or suspension of its license, as
well as to a fine of not less than $250 for each day the violation
continues. [Ord. No. 2015-68]
A. In lieu of the certification and licensure requirements set forth in
Articles II and IV of this chapter, a taxicab company may elect to
become licensed under the provisions of Article XII. Upon such election,
including payment of the fees set forth in § 40-1204, the taxicab
company shall be required to complete and meet all the provisions of
Article XII pertaining to TNCs. Any such licensure under Article XII
shall be subject to the fine and penalty provisions, including revocation,
set forth in that article.
B. Taxicab companies licensed pursuant to the provisions of Article XII
shall conduct background checks as provided in that article of all
drivers operating taxis for the company and shall provide a list of
drivers that have passed said background checks to the City. The City
shall thereafter issue a permit for each driver meeting the standards for
drivers provided in said article. No company licensed to operate under
Article XII shall permit or allow a person to drive a taxicab who has
failed to meet the requirements for drivers specified in said article. The
drivers of any and all taxicabs post a driver's identification card in such
a place within the taxicab as to be in full view of all passengers while
such driver is operating the taxicab.
C. Taxicab companies and drivers licensed pursuant to the provisions of
Article XII shall comply with the vehicle requirements specified in
§ 40-1212 and shall not be governed by the vehicle requirements of
§ 40-501. Taxicab companies and drivers licensed to operate under
Article XII shall be subject to all other provisions of Articles V, VI, VII
and VIII of this chapter.
§ 40-211 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 40-213
1:1586
§ 40-214. [Ch. 40, Sec. 214] Appeals. [Ord. No. 2015-68]
Any certificate or permit holder who receives a notice of revocation or
suspension may file an appeal with the City of Bloomington Administrative
Adjudication Unit. The appeal must be made in writing within 10 days
of the date of the mailing of the notice of revocation or suspension and
shall include a response to the notice. Such response shall include a brief
statement addressing the substantive deficiencies cited in the notice and
shall set forth the basis for why the certificate, permit or license should not
be revoked or suspended. The appeal must be submitted to the Bloomington
Corporation Counsel's office located at 109 East Olive Street, Bloomington,
IL 61701. The Corporation Counsel's office shall mail an appeal hearing
notice to the requester containing the hearing date and time set in the City
of Bloomington Administrative Court system.
D. This section shall sunset, be repealed and no longer effective as of June
1, 2016. [Ord. No. 2015-32]
§ 40-213 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-214
1:1587

ARTICLE III
License Plates
§ 40-301. [Ch. 40, Sec. 301] Issuance of plate. [Ord. No. 1989-31]
Upon the issuance of a certificate, inspection of the vehicle as specified
in Article V, and payment of requisite license fees, the City Clerk shall
deliver to the holder one local license plate for each taxicab duly licensed.
Each taxicab shall bear the number of the local license plate for which it
is issued and shall at all times be firmly affixed by the Bloomington Police
Department on the lower rear portion of the driver's side of each vehicle.
§ 40-302. [Ch. 40, Sec. 302] Transfer of plates.
§ 40-303. [Ch. 40, Sec. 303] Replacement of certificate or plate.
[Ord. No. 2018-89]
Whenever a holder has lost or destroyed a plate issued as provided herein,
he shall make a verified application in writing to the Traffic Division of
the Bloomington Police Department stating that the same has been lost or
destroyed, and the Police Department shall authorize the City Clerk to issue
a substitute thereof upon payment in an amount as set forth in the Schedule
of Fees to the City Clerk for the item so duplicated or substituted.
§ 40-304. [Ch. 40, Sec. 304] Suspension or revocation of license
plates. [Ord. No. 1989-31]
The City Manager may suspend or revoke the taxicab license plate of any
taxicab not in compliance with any part of Article V of this chapter. Upon
A. Validation of transfers. No license plate provided for by this ordinance
shall be transferred to any vehicle other than the one for which it was
issued unless the following requirements of this section have first been
met:
(1) The holder shall file an application for transfer with the City Clerk;
(2) The vehicle to which the license plate is to be transferred must be
certified by the Chief of Police for compliance with the
requirements of Article V hereof;
(3) The vehicle to which the license plate is to be transferred shall be
insured according to § 40-205. [Ord. No. 1989-31]
B. All plates shall be attached to or transferred from one vehicle to
another by a Bloomington Police Officer at the time of the investigation
of the vehicle or such other time as the owner may arrange with the
Bloomington Police Department. [Ord. No. 1989-31]
C. Penalty. Transfers of plates in violation of this section shall be grounds
for suspension or revocation of a holder's certificate. [Ord. No.
1989-31]
§ 40-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-304
1:1589
suspension or revocation, the taxicab license plate of the noncomplying
vehicle shall be surrendered to the City Clerk, and it shall not be returned
until the cause for the revocation or suspension has been removed to the
satisfaction of the City Manager. No refund of fees shall be made to the
holder in the event of revocation or suspension of plates under this section.
§ 40-304 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 40-304
1:1590
ARTICLE IV
Driver's Permits
§ 40-401. [Ch. 40, Sec. 401] Driver's permit required. [Ord. No.
2015-68]
No person shall drive a taxicab or downtown shuttle or be hired or
permitted to do so, unless he/she is a duly licensed driver by the State of
Illinois and has a valid City issued driver's permit.
§ 40-402. [Ch. 40, Sec. 402] Application for driver's permit.
A. An application for a taxicab or downtown shuttle driver's permit shall
be filed with the City Clerk on forms provided by the City of
Bloomington. The application fee shall be as set forth in the Schedule of
Fees and must be paid prior to processing the application. The
application shall be verified and shall contain the following information:
[Ord. No. 2018-89]
(1) The name, age and residence of the applicant;
(2) The names and addresses of four persons who have known the
applicant for a period of four years and who will vouch for the
sobriety, honesty, and general good character of the applicant;
(3) The number of the applicant's operator license issued by the State
of Illinois;
(4) Whether the applicant's operator license has ever been suspended
or revoked by any governmental body in or outside of the State of
Illinois, and if so, the reason therefor;
(5) The number and nature of moving traffic violations committed by
the applicant;
(6) A concise history of the applicant's employment;
(7) Whether the applicant is a sex offender within the meaning of
§ 40-102 of this chapter; and
(8) Convictions of the applicant of any felony in any jurisdiction. For
each such conviction, the applicant must detail the charge,
jurisdiction and date of conviction.
(9) Whether the applicant has a commercial driver's license (CDL)
from the State of Illinois.
B. At the time the application is submitted, the applicant must provide to
the City Clerk a copy of a criminal background check. Each background
check, at a minimum, must:
§ 40-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-402
1:1591
§ 40-403. [Ch. 40, Sec. 403] Investigation of applicant. [Ord. No.
2015-68]
The Police Department shall conduct an investigation of each applicant for
a taxicab or downtown shuttle driver's permit which shall include a review
of the application, background check and additional information submitted
by the applicant, together with such other information as may be needed to
assure that the applicant qualifies as a driver under the requirements set
forth in this article.
§ 40-404. [Ch. 40, Sec. 404] Consideration of application. [Ord. No.
1989-31]
The City Manager upon consideration of the application shall approve or
deny it. Approval of any application may be withdrawn if a police
investigation or other information discloses grounds for denial of an
application under § 40-405.
§ 40-405. [Ch. 40, Sec. 405] Grounds for denial, non-renewal or
revocation of driver's permit.
The following shall be grounds for denial, non-renewal or revocation of a
permit to drive a taxicab or downtown shuttle:
(1) Be done by a company that has been accredited by the National
Association of Professional Screeners, or another organization
approved by the City to perform criminal background checks;
(2) Be Multi-State/Multi-Jurisdiction Criminal Records Locator or
other similar commercial nationwide database with validation
(primary source search);
(3) Include a search of the National Sex Offender Registry database.
[Ord. No. 2015-68]
A. The applicant has a communicable disease of a type likely to be
transmitted to a passenger in the normal course of business;
B. The applicant has an uncorrected impairment which affects driving
ability;
C. The applicant has not attained the age of 18 years;
D. The applicant does not have a valid operator's license issued by the
State of Illinois;
E. The applicant has a bad driving record, which is defined as a conviction
within the last five years of any of the following:
(1) Manslaughter or reckless homicide resulting from the operation of
a motor vehicle;
§ 40-402 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 40-405
1:1592
§ 40-406. [Ch. 40, Sec. 406] Issuance of driver's permit.
(2) Driving under the influence of narcotics or intoxicating liquor, or
permitting another to drive one's vehicle while under the influence
of liquor or narcotics;
(3) Reckless driving;
(4) Failure as the driver of any vehicle involved in any accident to stop
and disclose his identity at the scene and to render aid to others, if
needed, and/or failure to give notice of the accident by the fastest
available means of communication to the local Police Department
as required by law.
F. The applicant is a sex offender within the meaning of § 40-102 of this
chapter;
G. The applicant has been convicted of a felony within seven years of the
date of application, or has been released from prison or jail for a felony
within seven years of the date of application;
H. The failure of an applicant to furnish truthful information on the
application; or failure of the applicant to report the occurrence of any
felony conviction, regardless of when or where it occurred, shall be
deemed the failure to furnish truthful information within the meaning of
this section and shall be grounds for denial of a driver's permit;
I. The conviction of the applicant for one or more violations of the
provisions of this chapter;
J. The conviction of the applicant of more than three violations in the past
five years of the Bloomington City Code or the code of such other
jurisdiction to which this chapter applies pursuant to an
intergovernmental cooperation agreement. [Ord. No. 2015-68]
A. If none of the disqualifying factors listed in the preceding section are
present, the Clerk shall be authorized to issue or renew a driver's
permit to any qualified applicant. The permit shall contain the name,
driver's license number, photograph, date of birth, address, and an
expiration date of the permit. Such permit shall be in effect for the
remainder of the calendar year. Applications for renewal of the annual
driver's permit shall be filed with the City Clerk's office prior to
December 1 of the calendar year for which the permit is sought. No
person shall be issued a renewed permit who would not qualify for
issuance of a new permit under this article. All fees must be paid prior
to issuance or renewal of any permit.
B. If an application for the issuance or renewal of a driver's permit is
denied, the City Manager shall issue a written notice of denial, together
with findings in support of the denial, to the applicant. The applicant
may, within 10 days of the mailing of the notice of denial, make a
written request for a hearing to appeal the denial. Failure to timely
§ 40-405 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-406
1:1593
§ 40-407. [Ch. 40, Sec. 407] Replacement of permit or identification
card. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
Whenever a driver has lost or destroyed his permit or identification card,
issued as herein provided, he shall make a verified application in writing to
the City Clerk stating that the same has been lost or destroyed, and the City
Clerk shall issue a duplicate copy or substitute thereof upon payment of an
amount as set forth in the Schedule of Fees to the City Clerk for such item
so duplicated or substituted.
§ 40-408. [Ch. 40, Sec. 408] Display of identification card. [Ord. No.
1989-31]
Every driver licensed under this Ordinance shall post his driver's
identification card in such a place as to be in full view of all passengers
while such driver is operating a taxicab.
§ 40-409. [Ch. 40, Sec. 409] Suspension or revocation of permit.
make such a request will waive the right to appeal. The request must
be submitted to the office of the City of Bloomington Corporation
Counsel located at 109 East Olive Street, Bloomington, Illinois 61701.
Upon receipt of a timely written request for a hearing, the Corporation
Counsel's office shall schedule a hearing on the appeal in the City of
Bloomington Administrative Court and shall mail notice of the date
and time of a hearing to the applicant. Said hearing shall be set for a
date within 30 days of the Corporation Counsel's receipt of the request
for an appeal. If, at the appeal hearing, the applicant establishes by
a preponderance of the evidence that the denial was based upon
incorrect findings, the City Manager shall issue a permit. If, at such
hearing, the denial is found to have been based upon correct findings,
or if the applicant fails to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that
the findings forming the basis for the denial were incorrect, the denial
shall become final. An applicant for a driver's permit whose application
is revoked shall not be eligible to reapply for a permit for a period
of two years from the date of the revocation, or from the date of any
decision upholding the revocation. [Ord. No. 2015-68]
A. For any violation or noncompliance with this chapter or of any other law
or regulation relating to a person's driving, the City Manager is hereby
given the authority to suspend any driver's permit issued under this
chapter for a period of one to 180 days or to revoke any driver's permit.
A driver's permit may also be suspended or revoked if a driver would no
longer qualify for issuance of a permit pursuant to the criteria set forth
in § 40-405 of this chapter. Except for when a permit is suspended or
revoked for emergency circumstances, as provided in Subsection B of
this section, a driver who receives a notice of suspension or revocation
of their permit shall have the right to appeal pursuant to § 40-214 of
this chapter.
§ 40-406 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 40-409
1:1594
§ 40-410. [Ch. 40, Sec. 410] Application of articles to taxicab
companies operating pursuant to Article XII; sunset provision. [Ord.
No. 2015-32]
Except for § 40-408, the provisions of Articles II and IV shall not apply to a
taxicab company that has elected to be licensed pursuant to the provisions
of Article XII. This section shall sunset, be repealed and no longer effective
as of June 1, 2016.
B. When the City Manager finds that circumstances exist that require
immediate revocation or suspension of a driver's permit to protect
public safety, a driver's permit may be suspended or revoked
immediately. In such cases, notice of the suspension or revocation will
include a hearing date, no sooner than five days, but no later than 15
days from the date of revocation or suspension, when the driver may
appeal the suspension or revocation in the City of Bloomington
Administrative Court System.
C. An applicant for a driver's permit whose application is revoked shall not
be eligible to reapply for a permit for a period of two years from the
date of the revocation, or from the date of any decision upholding the
revocation. [Ord. No. 2015-68]
§ 40-409 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-410
1:1595

ARTICLE V
Vehicles, Equipment and Maintenance
§ 40-501. [Ch. 40, Sec. 501] Vehicles - license required.
A. Vehicles must be licensed.
(1) Prior to the use and operation of any vehicle under the provisions of
this Ordinance and during the months of December and June of
each year, every vehicle shall be thoroughly examined and
inspected by the Police Department and found to be satisfactory in
regard to the following:
(a) Steering;
(b) Brakes;
(c) Speedometer;
(d) Lights;
(e) Tires;
(f) Horn;
(g) Exhaust system;
(h) Rear view mirror;
(i) Windshield wipers;
(j) Approved taximeter in good condition;
(k) Properly licensed by State of Illinois;
(l) Rate card;
(m) Otherwise clean, sanitary and safe for the transportation of
passengers;
(n) State Sticker showing proof of insurance;
(o) Seat belts for all authorized passengers which seat belts must
not be pushed under seats where they would not be in plain
view;
(p) No crack in a window which cannot be covered by a one-inch
disk (State law - a quarter);
(q) No body damage or condition shall be allowed to remain which
would cost in excess of $250 on the regular body work market
or which presents sharp edges or other dangerous conditions
to passengers;
§ 40-501 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-501
1:1597
§ 40-502. [Ch. 40, Sec. 502] Designation of taxicabs. [Ord. No.
1989-31]
Each taxicab shall bear on each side in painted letters not less than four
inches nor more than eight inches in height, the name of the holder or the
trade name under which his certificate has been issued, and in addition,
may bear an identifying design approved by the City Manager. No vehicle
covered by the terms of this Ordinance shall be licensed whose color
scheme, identifying design, monogram, or insignia to be used thereon shall,
in the opinion of the City Manager, conflict with or imitate any color scheme,
identifying design, monogram, or insignia used on a vehicle or vehicles
already operating under the Ordinance, in such a manner as to be
(r) Every vehicle shall have a lighted sign on its roof identifying it
as a taxi and it shall be regulated by the meter to the extent
that it is on when the meter is not running and off when the
meter is running.
(2) As part of this examination, every vehicle must pass the safety test
provided by an official Illinois testing station as established by the
Illinois Compiled Statutes. A Bloomington Police Officer and the
person who brings the vehicle to the Police Department for testing
shall both go to the official testing station for said test and the test
shall be paid for at that time by said person. If the taxicab passes
both the City test and the official Illinois test, the sticker of safety
by the official testing station or at the election of the Police
Department a sticker issued by the City shall be affixed to said
taxicab and it shall at all times be displayed on said taxicab. No
sticker issued during the first six months of any year shall be of any
effect after July 1st of that year and no such certificate issued
during the second six months of any year shall be of any effect after
January 1st of the following year. No taxicab shall be operated upon
the streets, alley or public places of said City without having been
tested as herein required or without having said sticker displayed
on said taxicab.
(3) When the Police Department finds that a vehicle has met the
standards the Department shall also issue a certificate to that
effect, which shall also state the authorized seating capacity of said
vehicle. [Ord. No. 2011-33]
B. Periodic inspections. Every vehicle operating under this Ordinance
shall be inspected every six months by the Police Department as
provided for herein. However, the City Manager shall have authority to
order an inspection at any time to insure the continued maintenance of
safe operating conditions. [Ord. No. 1989-31]
C. Vehicles must be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. Every vehicle
operating under this Ordinance shall be kept in a safe, clean and
sanitary condition at all times to conform to the standards above. [Ord.
No. 1989-31]
§ 40-501 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 40-502
1:1598
misleading or tend to deceive or defraud the public; and provided further,
that if after a license has been issued for a taxicab hereunder, the color
scheme, identifying design, monogram or insignia used by any other person,
owner or operator in such a manner as to be misleading or tend to deceive
the public, the license of or certificate covering such taxicab or taxicabs
shall be suspended or revoked.
§ 40-503. [Ch. 40, Sec. 503] Taximeter.
§ 40-504. [Ch. 40, Sec. 504] Rate card. [Ord. No. 1989-31]
Except for vehicles which furnish only zone or special service under
§ 40-601, each taxicab, as a prerequisite to being approved for use, shall
A. Except for vehicles which furnish only zone or special service under
§ 40-601, all taxicabs operated under the authority of this ordinance
shall be equipped with taximeters fastened in front of the passengers,
visible to them at all times day and night, and after sundown the face of
the taximeter shall be illuminated. Said taximeter shall be operated
mechanically by a mechanism of standard design and construction,
driven either from the transmission or from one of the front wheels by a
flexible and permanently attached driving mechanism. They shall be
sealed at all points and connections which, if manipulated, would affect
their correct reading and recording. Each taximeter shall have thereon
a flag to denote when the vehicle is employed and when it is not
employed, and it shall be the duty of the driver to throw the flag of such
taximeter into a nonrecording position at the destination of each
passenger or group of passengers unless a passenger declares to the
driver that no clearance of the meter shall be made until all or certain
designated passengers in such taxicab reach their respective
destination. The passenger making such declaration shall be
responsible for the whole fare upon reaching his destination.
B. It shall be unlawful for any holder to allow and for any driver to drive
such taxicab unless the fare to be charged is determined by the meter in
accordance with the schedule of fares contained herein, and except as
specifically provided herein, no other fare shall be charged to
passengers than is recorded on the dial of said meter for the trip. In
addition to the penalty which may be assessed against the driver for
such violation, the City Manager may suspend the certificate of the
holder as generally provided for herein.
C. The said taximeter shall be subject to inspection from time to time by
the Police Department. Any inspector or other officer of said
Department is hereby authorized either on complaint of any person or
without such complaint to inspect any meter, and upon discovery of any
inaccuracy therein, to notify the person operating said taxicab to cease
operation. Thereupon said taxicab shall be kept off the streets until the
taximeter is repaired and in the required working condition. [Ord. No.
1989-31]
§ 40-502 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-504
1:1599
have affixed in a location clearly visible to passengers a rate card showing
the rated charged under § 40-601.
§ 40-505. [Ch. 40, Sec. 505] Parking facilities. [Ord. No. 1989-31]
Except for vehicles which furnish only zone or special service under
§ 40-601, each holder shall provide sufficient off-street parking facilities to
accommodate all vehicles licensed in his name.
§ 40-506. [Ch. 40, Sec. 506] Sanitation. [Ord. No. 1989-31]
All horses or other animals pulling vehicles shall be equipped with an
adequate device to prevent manure and other excrement from falling on the
streets of the City. If any excrement should fall on the streets of the City
and is not immediately removed by the driver, it may be removed by the City
and the expense of such removal shall be recovered from the owner of the
vehicle.
§ 40-504 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 40-506
1:1600
ARTICLE VI
Taxicab Service and Facilities
§ 40-601. [Ch. 40, Sec. 601] Rates.
A. The following rates and no others shall be charged for taxicab services:
(1) Meter rates:
(a) Hour rates: $18 per hour for one or more passengers.
(b) Mileage rates: $2.50 for the first 1/6 mile or fraction thereof;
$0.40 for each, 1/6 mile or fraction thereof.
(c) Waiting time: $0.50 for each one minute of waiting time or
fraction thereof if taximeter is equipped to measure time
provided, however, that the charge for waiting time may be
assessed only in the case of delays caused by the customer.
[Ord. No. 2008-42]
(2) Special rates.
(a) Additional passengers over the age of 12 being transported
from same point of departure to same destination shall be
carried at an additional charge of $0.50.
(b) Children under the age of 12 shall be carried free when
accompanied by an adult.
(c) Senior Citizens (anyone 60 years of age or older), meter rate
less 15%.
(d) Zone service to and from Bloomington-normal airport. As an
alternative to the rates provided in Subsection A(1), zone rates
may be charged for service between Bloomington-Normal
Airport and service zones within the combined Bloomington-
Normal corporate limits. [Ord. No. 2001-31]
(e) On any day in which the price of the lowest grade of unleaded
gasoline is at or more than $4 per gallon, an additional charge
of $0.50 per trip shall be charged. On any day in which the
price of the lowest grade of unleaded gasoline is at or more
than $5 per gallon, an additional charge of $1 per trip shall be
charged. The additional $1 charge per trip authorized in the
preceding sentence is in lieu of, and not in addition to, the
$0.50 per trip charge authorized in the first sentence of this
subsection. In case of a complaint that this surcharge was
imposed when the price of the lowest grade of unleaded
gasoline was below $4 or $5 per gallon, depending on the
applicable gas price, the taxicab service shall supply to the City
the name and location of the gasoline station which the taxicab
service used to determine that such price was at or more than
said price. [Ord. No. 2012-33]
§ 40-601 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-601
1:1601
§ 40-602. [Ch. 40, Sec. 602] Receipts. [Ord. No. 1989-31]
The driver of any taxicab shall upon demand by the passenger render to
such passenger a receipt for the amount charged, either by a mechanically
printed receipt or by a specially prepared receipt on which shall be the
name of the holder, license number or motor number, amount of meter
reading or charges and date of transaction.
§ 40-603. [Ch. 40, Sec. 603] Solicitation, acceptance and discharge
of passengers.
(f) For rides that begin between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00
a.m., an additional $2 may be charged above the metered rate,
provided that this amount shall not be assessed when one or
more of the passengers is a senior citizen as defined in
Subsection A(2)(c) or a person with a disability. [Ord. No.
2015-68]
(3) Contractual services. Notwithstanding the rates set forth
previously in this section, a holder shall not be precluded from
entering into contractual agreements with businesses, private or
public institutions, governmental units or similar entities to provide
transportation services under terms other than those previously set
forth herein. [Ord. No. 1993-64]
(4) Companies licensed under this chapter may from time to time wish
to provide specialized services which would require a fee structure
different from the approved rate schedule enumerated in this
section. A fee structure for specialized services may be approved by
the City Manager, provided that:
(a) The approved fee schedule shall apply to all companies that
provide the same services; and
(b) The services are unique because of the use of specialized
equipment or specialized services such as all trips originating
at a common point.
B. The company requesting special fee arrangements shall apply to the
City Manager in writing specifying the service to be provided, the
equipment to be used and the fee to be charged. The City Planner shall
provide a copy of the request to all companies licensed by this chapter
and provide them with 10 calendar days to comment on the request.
The City Manager must approve or deny the request within 30 calendar
days of the date of the request. [Ord. No. 1993-64]
A. Solicitation of passengers by driver. No driver shall solicit passengers
for a taxicab except when sitting in the driver's compartment of such
taxicab or while standing immediately adjacent to the curb side thereof.
The driver of any taxicab shall remain in the driver's compartment or
immediately adjacent to his vehicle at all times when such vehicle is
§ 40-601 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 40-603
1:1602
upon the public street, except that when necessary a driver may be
absent from his taxicab for not more than 10 consecutive minutes, and
provided further that nothing herein contained shall be held to prohibit
any driver from alighting to the street or sidewalk for the purpose of
assisting passengers into or out of such vehicle. [Ord. No. 1989-31]
B. Prohibited solicitation. No driver shall solicit patronage in a loud or
annoying tone of voice or by sign or in any manner annoy any person or
obstruct the movements of any persons, or follow any person for the
purpose of soliciting patronage. [Ord. No. 1989-31]
C. Receipt and discharge of passengers on sidewalk only. Drivers of
taxicabs shall not receive or discharge passengers in the roadway but
shall drive to the sidewalk on the right-hand side of the road as nearly
as possible or in the absence of a sidewalk to the extreme right-hand
hand side of the road and there receive or discharge passengers, except
upon one-way streets where passengers may be discharged at either
the right or left-hand sidewalk or side of the roadway in the absence of
a sidewalk. [Ord. No. 1989-31]
D. Cruising. No driver shall cruise in search of passengers except in such
areas and at such times as shall be designated by the City Manager.
Such areas and times shall only be designated when the City Manager
finds that taxicab cruising would not congest traffic or be dangerous to
pedestrians and other vehicles. [Ord. No. 1989-31]
E. Additional passengers. No driver shall permit any other person to
occupy or ride in said taxicab unless the person or persons first
employing the taxicab shall consent to the acceptance of additional
passenger or passengers. No charge shall be made for an additional
passenger other than the charge stated in § 40-601A(2)(a). [Ord. No.
1989-31]
F. Restriction of number of passengers. No driver shall permit more
persons to be carried in a taxicab as passengers than the rated seating
capacity of his taxicab as stated in the certificate for said vehicle. A
child in arms shall not be counted as a passenger. [Ord. No. 1989-31]
G. Refusal to carry orderly passengers prohibited. No driver shall refuse
or neglect to convey any orderly person or persons upon request unless
previously engaged or unable or forbidden by the provisions of this
Ordinance to do so. [Ord. No. 1989-31]
H. Prohibitions of drivers. It shall be a violation of this Ordinance for any
driver of a taxicab to solicit business for any hotel or motel or to attempt
to divert patronage from one hotel or motel to another. Neither shall
such driver engage in selling or delivering intoxicating liquors or solicit
business for or from any house of ill repute. [Ord. No. 1989-31]
§ 40-603 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-604
1:1603
§ 40-604. [Ch. 40, Sec. 604] Direct route.
Taxicab drivers shall transport each passenger to the person's destination
by means of the most direct route thereto unless:
§ 40-605. [Ch. 40, Sec. 605] Personal articles left in taxicabs. [Ord.
No. 1989-31]
All articles found in taxicabs by the holder or driver thereof shall be turned
over to the Police Department within 24 hours of the finding thereof unless
the lost property in the meantime is claimed by the owner. The Police
Department shall give a receipt therefor and if not claimed within 30 days,
such property shall be returned to the holder or driver.
§ 40-606. [Ch. 40, Sec. 606] Hours.
Except for holders which furnish only zone service and special service under
§ 40-601, every holder is required to provide taxicab service 24 hours per
day and seven days per week by:
§ 40-607. [Ch. 40, Sec. 607] Manifests.
§ 40-608. [Ch. 40, Sec. 608] Holder's records and reports.
A. The passenger requests a different route; or
B. Traffic conditions necessitate a different route. [Ord. No. 1989-31]
A. Keeping at least one taxicab in operation at all hours; or
B. Reaching an agreement with one or more other taxicab operators who
provide twenty-four-hour service to provide twenty-four-hour service by
sharing or allocating equipment and labor therefor which must be
approved by the City Manager to be effective. [Ord. No. 1989-31]
A. Every driver shall maintain a daily manifest upon which is recorded all
trips made each day, showing time and place of origin and destination of
each trip, the number of passengers, and amount of fare, and all such
completed manifests shall be returned to the holder by the driver at the
conclusion of his tour of duty. The forms for each manifest shall be
furnished to the driver by the holder and shall provide for content and
be of a type approved by the City Manager.
B. Every holder of a certificate of public convenience shall retain and
preserve all drivers' manifests in a safe place for at least one calendar
year following the year to which they relate and said manifest shall be
available at any time on request to the City Manager or Police
Department. [Ord. No. 1989-31]
A. Every holder shall keep and maintain accurate records of receipts from
operations, operating and other expenses, capital expenditures, and
§ 40-604 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 40-608
1:1604
§ 40-609. [Ch. 40, Sec. 609] Advertising. [Ord. No. 1989-31]
Subject to the rules and regulations of the City Manager, it shall be lawful
for any person owning or operating a taxicab or motor vehicle for hire to
permit advertising matter to be affixed to or installed in or on such taxicab
or motor vehicles for hire.
§ 40-610. [Ch. 40, Sec. 610] Open stands.
§ 40-611. [Ch. 40, Sec. 611] Call box stands.
such other operating information and data as may be required by the
City Manager or Police Department. [Ord. No. 1989-31]
B. All accidents arising from or in connection with the operation of
taxicabs which result in death or injury to any person or in damage to
any vehicle, or to any property in an amount exceeding the sum of $250
shall be described on an accident report form to be furnished by the
Police Department within 10 days from the time of the occurrence.
[Ord. No. 1989-31]
A. The City Council of the City of Bloomington or the corporate authority
of any other jurisdiction to which this chapter applies pursuant to an
intergovernmental cooperation agreement may establish open stands in
such place or places upon the streets of that jurisdiction as it deems
necessary for the use of taxicabs operated therein. The corporate
authority shall not create an open stand without taking into
consideration the need for such stand by the companies and the
associated convenience to the general public. The corporate authority
shall prescribe the number of such cabs that shall occupy such open
stands. [Ord. No. 1989-31]
B. Open stands shall be used by drivers on a first come first served basis.
Drivers shall pull on to the open stand from the rear and shall advance
forward as the cabs ahead pull off. Drivers shall stay within five feet of
their cars, and they shall not solicit passengers or engage in loud or
boisterous talk while at an open stand. Nothing in this Ordinance shall
be construed as preventing a passenger from boarding the cab of his
choice that is parked at an open stand. [Ord. No. 1989-31]
A. The City Council may establish call box stands upon the streets of
Bloomington in such places as in its discretion it deems proper. A holder
desiring to establish a call box stand shall make written application to
the City Manager. The applicant must attach to the application the
written approval of the abutting property owners to said space
consenting to the creation of such stand. Upon filing of the application
the City Manager shall make an investigation of the traffic conditions at
said location and shall thereafter make his written recommendation to
the City Council. The City Council shall then either grant or refuse the
application. When a call box stand has been established as herein
provided, it shall be used solely by the holder to whom the same has
§ 40-608 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-611
1:1605
§ 40-612. [Ch. 40, Sec. 612] Prohibitions of other vehicles. [Ord.
No. 1989-31]
Private or other vehicles for hire shall not at any time occupy the space
upon the streets that has been established as either open stands or call box
stands.
been granted and his agents, servants, and drivers and no other holder
shall be permitted to use the same provided, however, that no holder
shall obtain a permit for more than two such stands within the
downtown business area. [Ord. No. 1989-31]
B. Use. A holder operating a call box stand as provided for in this
Ordinance shall be allowed to have on duty at such stand an employee
for the purpose of assisting in the loading or unloading of passengers
from cabs, for receiving calls and dispatching cabs, and for soliciting
passengers at such stand. The words "at such stand" shall mean that
part of the sidewalk immediately adjacent to and of equal length with
such call box stand. It shall be unlawful for any such employee to go
beyond the area herein designated for the purpose of soliciting
passengers. [Ord. No. 1989-31]
C. The City Manager may designate horse drawn vehicle loading and
unloading spaces as deemed necessary. [Ord. No. 1989-31]
§ 40-611 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 40-612
1:1606
ARTICLE VII
Offenses and Penalty
§ 40-701. [Ch. 40, Sec. 701] Illegal operation of taxicab.
A person commits the offense of illegal operation of a taxicab if:
§ 40-702. [Ch. 40, Sec. 702] Filing false application. [Ord. No.
2011-33]
A person commits the offense of filing a false application if he knowingly
makes a misstatement of fact on any application for a certificate of public
convenience or a taxicab driver's permit. Based on the applicant's access to
such information, any misstatement of fact on any such application shall be
presumed to have been knowingly made unless the applicant can prove that
such misstatement was not knowingly made.
§ 40-703. [Ch. 40, Sec. 703] Illegal transfer of certificate.
A. Without a valid effective certificate of public convenience the person
operates or drives a taxicab or allows another person to operate or
drive a taxicab; or
B. The person operates or drives a taxicab without a valid operator's
license from the State of Illinois or without a valid taxicab driver's
permit from the City of Bloomington, or allows another person to do so;
or
C. The person operates or drives or allows another to operate or drive a
taxicab which lacks proper State of Illinois license plates or City of
Bloomington taxicab plates; or
D. The person operates or drives or allows another to operate or drive a
taxicab with a taximeter which is disconnected from the transmission or
front wheels. [Ord. No. 2011-33]
A. It is illegal for and a person commits the offense of illegal transfer of
certificate if he assigns, sells, pledges, gives or otherwise transfers his
certificate of public convenience to another person other than in
compliance with § 40-209.
B. For purposes of this section, the following shall be deemed to be a
transfer within the meaning of this section:
(1) Corporations. The addition, removal or substitution of any officer or
director, or the transfer of 25% or more of any class of stock.
(2) Partnerships. The addition, removal or substitution of any partner.
[Ord. No. 2011-33]
§ 40-701 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-704
1:1607
§ 40-704. [Ch. 40, Sec. 704] Illegal use of taxicab license plates.
[Ord. No. 2011-33]
It is illegal for and a person commits the offense of illegal transfer of plates
if he transfers or allows to be transferred a City taxicab license plate from
one vehicle to another other than in compliance with § 40-302.
§ 40-705. [Ch. 40, Sec. 705] Illegal rate assessment. [Ord. No.
1989-31]
It is illegal for and a person commits the offense of illegal rate assessment
if he charges any fare to any passenger or group of passengers except in
compliance with § 40-601.
§ 40-706. [Ch. 40, Sec. 706] Refusal to carry orderly persons. [Ord.
No. 1978-76]
It is illegal for and a person commits the offense of refusal to carry orderly
persons if he refuses or neglects, or if a holder allows a driver to refuse
or neglect to convey any orderly person or persons upon request unless
previously engaged or unless unable or forbidden to do so by the provisions
of this Ordinance. For the purposes of this section, a person who requests
service by telephone shall be deemed to be an orderly person.
§ 40-707. [Ch. 40, Sec. 707] Refusal to pay legal fare. [Ord. No.
1978-76]
It is illegal for any person to refuse to pay the legal fare of any of the
vehicles mentioned in this Ordinance after having been conveyed in the
same, and it is illegal for any person to hire any vehicle herein defined with
intent to defraud the person from whom it is hired from, and it assumed that
any person who does not pay the legal fare after having been conveyed in
such a vehicle intended to defraud such person, and it shall be the burden
of the conveyed person to prove (s)he did not intend to defraud said person.
§ 40-708. [Ch. 40, Sec. 708] Insufficient service.
It is illegal for and a holder commits the offense of supplying insufficient
service if:
§ 40-709. [Ch. 40, Sec. 709] Failure to keep manifests.
It is illegal for and a person commits the offense of failure to keep manifests
if:
A. He fails to provide twenty-four-hour taxicab service as required by
§ 40-606; or
B. He fails to provide taxicab service to a bona fide caller within 30
minutes of the time that a request for a taxicab is made. [Ord. No.
1989-31]
§ 40-704 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 40-709
1:1608
§ 40-710. [Ch. 40, Sec. 710] Failure to keep records and reports.
[Ord. No. 1989-31]
It is illegal for and a person commits the offense of failure to keep records
and reports if he fails to keep his records and reports as required by
§ 40-607.
§ 40-711. [Ch. 40, Sec. 711] Failure to insure. [Ord. No. 1989-31]
It is illegal for and a holder commits the offense of failure to insure if he
fails to provide the insurance required by § 40-205.
§ 40-712. [Ch. 40, Sec. 712] Improper vehicle use. [Ord. No.
1989-31]
It is illegal for and a person commits the offense of improper vehicle use
if he violates any provision of the Illinois Motor Vehicle Code (111. Rev.
Stat. Ch. 95 1/284) or the Bloomington Motor Vehicle Code (Bloomington
City Code Chapter 29) or any other applicable portion of the Codes or
Ordinances of any other jurisdiction.
§ 40-713. [Ch. 40, Sec. 713] Overloading vehicle. [Ord. No. 1989-31]
It is illegal for and a person commits the offense of overloading a vehicle
if he carries more passengers than the seating capacity of the taxicab was
obviously designed to carry.
§ 40-714. [Ch. 40, Sec. 714] Insufficient parking. [Ord. No. 1989-31]
It is illegal for and a holder commits the offense of supplying insufficient
parking if he fails to provide off-street parking facilities for his motor
vehicles as required by § 40-505.
§ 40-715. [Ch. 40, Sec. 715] Theft of service call. [Ord. No. 1989-31]
It shall be a violation of this Ordinance to respond to a call for service
directed to any other company. The City Manager may punish a violation of
this section by suspension or revocation of the Certificate of Convenience
or the taxicab driver's permit or both in addition to the penalties contained
in § 40-718 of this chapter.
A. He is a holder and he allows a driver to neglect or omit the making of a
manifest as required by § 40-607; or
B. He is a driver and he neglects or omits the making of a manifest as
required by § 40-607. [Ord. No. 1989-31]
84.Editor's Note: See now 625 ILCS 5.
§ 40-709 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-716
1:1609
§ 40-716. [Ch. 40, Sec. 716] Improper advertising. [Ord. No.
1989-31]
It shall be unlawful for any holder of a certificate to place, or cause to be
placed, any advertisement for services on public property. Advertisements
for service placed on private property shall only be located in accordance
with the City's Sign Code and with the written consent of the property
owner.
§ 40-717. [Ch. 40, Sec. 717] "No smoking" signs required. [Ord. No.
2012-34]
Signs stating "No Smoking" shall be posted in taxicabs. The sign shall have
a reference to Chapter 41, § 41-204, of the Bloomington City Code and shall
state that complaints of persons smoking in violation of the law may be
reported to the Bloomington City Clerk at (309) 434-2240.
§ 40-718. [Ch. 40, Sec. 718] Penalty.
A. The penalty for operation of an illegal taxicab as described in § 40-701
of this article, shall be a fine of not less than $250 nor more than $1,000
for the first offense and a fine of not less than $500 nor more than
$3,000 for second and subsequent offenses. Vehicles operating as
illegal taxicabs may be impounded by the police and shall not be
released prior to the payment of a release fee of $10, an impoundment
fee of $250 and the paying of all towing company fees. In addition,
anyone found to have illegally operated a taxicab is subject to having
their certificate or driver's permit suspended or revoked. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or which an offense
occurs or continues. [Ord. No. 2011-33]
B. For all offenses enumerated in this article, with the exception of
§ 40-701, the penalty shall be a fine of no less than $100 and no more
than $500 for each offense. In addition to said fine, violators may have
their certificate or driver's permit suspended or revoked. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which an
offense occurs or continues. [Ord. No. 2011-33]
§ 40-716 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 40-718
1:1610
ARTICLE VIII
Enforcement Responsibilities and Procedures
§ 40-801. [Ch. 40, Sec. 801] Service of notice.
§ 40-802. [Ch. 40, Sec. 802] Appeal. [Ord. No. 1978-76]
Any person aggrieved by a determination or action of the City Manager
under the provisions of this chapter may appeal to the City Council by giving
written notice of intent to appeal to the Mayor of the City of Bloomington
not later than noon on the Wednesday preceding the next regularly
scheduled City Council Meeting. If in the opinion of the Mayor the matter
being appealed is urgent, he may, in his sole discretion, call a special
meeting of the City Council as outlined in Bloomington City Code Chapter
2, § 2-204.
§ 40-803. [Ch. 40, Sec. 803] Enforcement. [Ord. No. 1978-76]
In enforcing this ordinance the Police Department of the City of
Bloomington upon discovering a violation of the provisions of this
Ordinance, shall take appropriate action to enforce the law and shall report
the same to the City Manager who may take appropriate action with respect
thereto.
A. Service of notice on individuals.
(1) Except as otherwise expressly provided, service of any notice
required in this chapter upon an individual shall be made:
(a) By leaving a copy thereof with person personally; or
(b) By leaving a copy at his home or usual place of work, with some
member of the person's family of the age of 10 years or
upwards, and informing that person of the contents thereof,
provided the officer or other person making service shall also
send a copy of the notice in a sealed envelope with postage
fully prepaid, addressed to the person at his usual place of
abode.
(2) The certificate of the officer or affidavit of the person that he has
sent the copy in pursuance of this section is sufficient evidence to
prove that he has done so. [Ord. No. 1978-76]
B. Service on partnership or corporation. Any corporation or partnership
required to be given any notice under this chapter may be served by
serving notice on any director, officer or partner thereof in the manner
provided in Subsection A above. [Ord. No. 1978-76]
§ 40-801 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-804
1:1611
§ 40-804. [Ch. 40, Sec. 804] Supplemental regulations. [Ord. No.
1978-76]
The City Manager is hereby given the authority to promulgate such rules
and regulations not inconsistent with this Ordinance as he shall find
necessary to effectuate the purpose and intent of this chapter.
§ 40-804 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 40-804
1:1612
ARTICLE IX
Severability and Repealer
§ 40-901. [Ch. 40, Sec. 901] Severability. [Ord. No. 1978-76]
Each of the provisions of this Ordinance are severable and if any provisions
shall be declared to be invalid, the remaining provisions shall not be
affected but shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 40-902. [Ch. 40, Sec. 902] Repealer. [Ord. No. 1978-76]
All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances in conflict with this Ordinance are
hereby repealed.
§ 40-901 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-902
1:1613

ARTICLE X
Downtown Shuttles
§ 40-1001. [Ch. 40, Sec. 1001] Operation of downtown shuttles.
[Ord. No. 2015-68]
No person or entity shall operate or drive a downtown shuttle without
complying with the requirements of this article. Downtown shuttles may
only be operated on Thursdays, Fridays and Saturdays, commencing at 6:00
p.m. until 4:00 a.m. the following morning. Downtown shuttles may also
be operated on the following dates commencing at 6:00 p.m. through 4:00
a.m. on the following morning: Super Bowl Sunday, March 17th, October
31st, the day before Thanksgiving and the first dates on which students
at Illinois State University and Illinois Wesleyan University move in or
out of dormitories, the respective homecoming weekends for Illinois State
University and Illinois Wesleyan University, and December 31st. Downtown
shuttles may also be operated on any dates and times for which an official
notice to do so has been issued by the City Manager. Holders of downtown
shuttle certificates who wish to request that a specific date be officially
designated by the City Manager pursuant to the preceding sentence must
send a written request the City Clerk's office no later than 14 days prior to
the date for which the official designation is requested.
§ 40-1002. [Ch. 40, Sec. 1002] Certificate of public convenience
required. [Ord. No. 2015-68]
No person shall operate or permit a downtown shuttle owned or controlled
by him to be operated as a downtown shuttle upon the streets of the City of
Bloomington or such other areas to which this chapter applies pursuant to
an intergovernmental cooperation agreement without having first obtained
a certificate of public convenience from the City Manager as provided in
Article II of this chapter.
§ 40-1003. [Ch. 40, Sec. 1003] Number of downtown shuttles. [Ord.
No. 2015-68]
Each holder shall operate the number of downtown shuttles for which the
holder's certificate was issued. Additions to in the number of downtown
shuttles allowed for each holder shall be made only in accordance with the
procedure outlined for the issuance of a certificate of public convenience
set forth in Article II of this chapter and will require that an application for
operation of additional vehicles be filed with the Clerk's office as provided
therein. Certificate holders may voluntarily take a downtown shuttle out of
service and are not required to have insurance on such a vehicle. Prior to a
vehicle being returned to service, it must be insured as required by § 40-205
and proof of said insurance shall be provided to the City Clerk. The vehicle
must also be inspected for the portion of the year for which it will operate
as required by § 40-1005 of this article.
§ 40-1001 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-1004
1:1615
§ 40-1004. [Ch. 40, Sec. 1004] Display of identification card. [Ord.
No. 2015-68]
Every driver licensed under this article shall post his driver's identification
card in such a place as to be in full view of all passengers while such driver
is operating a downtown shuttle.
§ 40-1005. [Ch. 40, Sec. 1005] Downtown shuttles - license
required.
A. Vehicles must be licensed.
(1) Prior to the use and operation of any vehicle under the provisions of
this article and during the months of December and June of each
year, every vehicle shall be thoroughly examined and inspected by
the Police Department and found to be satisfactory in regard to the
following:
(a) Steering;
(b) Brakes;
(c) Lights;
(d) Tires;
(e) Horn;
(f) Exhaust system;
(g) Rear view mirror;
(h) Windshield wipers;
(i) Properly licensed by State of Illinois;
(j) Otherwise clean, sanitary and safe for the transportation of
passengers;
(k) State Sticker showing proof of insurance;
(l) No crack in a window which cannot be covered by a one-inch
disk (State law - a quarter);
(m) No body damage or condition shall be allowed to remain which
would cost in excess of $250 on the regular body work market
or which presents sharp edges or other dangerous conditions
to passengers.
(2) As part of this examination, every vehicle must pass the safety test
provided by an official Illinois testing station as established by the
Illinois Compiled Statutes. If the vehicle complies with the City
standards set forth above and passes the official Illinois test, the
sticker of safety by the official testing station and a sticker issued
by the City shall be affixed to said vehicle and it shall at all times be
§ 40-1004 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 40-1005
1:1616
§ 40-1006. [Ch. 40, Sec. 1006] Penalties. [Ord. No. 2015-68]
Any person or entity violating any portion of this article X (Downtown
Shuttles) shall be fined a minimum amount not less than $250 and a
maximum amount not to exceed $1,000 for a first offense and a minimum
amount not less than $250 and an amount not to exceed $2,500 for second
and subsequent offenses.
§ 40-1007. [Ch. 40, Sec. 1007] Personal articles left in downtown
shuttles. [Ord. No. 2015-68]
All articles found in downtown shuttles by the holder or driver thereof
shall be turned over to the Police Department of the jurisdiction where the
vehicle is located when the article is found within 24 hours of the finding of
the article, unless the property is claimed by the owner. Upon the property
being turned over, the Police Department shall give a receipt to the person
turning the property over to the police department and, if not claimed in 30
days, such property shall be returned to the holder or driver, or disposed of
by the police department.
§ 40-1008. [Ch. 40, Sec. 1008] Manifests.
displayed on said vehicle. No sticker issued during the first six
months of any year shall be of any effect after July 1st of that year
and no such certificate issued during the second six months of any
year shall be of any effect after January 1st of the following year.
No downtown shuttle shall be operated upon the streets, alley or
public places of said City without having been tested as herein
required or without having said sticker displayed on said vehicle. A
fee as set forth in the Schedule of Fees shall be paid to the City for
each such certificate. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
B. Periodic inspections. Every vehicle operating under this Ordinance
shall be inspected every six months by the Police Department as
provided for herein. However, the City Manager shall have authority to
order an inspection at any time to insure the continued maintenance of
safe operating conditions.
C. Vehicles must be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. Every vehicle
operating under this Ordinance shall be kept in a safe, clean and
sanitary condition at all times to conform to the standards above. [Ord.
No. 2015-68]
A. Every driver shall maintain a daily manifest upon which is recorded all
trips made each day, showing time and place of origin, the number of
passengers, and amount of fare, and all such completed manifests shall
be returned to the holder by the driver at the conclusion of his tour of
duty. The forms for each manifest shall be furnished to the driver by the
certificate holder and shall provide for content and be of a type
approved by the City Manager.
§ 40-1005 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-1008
1:1617
§ 40-1009. [Ch. 40, Sec. 1009] Certificate holder's records and
reports. [Ord. No. 2015-68]
All accidents arising from or in connection with the operation of downtown
shuttles which result in death or injury to any person or in damage to
any vehicle, or to any property in an amount exceeding the sum of $250
shall be described on an accident report form to be furnished by the Police
Department within 10 days from the time of the occurrence.
§ 40-1010. [Ch. 40, Sec. 1010] Refusal to pay legal fare. [Ord. No.
2015-68]
It is illegal for any person to refuse to pay the fee for any downtown shuttle
when being conveyed in same. Persons who refuse to pay the fare required
for entry into the vehicle may be denied passage.
§ 40-1011. [Ch. 40, Sec. 1011] Filing false application. [Ord. No.
2015-68]
A person commits the offense of filing a false application if he knowingly
makes a misstatement of fact on any application for a certificate of public
convenience or a vehicle for hire driver's permit. Based on the applicant's
access to such information, any misstatement of fact on any such
application shall be presumed to have been knowingly made unless the
applicant can prove that such misstatement was not knowingly made.
§ 40-1012. [Ch. 40, Sec. 1012] Illegal operation of downtown
shuttles.
It is illegal for and a person commits the offense of illegal operation of a
downtown shuttle if:
B. Every certificate holder of a certificate of public convenience shall
retain and preserve all drivers' manifests in a safe place for at least one
calendar year following the year to which they relate and said manifest
shall be available at any time on request to the City Manager or Police
Department. [Ord. No. 2015-68]
A. Without a valid effective certificate of public convenience the person
operates or drives a downtown shuttle or allows another person to
operate or drive a downtown shuttle; or
B. The person operates or drives a downtown shuttle without a valid
operator's license from the State of Illinois or without a valid downtown
shuttle driver's permit from the City of Bloomington, or allows another
person to do so; or
C. The person operates or drives or allows another to operate or drive a
downtown shuttle which lacks proper State of Illinois license plates or
City of Bloomington downtown shuttle stickers; or
§ 40-1008 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 40-1012
1:1618
§ 40-1013. [Ch. 40, Sec. 1013] Refusal to carry orderly persons.
[Ord. No. 2015-68]
It is illegal for and a person commits the offense of refusal to carry orderly
persons if he refuses or neglects, or if a holder allows a driver to refuse or
neglect, for reasons other than the vehicle being filled to legal capacity or
failure to pay a required fare, to convey any orderly person or persons upon
request.
§ 40-1014. [Ch. 40, Sec. 1014] Failure to keep manifests.
It is illegal for and a person commits the offense of failure to keep manifests
if:
§ 40-1015. [Ch. 40, Sec. 1015] Failure to keep records and reports.
[Ord. No. 2015-68]
It is illegal for and a person commits the offense of failure to keep records
and reports if he fails to keep his records and reports as required by
§ 40-1009.
§ 40-1016. [Ch. 40, Sec. 1016] Failure to insure. [Ord. No. 2015-68]
It is illegal for and a holder commits the offense of failure to insure if he
fails to provide the insurance required by § 40-205.
§ 40-1017. [Ch. 40, Sec. 1017] Improper vehicle use. [Ord. No.
2015-68]
It is illegal for and a person commits the offense of improper vehicle use if
he violates any provision of the Illinois Motor Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5) of
the Bloomington Motor Vehicle Code (Bloomington City Code Chapter 29)
or any other applicable portion of the Codes or Ordinances of any other
jurisdiction.
D. The person operates or drives or allows another to operate or drive a
downtown shuttle which does not have the name of the business and a
phone number on the side of the downtown shuttle. [Ord. No.
2015-68]
A. He is a holder and he allows a driver to neglect or omit the making of a
manifest as required by § 40-1008; or
B. He is a driver and he neglects or omits the making of a manifest as
required by § 40-1008. [Ord. No. 2015-68]
§ 40-1012 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-1018
1:1619
§ 40-1018. [Ch. 40, Sec. 1018] Overloading vehicle. [Ord. No.
2015-68]
It is illegal for and a person commits the offense of overloading a vehicle if
he carries more passengers than the seating capacity of the vehicle under
state or federal law.
§ 40-1019. [Ch. 40, Sec. 1019] Insufficient parking. [Ord. No.
2015-68]
It is illegal for and a holder commits the offense of supplying insufficient
parking if he fails to provide off-street parking facilities sufficient to store
his motor vehicles while such vehicles are not in service.
§ 40-1020. [Ch. 40, Sec. 1020] Improper advertising. [Ord. No.
2015-68]
It shall be unlawful for any holder of a certificate to place, or cause to be
placed, any advertisement for services on public property. Advertisements
for service placed on private property shall only be located in accordance
with the City's Sign Code and with the written consent of the property
owner.
§ 40-1021. [Ch. 40, Sec. 1021] "No smoking" signs required. [Ord.
No. 2015-68]
Signs stating "No Smoking" shall be posted in downtown shuttles. The sign
shall have a reference to Chapter 41, § 41-203, of the Bloomington City
Code and shall state that complaints of persons smoking in violation of the
law may be reported to the Bloomington City Clerk at (309) 434-2240.
§ 40-1022. [Ch. 40, Sec. 1022] Advertising. [Ord. No. 2015-68]
Subject to the rules and regulations of the City Manager, it shall be lawful
for any person owning or operating a downtown shuttle to permit
advertising matter to be affixed to or installed in or on such downtown
shuttle.
§ 40-1023. [Ch. 40, Sec. 1023] Hub locations and waiting periods.
A. Locations.
(1) The following locations are permitted waiting locations for
downtown shuttles on dates when downtown shuttles may legally
operate, commencing at 10:00 p.m. and ending at 3:00 a.m.:
§ 40-1018 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 40-1023
1:1620
§ 40-1024. [Ch. 40, Sec. 1024] Alcoholic liquor prohibited on
downtown shuttles.
Location
500 Block of North Main Street (East Side) - the seven regular
parking spaces north of the handicap parking space and the two
"freight loading" spaces north of those seven spaces
100 Block of West Washington (South Side)
300 Block of West Front Street (South Side)
(2) Downtown shuttles are permitted to park in the above locations for
a maximum of 15 minutes unless the vehicles are loading
passengers. If passengers are loading, the downtown shuttle is
permitted to stay at that location an additional five minutes.
(3) In the event of a violation of this section, both the driver of the
downtown shuttle and the company for which the driver is working
may be charged with a violation of this section.
B. In addition to, or in lieu of, the hub locations set forth in Subsection A,
the Chief of Police of the City of Bloomington or Town of Normal, or that
person's designee may, based upon consideration of public safety or
nuisance abatement, designate and promulgate hub locations. Notice of
newly designated hub locations shall be sent to certificate holders of
downtown shuttles by regular, first class mail to the business address of
the certificate holder no less than 10 days from the date upon which
said designation will become effective.
C. In the Town of Normal, downtown shuttles may drop off and pick up
passengers only in lawful parking places and at other locations
specifically designated by the Chief of Police of the Town of Normal.
D. The Chief of Police of the City of Bloomington or the Town of Normal, or
that person's designee may, based upon consideration of public safety
or nuisance abatement, designate any place in their jurisdiction as a
prohibited drop off, pick-up, waiting or parking location for downtown
shuttles. Notice of any designated prohibited location shall be sent to
certificate holders of downtown shuttles by regular first-class mail to
the business address of the certificate holders not less than 10 days
before the date upon which said designation will become effective.
[Ord. No. 2015-68]
A. No person may possess alcoholic liquor, regardless of whether the
container for such alcoholic liquor is sealed or open, on any downtown
shuttle operating within the corporate limits of the City of Bloomington
or the Town of Normal. Signs shall be prominently posted at the doors
to all vehicles for hire, stating "It is unlawful to possess alcohol on this
vehicle."
§ 40-1023 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-1024
1:1621
§ 40-1025. [Ch. 40, Sec. 1025] Service of notice.
§ 40-1026. [Ch. 40, Sec. 1026] Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2015-68]
In enforcing the provisions of this chapter, the Police Department of the
City of Bloomington upon discovering a violation of the provisions of this
chapter, shall take appropriate action to enforce the law and shall report
the same to the City Manager who may take appropriate action with respect
thereto.
§ 40-1027. [Ch. 40, Sec. 1027] Supplemental regulations. [Ord. No.
2015-68]
The City Manager is hereby given the authority to promulgate such rules
and regulations not inconsistent with this chapter as he shall find necessary
to effectuate its purpose and intent.
§ 40-1028. [Ch. 40, Sec. 1028] Towing and impoundment. [Ord. No.
2015-68]
Vehicles operated in violation of the provisions of this chapter may be towed
and impounded pursuant to the ordinances of the jurisdiction within which
the violation takes place.
B. No driver of a downtown shuttle shall permit a violation of Subsection A
of this section. [Ord. No. 2015-68]
A. Service of notice on individuals. Except as otherwise expressly
provided, service of any notice required in this chapter upon an
individual shall be made:
(1) By leaving a copy thereof with the person personally; or
(2) By leaving a copy at this home or usual place of work, with some
member of the person's family of the age of 13 years or upwards,
and informing that person of the contents thereof, provided the
officer or other person making service shall also send a copy of the
notice in a sealed envelope with postage fully prepaid, addressed to
the person at this usual place of abode. The certificate of the officer
or affidavit of the person that he has sent the copy in pursuance of
this section is sufficient evidence to prove that he has done so.
(3) By first class mail or by email to the last known postal or email
address of the person. For the purpose of this section, the last
known address shall be the one that has most recently been
recorded in the City Clerk's office.
B. Service on partnership, limited liability company or corporation. Any
corporation, limited liability company or partnership required to be
given any notice under this chapter may be served by serving notice on
any director, officer or partner thereof in the manner provided in
Subsection A above. [Ord. No. 2015-68]
§ 40-1024 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 40-1028
1:1622
ARTICLE XI
Limousines
§ 40-1101. [Ch. 40, Sec. 11] Limousine regulations. [Ord. No.
2015-68]
"Limousine" shall mean any vehicle for which the lessee has executed a
written contract granting the lessee and his or her guests the exclusive use
of the vehicle for a continuous period of time of three hours or more. All
vehicles purporting to be operating as a limousine must at all times have
in the possession of the driver a copy of the written contract which has
been executed by the current lessee of the vehicle. Whenever a limousine
is under the exclusive use of a lessee and is parked, it must have a sign
prominently posted which states, "Not for Hire." No vehicle shall be leased
as a limousine unless it has "livery" or "PT" vehicle registration plates issued
by the Illinois Secretary of State. Persons operating a vehicle in compliance
with the requirements of this article XI shall not be deemed to be unlawfully
operating a taxi or a downtown shuttle.
§ 40-1101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-1101
1:1623

ARTICLE XII
Transportation Network Providers
§ 40-1201. [Ch. 40, Sec. 1201] Purpose of article; applicability.
§ 40-1202. [Ch. 40, Sec. 1202] Definitions; geographic operations.
§ 40-1203. [Ch. 40, Sec. 1203] Compliance with state law.
A. The purpose of this article XII is to protect the health, safety, and
welfare of the citizens of the communities of the City of Bloomington
and the Town of Normal through the regulation of Transportation
Network Company (TNC) services, which provide transportation of
passengers for hire.
B. The City of Bloomington and the Town of Normal have entered into an
intergovernmental agreement under which the City of Bloomington will
perform the administration and enforcement of the regulations under
this article.
C. This article is adopted pursuant to the home rule authority of the City of
Bloomington and the Town of Normal and pursuant to the authority to
regulate drivers for hire under Section 11-42-6 of the Illinois Municipal
Code. [Ord. No. 2015-31]
A. As used in this Article XII:
CITY CLERK — The City Clerk of the City of Bloomington or his or her
designee.
CITY MANAGER — The City Manager of the City of Bloomington or his
or her designee.
TNP ACT — The Transportation Network Providers Act.
TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANY, TNC, TRANSPORTATION
NETWORK COMPANY DRIVER, TNC DRIVER, and TRANSPORTATION
NETWORK COMPANY SERVICES or TNC SERVICES — Shall have the
meanings set forth under Section 5 of the Transportation Network
Providers Act, (625 ILCS 57/), which was enacted under Public Act
98-1173 and takes effect on June 1, 2015.
B. A TNC operates in the City of Bloomington and Town of Normal if a TNC
driver picks up a passenger in the jurisdictional boundaries of either
the City of Bloomington or the Town of Normal.
C. A TNC driver operates in the City of Bloomington and Town of Normal if
he or she picks up a passenger in the jurisdictional boundaries of either
the City of Bloomington or the Town of Normal. [Ord. No. 2015-31]
A. Each TNC and each TNC driver operating in Bloomington-Normal must
comply with the provisions of the TNP Act. If a TNC or TNC driver
operates in Bloomington-Normal before the effective date of the TNP
Act, then the TNC or TNC driver must comply with the provisions of the
§ 40-1201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-1203
1:1625
§ 40-1204. [Ch. 40, Sec. 1204] Transportation network company
license required.
§ 40-1205. [Ch. 40, Sec. 1205] Transportation network company
application.
TNP Act as if the Act were in effect as of the date that the TNC or TNC
driver operates in Bloomington-Normal.
B. Failure of a TNC or TNC driver to comply with the provisions of the TNP
Act will be deemed a violation of this chapter and may subject the
violator to revocation or suspension of any TNC license or driver's
permit issued pursuant to this article or to fines as provided in this
article. [Ord. No. 2015-31]
A. No TNC may operate in Bloomington-Normal unless it obtains a TNC
License. The application for TNC license shall be made to the City Clerk
in the form and manner required by that office. The fee for application
for license issuance or renewal shall be as set forth in the Schedule of
Fees and upon the issuance of a license upon approval, the licensure fee
shall be an amount as set forth in the Schedule of Fees. The licensure
fee must be paid prior to issuance of a license. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
B. Each TNC License shall commence upon issuance and continue through
December 31 of the calendar year issued. Thereafter, if renewed, the
TNC License will run annually, concurrent with each calendar year.
Application for annual license renewal must be submitted to the Clerk's
office prior to the year for which renewal is sought. The application fee
shall be non-refundable regardless of whether a license is issued or
renewed. [Ord. No. 2015-31]
A. Each application for a TNC license shall be verified upon oath or
affirmation and shall furnish, at a minimum, the following information:
(1) If the license applicant is an individual:
(a) The individual's full name, residence address, business
address, business e-mail address and business telephone
number; and
(b) Proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age.
(2) If the license applicant is a corporation:
(a) The corporate name, business address and telephone number
of the applicant;
(b) The date and state of incorporation; [Ord. No. 2015-31]
(c) The name, street address, mailing address and email address
of a designated registered agent in the State of Illinois
authorized to accept service of process and all notices required
under this article;
§ 40-1203 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 40-1205
1:1626
(d) Proof that the applicant is authorized and registered to do
business in the State of Illinois; if the applicant has existed for
more than one year, this proof shall include a Certificate of
Good Standing issued by the Secretary of State;
(3) If the license applicant is a partnership or limited liability company:
(a) The name, business address or principal office address and
telephone number of the applicant;
(b) The full names, residence addresses, e-mail addresses and
residence telephone numbers of:
[1] The three members who own the highest percentage
interests in such partnership or limited liability company,
[2] The general partner of a partnership;
[3] The managing partner of a limited liability company; and
[4] Any other member who owns a 25% or more interest
therein;
(c) The name, street address, mailing address and e-mail address
of a designated registered agent in the State of Illinois
authorized to accept service of process and all notices required
under this article; and
(d) If the applicant is a limited liability company, proof that the
applicant is authorized and registered to do business in the
State of Illinois and, if the applicant has been in existence for
more than one year, this proof shall include a Certificate of
Good Standing issued by the Secretary of State.
B. In addition to the license application requirements listed in Subsection
A any applicant for license issuance or renewal shall provide to the
Clerk:
(1) The names, driver's license numbers and addresses of drivers
registered with the applicant as of the date of the application who
will be providing TNC services in the City of Bloomington and the
Town of Normal or, on a monthly basis, a list of the last four
numbers of the driver's license number and initial of first and last
name for each active driver.
(2) A sworn statement under oath by the TNC that:
(a) The TNC has conducted the background checks as required by
§ 40-1209 of this chapter on any existing TNC drivers and will
conduct such background checks on any future drivers prior to
being allowed to operate for the TNC;
(b) That background checks will be updated on all TNC drivers on
an annual basis;
§ 40-1205 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-1205
1:1627
§ 40-1206. [Ch. 40, Sec. 1206] Transportation network company
license qualifications.
(c) That all TNC drivers have passed the TNC's background
checks and are not disqualified under § 40-1209B of this
chapter;
(d) That the TNC has ensured the vehicles of all TNC drivers have
met the qualifications of § 40-1212 of this chapter; and
(e) That the TNC and all TNC drivers have met the insurance
obligations set forth in § 40-1210 of this chapter.
(3) The applicant's insurance policies as required by Section 10 of the
Transportation Network Providers Act.
(4) Regular and twenty-four-hour emergency contact information,
including a telephone number, for the TNC.
(5) A plan on the provision of background checks as required by
§ 40-1206H. [Ord. No. 2015-31]
A. In order to qualify for a TNC license, whether upon initial application or
upon application for renewal of a license:
(1) An applicant shall be in compliance with all applicable City, State of
Illinois and federal law and must not owe any debt to the City;
(2) If the applicant is a corporation or limited liability company, the
applicant must be registered with the Illinois Secretary of State as
an organization authorized to do business in the State of Illinois
and be in good standing;
(3) The applicant shall have a designated registered agent in the State
of Illinois authorized to accept service of process and notices
required by this article; and
(4) The applicant shall provide regular and twenty-four-hour
emergency contact information, including a telephone number, for
the TNC.
B. No applicant is eligible for a license if any transportation network
company license held by the applicant, or by any officer or director of a
corporate applicant or partner of a partnership applicant, has been
revoked within the previous five years, or if the applicant, or any officer
or director of a corporate applicant or partner in a partnership
applicant, within the five years immediately preceding the date of his
application, has been either convicted, or in custody, under parole or
under any other noncustodial supervision resulting from a conviction in
a court of any jurisdiction for the commission of any felony as defined
by Article 2 of the Illinois Criminal Code of 2012, codified at 720 ILCS 5/
2-0.5 et seq., or its equivalent under federal or other jurisdictional law.
§ 40-1205 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 40-1206
1:1628
C. No applicant is eligible for a license if the applicant, or any officer,
director, or shareholder having any more than 25% of the shares in a
corporate or limited liability company applicant, or any partner in a
partnership applicant, owes the City of Bloomington or Town of Normal,
any outstanding fines, judgment debts, past-due amounts for water or
other City services, taxes, fees or any other amounts. This provision
may be waived by the City Manager of the municipality to whom the
financial obligation is outstanding, provided that the applicant enters
into and fully complies with a payment agreement providing for full
payment to the jurisdiction of any and all outstanding obligations
referred to in the preceding sentence. Any license issued pursuant to
such an agreement shall be probationary in the sense that it shall be
contingent upon full compliance with the agreement and shall be
revoked upon failure to comply therewith.
D. No applicant is eligible for a license if the applicant, or any officer,
director, shareholder having more than 25% of the shares in a
corporate or limited liability company applicant, or any partner in a
partnership applicant, has been found guilty of three or more violations
of the Bloomington City Code or the ordinances of the Town of Normal
in the past three years preceding the date of application;
E. Eligibility for issuance of any license under this chapter shall be a
continuing requirement for maintaining such license.
F. If the applicant meets the criteria set forth in this section, the City
Manager shall direct the City Clerk to issue or renew a TNC license.
G. If an application for the issuance or renewal of a license is denied, the
City Manager shall issue a written notice of denial, together with
findings in support of the denial, to the applicant. The applicant may,
within 10 days of the mailing of the notice of denial, make a written
request for a hearing to appeal the denial. Failure to timely make such a
request will waive the right to appeal. The request must be submitted to
the office of the City of Bloomington Corporation Counsel located at 109
East Olive Street, Bloomington, Illinois 61701. Upon receipt of a timely
written request for a hearing, the Corporation Counsel's office shall
schedule a hearing on the appeal in the City of Bloomington
Administrative Court and shall mail notice of the date and time of a
hearing to the applicant. Said hearing shall be set for a date within 30
days of the Corporation Counsel's receipt of the request for an appeal.
If, at the appeal hearing, the applicant establishes by a preponderance
of the evidence that the denial was based upon incorrect findings, the
City Manager shall issue a license. If, at such hearing, the denial is
found to have been based upon correct findings, or if the applicant fails
to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that the findings forming
the basis for the denial were incorrect, the denial shall become final.
After entry of the final denial, the appellant shall be ineligible to make a
new application for a period of 18 months.
§ 40-1206 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-1206
1:1629
§ 40-1207. [Ch. 40, Sec. 1207] Rescission of transportation network
company license.
§ 40-1208. [Ch. 40, Sec. 1208] Additional requirements for a
transportation network company.
H. Prior to a license being issued, the TNP must submit a written plan for
how background checks will be conducted and affirm such background
checks are being completed and will continue to be completed as set
forth in the plan and in accordance with this subsection. A local and
national criminal background check, conducted through a third-party
vendor, must be completed for each applicant. Any company that has
been accredited by the National Association of Professional
Background Screeners shall be pre-approved by the City to perform the
required criminal background checks. Upon written application, the
City Manager may approve additional companies that meet similar
requirements. At a minimum, the criminal background checks shall
include:
(1) Multi-State/Multi-Jurisdiction Criminal Records Locator or other
similar commercial nationwide database with validation (primary
source search); and
(2) National Sex Offender Registry database. [Ord. No. 2015-31]
A. The City Manager shall have the power to rescind, pursuant to this
section, any transportation network company license erroneously or
illegally issued or renewed pursuant to this section.
B. In order for such rescission to be effective, the Corporation Counsel for
the City of Bloomington shall notify the licensee of the date the
rescission will take effect. The notice shall be provided by first-class
mail or in person. The notice shall indicate the basis for the rescission
and shall also indicate a date and time, prior to the proposed rescission
date, upon which the licensee may appear in the City of Bloomington
Administrative Court to contest the proposed rescission. The licensee
shall also be informed that he or she shall be entitled to present at the
hearing any document, including affidavits, relating to the proposed
rescission. Following the appearance of the licensee before the
Administrative Hearing Officer, the Officer may affirm or reverse the
rescission decision based upon the evidence presented by the licensee.
The Hearing Officer's decision shall be in writing and shall be mailed to
the licensee at least five days before a license rescission is effective. A
licensee may appeal the Hearing Officer's decision to any court of
competent jurisdiction. [Ord. No. 2015-31]
A. The requirements under this section are in addition to the requirements
set forth in the TNP Act. Failure of a TNC to comply with the
requirements of the TNP Act or of this section will be a violation of this
Code and may subject the licensee to suspension, revocation or fines as
provided in this article.
§ 40-1206 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 40-1208
1:1630
B. A TNC operating in Bloomington-Normal must comply with all of the
following:
(1) Upon notification from the City of Bloomington that a local TNC
driver has been involved in illegal activities, the TNC shall
immediately remove a driver from its network system and not
reinstate that driver until adjudication of the alleged activities and
re-qualification of the TNC driver.
(2) A TNC shall maintain TNC driver records at least until the one year
anniversary of the date on which a TNC driver's activation on the
TNC digital network has ended. These records shall include:
(a) Records provided or gathered by the TNC pertaining to driver
requirements mandated in Section 15 of the Transportation
Network Providers Act;
(b) Records of passenger complaints regarding drivers,
investigation by the TNC of those complaints and any other
records pertinent to passenger complaints or their
investigation;
(c) Accurate books and records of account of the licensee's
operations in the City of Bloomington and Town of Normal;
(d) A TNC shall maintain individual trip records for at least one
year from the date each trip was provided. The individual trip
record must include TNC driver and vehicle information, date
and time of start and finish of trip, location of trip, passenger's
personal identification, and fee charged for the service.
(3) The TNC shall be required to abide by the auditing requirements
set forth herein. The City, or a third party agreed upon by the City
and a TNC, may audit the records of the TNC, including either
specifically requested TNC drivers and/or a random sample of the
TNC's records related to drivers, in accordance with all of the
following:
(a) Except for cause relating to repeated public complaints or
infractions of this article, the City may conduct a general audit
of the records related TNC drivers no more than two times per
year.
(b) The audit shall take place at a third party location agreed upon
by the City and the TNC. If a location cannot be agreed upon,
the audit shall take place at a law office within the
Bloomington-Normal area as designated by the City's
corporation counsel.
(c) Upon a citation to a TNC driver and/or a complaint concerning
a TNC driver, the City shall be permitted to audit the records of
said TNC driver at any time.
§ 40-1208 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-1208
1:1631
§ 40-1209. [Ch. 40, Sec. 1209] TNC driver requirements.
(4) A TNC shall accept service of process by certified mail sent to its
registered agent.
(5) Obtain and review a driving history research report for such
individual.
(6) Conduct the background checks as required by § 40-1206H. [Ord.
No. 2015-31]
A. Prior to permitting an individual to act as a TNC driver on its digital
platform or otherwise on behalf of the TNC, the TNC shall:
(1) Require the individual to submit an application to the TNC, which
includes information regarding his or her address, age, driver's
license, driving history, motor vehicle registration, automobile
liability insurance, and other information required by the TNC.
(2) Perform a local and national criminal background check, conducted
through a third-party vendor, for each applicant in accordance with
the plan submitted in § 40-1206H and the requirements of this
article. Any company that has been accredited by the National
Association of Professional Background Screeners shall be preapproved
by the City to perform the required criminal background
checks. Upon written application, the City Manager may approve
additional companies that meet similar requirements. At a
minimum, the criminal background checks shall include:
(a) Multi-State/Multi-Jurisdiction Criminal Records Locator or
other similar commercial nationwide database with validation
(primary source search); and
(b) National Sex Offender Registry database.
(3) Obtain and review a driving history research report for such
individual.
B. The TNC shall not permit an individual to act as a TNC driver on its
digital platform, nor shall an individual be allowed to operate as a TNC
driver who:
(1) Has had more than three moving violations in the prior three-year
period, or one major violation in the prior three-year period
(including, but not limited to, attempting to evade the police,
reckless driving, or driving on a suspended or revoked license);
(2) Has been convicted, within the past seven years, of driving under
the influence of drugs or alcohol, or who has been convicted at any
time of fraud, sexual offenses, use of a motor vehicle to commit a
felony, a crime involving property damage, and/or theft, acts of
violence, or acts of terror;
§ 40-1208 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 40-1209
1:1632
§ 40-1210. [Ch. 40, Sec. 1210] Insurance required for
transportation network drivers.
(3) Is a match in the National Sex Offender Registry database or is a
sex offender as defined by Chapter 40;
(4) Does not possess a valid driver's license;
(5) Does not possess proof of registration for the motor vehicle(s) used
to provide TNC Services;
(6) Does not possess proof of automobile liability insurance for the
motor vehicle(s) used to provide TNC Services; or
(7) Is not at least 21 years of age.
C. All TNC drivers shall be required to carry and provide proof of their
affiliation with a TNC when operating, as well as insurance coverage
information as required by § 40-1210. [Ord. No. 2015-31]
A. Transportation network companies and participating TNC drivers shall
comply with the automobile liability insurance requirements of this
section.
B. The following automobile liability insurance requirements shall apply
from the moment a participating TNC driver logs on to the
transportation network company's digital network or software
application until the TNC driver accepts a request to transport a
passenger, and from the moment the TNC driver completes the
transaction on the digital network or software application or the ride is
complete, whichever is later, until the TNC driver either accepts
another ride request on the digital network or software application or
logs off the digital network or software application:
(1) Automobile liability insurance shall be in the amount of at least
$50,000 for death and personal injury per person, $100,000 for
death and personal injury per incident, and $25,000 for property
damage.
(2) Contingent automobile liability insurance in the amounts required
in Subsection B(1) of this subsection shall be maintained by a
transportation network company and provide coverage in the event
a participating TNC driver's own automobile liability policy
excludes coverage according to its policy terms or does not provide
at least the limits of coverage required in Subsection B(1).
C. The following automobile liability insurance requirements shall apply
from the moment a TNC driver accepts a ride request on the
transportation network company's digital network or software
application until the TNC driver completes the transaction on the
digital network or software application or until the ride is complete,
whichever is later:
§ 40-1209 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-1210
1:1633
(1) Automobile liability insurance shall be primary and in the amount
of $1,000,000 for death, personal injury, and property damage. The
requirements for the coverage required by this Subsection C(1)
may be satisfied by any of the following:
(a) Automobile liability insurance maintained by a participating
TNC driver;
(b) Automobile liability company insurance maintained by a
transportation network company; or
(c) Any combination of Subsection C(1)(a) and (b).
(2) Insurance coverage provided under this Subsection C shall also
provide for uninsured motorist coverage and underinsured
motorist coverage in the amount of $50,000 from the moment a
passenger enters the vehicle of a participating TNC driver until the
passenger exits the vehicle.
(3) The insurer, in the case of insurance coverage provided under this
Subsection C, shall have the duty to defend and indemnify the
insured.
(4) Coverage under an automobile liability insurance policy required
under this Subsection C shall not be dependent on a personal
automobile insurance policy first denying a claim nor shall a
personal automobile insurance policy be required to first deny a
claim.
D. In every instance when automobile liability insurance maintained by a
participating TNC driver to fulfill the insurance obligations of this
section has lapsed or ceased to exist, the transportation network
company shall provide the coverage required by this section beginning
with the first dollar of a claim.
E. This section shall not limit the liability of a transportation network
company arising out of an automobile accident involving a participating
TNC driver in any action for damages against a transportation network
company for an amount above the required insurance coverage.
F. The transportation network company shall disclose in writing to TNC
drivers, as part of its agreement with those TNC drivers, the following:
(1) The insurance coverage and limits of liability that the
transportation network company provides while the TNC driver
uses a vehicle in connection with a transportation network
company's digital network or software application; and
(2) That the TNC driver's own insurance policy may not provide
coverage while the TNC driver uses a vehicle in connection with a
transportation network company digital network depending on its
terms.
§ 40-1210 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 40-1210
1:1634
§ 40-1211. [Ch. 40, Sec. 1213] Suspension or revocation of license.
§ 40-1212. [Ch. 40, Sec. 1214] Transportation network vehicles.
G. An insurance policy required by this section may be placed with an
admitted Illinois insurer, or with an authorized surplus line insurer
under Section 445 of the Illinois Insurance Code; and is not subject to
any restriction or limitation on the issuance of a policy contained in
Section 445a of the Illinois Insurance Code.
H. Any insurance policy required by this section shall satisfy the financial
responsibility requirement for a motor vehicle under Sections 7-203
and 7-601 of the Illinois Vehicle Code.
I. The TNC and any TNC driver shall be required to provide proof of
insurance requested by the City and/or its law enforcement officials.
[Ord. No. 2015-31]
A. The City Manager may revoke or suspend a TNC License or impose a
penalty if the holder of that license violates any provision of this
chapter.
B. If any TNC receives a notice of a revocation or suspension of their
license an appeal may be filed with the City of Bloomington
Administrative Adjudication Unit. The appeal must be made in writing
within 10 days of the date of the mailing of the notice of revocation or
suspension. The appeal must be submitted to the Bloomington
Corporation Counsel's office located at 109 East Olive Street,
Bloomington IL 61701. The Corporation Counsel's office shall mail an
appeal hearing notice to the requestor containing the hearing date and
time set in the City of Bloomington Administrative Court system. [Ord.
No. 2015-31]
A. A TNC shall not permit a vehicle older than 10 years, counting from the
model year to the present calendar year, to operate in Bloomington-
Normal as a transportation network vehicle.
B. Prior to permitting a TNC driver to use a vehicle on the digital platform,
that vehicle shall be thoroughly examined by a third party vendor
approved by the City. Facilities certified as Automotive Service
Excellence (ASE) Accredited Training Providers shall be considered as
pre-approved vendors by the City for purposes of providing the
inspections required in this section. The City Manager may approve
other vendors upon application. Proof of inspections, and passage of
same, must be maintained by the TNC and individual TNC drivers
during operations and available for inspection by the City and/or its law
enforcement officials. No vehicle shall be used to provide
transportation network services unless it is found to be satisfactory in
regard to the following:
(1) Steering;
§ 40-1210 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-1212
1:1635
§ 40-1213. [Ch. 40, Sec. 1215] Penalties.
(2) Brakes;
(3) Speedometer;
(4) Lights;
(5) Tires;
(6) Horn;
(7) Exhaust system;
(8) Rear view mirror;
(9) Windshield wipers;
(10) Properly licensed by the State of Illinois;
(11) Otherwise clean, sanitary and safe for the transportation of
passengers;
(12) Seat belts for all authorized passengers which seat belts must not
be pushed under seats where they would not be in plain view;
(13)No crack in a window which cannot be covered by a one-inch disk
(State law - a quarter);
(14)No body damage or condition shall be allowed to remain which
would cost in excess of $250 on the regular body work market or
which presents sharp edges or other dangerous conditions to
passengers.
C. Periodic inspections. Every vehicle operating under this article shall be
inspected annually as provided in this section. Inspections may be
performed by a provider as set forth in Subsection B above. Proof of
inspections, and passage of same, must be maintained by the TNC and
individual TNC drivers during operations and available for inspection
by the City and/or its law enforcement officials upon request.
D. Vehicles must be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. Every vehicle
operating under this article shall be kept in a safe, clean and sanitary
condition at all times to conform to the standards above. [Ord. No.
2015-31]
A. Any TNC, TNC driver or other person who violates any provision of this
article is subject to a fine of not less than $250 nor more than $3,000 for
each violation. Each day upon which a violation continues or occurs
shall be considered a separate violation. Any penalties set forth herein
shall be in addition to the right of the City to suspend and/or revoke a
license under § 40-1211 of this chapter.
§ 40-1212 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 40-1213
1:1636
B. The Corporation Counsel may bring an action in the City of
Bloomington Administrative Adjudication Unit or McLean County
Circuit Court to enforce this article and to seek penalties as provided in
this article. [Ord. No. 2015-31]
§ 40-1213 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-1213
1:1637
Chapter 41
TOBACCO
§ 40-1213 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 40-1213
1:1638
ARTICLE I
Licensing the Sale of Tobacco
§ 41-101. [Ch. 41, Sec. 1] Definitions.
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms as used in this
chapter shall be construed according to the definitions given below.
BUILDING — A structure all under one roof, a group of structures having
separate tools but connected by tunnels, passageways, or corridors.
LOCATION — One building owned or operated by the same individual, firm,
association, or corporation.
RETAIL SALE — The sale for use or consumption, and not for resale.
TOBACCO — Any cigar, cigarette, snuff, chewing tobacco, manufactured
product of tobacco or tobacco in any form.
§ 41-102. [Ch. 41, Sec. 2] License required.
It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail in the City tobacco in any
form without first having obtained a license as herein provided.
§ 41-103. [Ch. 41, Sec. 3] Application.
Application for such license shall be made to the City Manager in writing,
signed by the applicant, setting forth the name and address of the person so
applying and the location at which it is proposed to sell tobacco at retail.
§ 41-104. [Ch. 41, Sec. 4] Fee. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
The fee to be paid for the license herein required shall be an amount as set
forth in the Schedule of Fees per year payable in advance to the Director
of Finance and no license shall be issued until such fee has been paid.
In the event that an application "is made after January 1 of any year, the
license fee shall be reduced pro rata according to the number of quarters or
parts thereof remaining in the year and the fractional part of a quarter shall
be counted as a whole quarter. Whenever a license is issued to a specific
location, no additional license shall be required for the sale of tobacco at
the same location by person other than the original applicant. In the event
of revocation or surrender of a license, no unearned portion of the license
fee shall be refunded.
§ 41-105. [Ch. 41, Sec. 5] Revocation.
Any license issued hereunder may be revoked by the City Manager
whenever, in his judgment, the public welfare requires such revocation; and
acceptance of any license issued hereunder shall constitute an agreement
between the parties to such license that the same may be revoked as herein
provided.
§ 41-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 41-106
1:1639
§ 41-106. [Ch. 41, Sec. 6] Sale to persons under age of 18.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association, or corporation to sell,
exchange, or give away any tobacco in any form to children under the age
of 18 years.
§ 41-107. [Ch. 41, Sec. 7] Selling cigarettes containing deleterious
or poisonous drugs.85
No person shall expose for sale, sell, or offer for sale to any person directly
or indirectly, within the City any cigarettes containing opium, morphine,
jimpson weed, belladonna, marijuana, strychnia, cocaine, or other
deleterious or poisonous drug.
§ 41-108. [Ch. 41, Sec. 9] Penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be fined not
less than $50 nor more than $200 for each offense.
85.For state law as to inspection of tobacco. see 111. Rev. Stat. 1959, Ch. 24, Par. 23-64.
§ 41-106 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 41-108
1:1640
ARTICLE II
Smoking in Public Places
[Effective 1-1-2007]
§ 41-201. [Ch. 41, Sec. 10] Interpretation with other laws. [Ord. No.
2006-51]
Nothing in this article overrides any existing elimination of smoking that is
already covered by fire code restrictions.
§ 41-202. [Ch. 41, Sec. 11] Definitions.
The following words and phrases whenever used in this article shall have
the following meanings:
ADULT DAY CARE HOME — A private residence which receives for care one
or more aging or disabled adults, not related to the family.
BUSINESS — Any sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture,
corporation, limited liability company or other business entity formed for
profit-making purposes, including without limitation retail establishments
where goods or services are sold as well as professional corporations and
other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural, or
other professional services are delivered.
CHILD DAY CARE HOME — A private residence which receives for care one
or more children under the age of 12, not related to the family.
CHURCH — A facility used primarily and regularly for religious worship or
religious instruction.[Ord. No. 2006-138]
EMPLOYEE — Any person who is employed by an employer in consideration
for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, and a person who volunteers
his or her services for a nonprofit entity.
EMPLOYER — Any person, business, partnership, association, corporation,
including without limitation a municipal corporation, trust, or nonprofit
entity that employs the services of one or more individual persons.
ENCLOSED AREA — All space in any structure or building that is enclosed
on all sides by any combination of walls, half walls, windows, or doorways
extending from floor to the ceiling, regardless of whether they are open or
closed.
FACILITY — Any enclosed structure or building intended for human
occupancy.
HEALTH CARE FACILITY — Any office or institution providing care or
treatment of diseases, whether physical, mental, or emotional, or other
medical, physiological, or psychological conditions, including without
limitation hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals, clinics, nursing homes, homes
for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories, and offices of surgeons,
chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians, dentists, and other
specialists within these professions. This definition shall include all waiting
§ 41-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 41-202
1:1641
rooms, hallways, private rooms, semiprivate rooms and wards within health
care facilities.
PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT — Any enclosed area under the control of a
public or private employer that employees frequent during the course of
employment, including without limitation work areas, employee lounges,
rest rooms, conference rooms, classrooms, employee cafeterias, hallways
and vehicles. A private residence is not a "place of employment" unless it is
used as a child day care home, adult day care home, health care facility or
home-based business of any kind open to the public.
PRIVATE CLUB OR LODGE — An organization, whether incorporated or not,
which is the owner, lessee, or occupant of a building or portion thereof used
for club purposes, which is operated solely for a recreational, fraternal,
social, patriotic, political, benevolent, or athletic purpose, but not for
pecuniary gain, and if alcoholic beverages are sold such sale is incidental
to its operation. The affairs and management of the organization are
conducted by a board of directors, executive committee, or similar body
chosen by the members at an annual meeting. The organization has
established bylaws and/or a constitution to govern its activities. The
organization has been granted an exemption from the payment of federal
income tax as a club under 26 U.S.C. § 501. No organization shall be
considered a private club or lodge under this section if it permits members
to join under circumstances which renders it to be, in effect, a place
of public accommodation, including but not limited to such methods as
permitting persons to purchase membership in the club for a nominal fee.
During such time that a private club or lodge permits its building or portion
thereof to be used by non-organization members and does not require such
non-organization members to be accompanied by a member of the private
club or lodge, such building or portion thereof shall lose its exemption from
the requirements of this article. If the portion of the building so used by the
non-organization members has separate and distinct rest room facilities and
can be physically separated by means of walls and closed doors from other
areas of the building used only by members of the private club or lodge,
only that portion of the building used by such non-organization members
is subject to the requirements of this article. During the time the building
or portion thereof is subject to this article, temporary signs shall be posted
pursuant to § 41-210.[Ord. No. 2006-138]
PUBLIC PLACE — Any enclosed area to which the public is invited or
in which the public is permitted, including without limitation banks, any
business, educational facilities, government buildings, health care facilities,
laundromats, museums, public transportation facilities, reception areas,
restaurants, bars/taverns, retail food production and marketing
establishments, retail service establishments, retail stores, service line,
shopping malls, sports arenas, theaters, waiting rooms, and common areas
in multiple-family residences. A private residence is not a "public place"
unless it is used as a child day care home, adult day care home, health care
facility or home-based business of any kind open to the public.[Ord. No.
2006-138]
§ 41-202 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 41-202
1:1642
RETAIL TOBACCO STORE — Any retail store utilized primarily for the sale
of tobacco products and accessories and in which the sale of other products
is merely incidental and where no one under 18 is permitted.
SERVICE LINE — Any indoor line at which one or more persons are waiting
for or receiving services of any kind, whether or not the service involves the
exchange of money.
SHOPPING MALL — Any enclosed walkway or hall area that serves to
connect retail or professional establishments.
SMOKING — Inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted cigar,
cigarette, pipe, hookah or other lighted tobacco product in any manner or
in any form.
SPORTS ARENA, ENCLOSED OR SEMI-ENCLOSED — Any sports pavilion,
stadium, gymnasium, health spa, boxing arena, swimming pool, roller and
ice rink, bowling alley and other similar places where members of the
general public assemble to participate in or witness sports, cultural,
recreational or other events.[Ord. No. 2006-51]
§ 41-203. [Ch. 41, Sec. 12] City owned facilities. [Ord. No. 2006-51]
Smoking shall be prohibited in any enclosed City facility and any City
vehicle, including without limitation facilities and vehicles owned, leased,
or operated by the City of Bloomington.
§ 41-204. [Ch. 41, Sec. 13] Prohibition of smoking in public places
and places of employment. [Ord. No. 2006-51]
Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed public places and places of
employment within the City of Bloomington, except as provided in § 41-205.
§ 41-205. [Ch. 41, Sec. 14] Reasonable distance. [Ord. No. 2006-51]
Smoking is prohibited within 15 feet of any public entrance to an area in
which smoking is prohibited.
§ 41-206. [Ch. 41, Sec. 15] Where smoking is not regulated.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article to the contrary, the
following areas shall be exempt from the provisions of §§ 41-202 through
41-213.
A. Private residences, except when used as a licensed child day care
home, adult care home, health care facility, or a home-based business of
any kind open to the public, provided, however, private sleeping rooms
in nursing homes and assisted living centers are not subject to § 41-204,
unless a roommate objects to smoking in the room.
B. Hotel and motel sleeping rooms that are rented to guests and are
designated as smoking rooms provided, however, that not more than
§ 41-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 41-206
1:1643
§ 41-207. [Ch. 41, Sec. 16] Declaration of establishment as nonsmoking.
[Ord. No. 2006-51]
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, an owner, operator,
manager, or other person in control of an establishment, facility, or outdoor
area may declare that entire establishment, facility or outdoor area as a
non-smoking place by posting a sign in conformance with the provisions of
this Act. Smoking shall be prohibited in any area declared a non-smoking
area and any person smoking in such area shall be subject to the penalty
provisions of this Act.
§ 41-208. [Ch. 41, Sec. 17] Non-retaliation. [Ord. No. 2006-51]
No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire, or in any manner
retaliate against an employee, applicant for employment, or customer
because that employee, applicant, or customer exercises any rights afforded
by this article or reports or attempts to prosecute a violation of this article.
§ 41-209. [Ch. 41, Sec. 18] Enforcement.
25% of the rooms rented to guests in a hotel or motel may be so
designated.
C. Retail tobacco stores, provided that smoke from these places does not
infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of
any section of this article.
D. Private clubs or lodges (except as provided in § 41-202 of this chapter).
[Ord. No. 2006-138]
E. Outdoor patios, except for that area of an outdoor patio within 15 feet of
a primary public entrance to an area where smoking is prohibited.
F. Public sidewalk, roadway, park and golf course. [Ord. No. 2006-138]
G. Churches. [Ord. No. 2006-51]
H. A room designated for smoking in an airport established and operated
pursuant to the Illinois Airport Authorities Act (70 ILCS 5), provided
that such room is located in an area where persons cannot enter
without passing through an airport security checkpoint regulated by
the Transportation Security Administration or successor agency, and
provided that such room is equipped with a ventilation system which
substantially reduces the amount of smoke leaving the room and does
not allow recirculation of smoke to public areas. [Ord. No. 2006-138]
A. Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this article may
file a complaint with the City of Bloomington.
B. The City shall, while an establishment is undergoing otherwise
mandated inspection, inspect for compliance with this article.
§ 41-206 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 41-209
1:1644
§ 41-210. [Ch. 41, Sec. 19] Posting of signs. [Ord. No. 2006-138]
Every public place, place of employment, and place established as nonsmoking
pursuant to § 41-207 where smoking is prohibited by this article,
shall have posted at every entrance a conspicuous sign clearly stating that
smoking is prohibited. The international "no smoking" symbol consisting of
a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle
with a red bar diagonally across it shall be considered acceptable under this
section.
§ 41-211. [Ch. 41, Sec. 20] Violations and penalties.
§ 41-212. [Ch. 41, Sec. 21] Public education. [Ord. No. 2006-51]
The City of Bloomington shall engage in a continuing program to explain
and clarify the purposes and requirements of this article to citizens affected
by it, and to guide owners, operators, and managers in their compliance
with it.
C. An owner, manager, operator or employee of an establishment
regulated by this article shall inform persons violating this article of the
appropriate provisions thereof. Posting of a no smoking sign
conforming with this article shall be considered adequate notice.
D. In addition to the remedies provided by this article, the City Manager or
any person aggrieved by the failure of the owner, operator, manager or
other person in control of a public place or a place of employment to
comply with the provisions of this section may apply for injunctive relief
to enforce those provisions in any court of competent jurisdiction. [Ord.
No. 2006-51]
A. A person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited by this
article shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by a fine of not less
than $25 nor more $500.
B. A person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls a place
subject to this article and who fails to prohibit smoking shall be guilty of
an infraction, punishable by: a fine of not less than $25 nor more than
$2,500.
C. A person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls a place
subject to this article and who fails to post a sign in conformance with
the provisions of this article shall be guilty of an infraction punishable
by a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $500.
D. Each day on which a violation of this article occurs shall be considered
a separate and distinct violation. [Ord. No. 2006-51]
§ 41-209 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 41-213
1:1645
§ 41-213. [Ch. 41, Sec. 22] Other applicable laws. [Ord. No.
2006-51]
This article shall not be interpreted or be construed to permit smoking
where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws.
§ 41-214. [Ch. 41, Sec. 23] Severability. [Ord. No. 2006-51]
If any provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this article or the
application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be held invalid
by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect the
other provisions of this article which can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this article are
declared to be severable.
§ 41-213 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 41-214
1:1646
Chapter 42
TOWNSHIP OFFICERS, ETC.
§ 41-214 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 41-214
1:1647

ARTICLE I
§ 42-101. [Ch. 42, Sec. 1] City Clerk and Town Clerk - offices
consolidated; duties of City Clerk.
The offices of City Clerk of the City of Bloomington and Town Clerk of the
Town of the City of Bloomington shall be and the same are hereby united
in the same person, and the City Clerk of the City of Bloomington shall
perform all the duties required of the Town Clerk of the Town of the City of
Bloomington, and no Town Clerk shall be elected for the Town of the City of
Bloomington.
§ 42-102. [Ch. 42, Sec. 2] Town Clerk custodian of records -
administering of oaths.
The Town Clerk shall have the custody of all records, books, and papers of
the town, and he shall duly file all certificates or oaths and other papers
required by law to be filed in his office. He is authorized to administer oaths
and take affidavits in all cases required by law to be administered or taken
by town officers.
§ 42-103. [Ch. 42, Sec. 3] Records of town meetings.
He shall act as Clerk of the annual town meeting and record in the book of
records of his town the minutes of the proceedings of every town meeting
held therein and shall enter in said book every order of direction and all bylaws,
rules, and regulations made by any town meeting, which entries shall
be signed by himself and the moderator of the meetings.
§ 42-104. [Ch. 42, Sec. 4] Certificates of votes to raise money.
He shall deliver to the supervisor, before the annual meeting of the County
Board of the county, in each year, certified copies of all entries of votes for
raising money made since the last annual meeting of the County Board.
§ 42-105. [Ch. 42, Sec. 5] Amount of tax required to be certified to
County Clerk.
He shall annually at the time required by law certify to the County Clerk the
amount of taxes required to be raised for all town purposes.
§ 42-106. [Ch. 42, Sec. 6] Failure to return.
If the Town Clerk shall willfully omit to make such return, he shall be fined,
for each offense, not exceeding $10.
§ 42-107. [Ch. 42, Sec. 7] To file copy of annexation ordinance.
The City Clerk shall file a certified copy of all resolutions or ordinances of
the City of Bloomington annexing any territory in any adjacent township
with the County Clerk of McLean County, Illinois.
§ 42-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 42-108
1:1649
§ 42-108. [Ch. 42, Sec. 8] Town Clerk, Clerk of Board - duties, etc.
The Town Clerk shall act as Clerk of the City Council acting as the Board
of town auditors and shall record the proceedings of each meeting of the
Board in a book which he shall provide for that purpose at the expense of
the town; such record shall include all certificates of accounts audited by
the Board. Accounts audited shall be paid by the supervisor on presentation
of a certificate of the Town Clerk, stating the amount and to whom allowed;
the date when audited and on what account, which certificate before
payment of the amount shall be countersigned by the supervisor.
§ 42-108 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 42-108
1:1650
ARTICLE II
Power of City Council
§ 42-201. [Ch. 42, Sec. 9] To exercise powers of Board of Town
Auditors.
All the powers now and hereafter vested by law in the Board of Town
Auditors of the Town of the City of Bloomington shall be exercised by the
City Council.
§ 42-202. [Ch. 42, Sec. 10] Semi-annual meeting - special meetings
- notice.
Said City Council in exercising the powers of the Board of Auditors shall
meet at the City Clerk's office for the purpose of examining and auditing
the town accounts semi-annually on the Tuesday next preceding the annual
meeting of the County Board and on the Tuesday next preceding the annual
town meeting and may in their discretion meet at such other times as they
may determine. Upon the request of the supervisor, or of any two members
of the Council, the Town Clerk shall call a meeting at the time requested
and shall furnish to the members of the Council at least 48 hours' notice
thereof. All such meetings shall be open to the public.
§ 42-203. [Ch. 42, Sec. 11] Auditing accounts.
The City Council acting as the Board of Auditors shall, at the same time and
place as stated § 42-103, examine the accounts of the supervisor, overseer
of the poor, for all moneys received and distributed by him arid shall
also examine and audit all charges and claims against their town, and the
compensation of all town officers, except the compensation of supervisors
for county services.
§ 42-204. [Ch. 42, Sec. 12] Accounts filed with Town Clerk, etc.
The accounts so audited, and those rejected, if any, shall be delivered, with
the certificate of the auditors, or a majority of them, to the Town Clerk, to be
by him kept on file for the inspection of any of the inhabitants of the town.
They shall also be produced by the Town Clerk at the next annual meeting,
and shall be there read by him.
§ 42-205. [Ch. 42, Sec. 13] Accounts verified.
The City Council, acting as the Board of Auditors may require any account
presented to be verified by affidavit, setting forth that the same is correct
and just and is unpaid, or, if any part thereof has been paid, setting forth
how much.
§ 42-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 42-206
1:1651
§ 42-206. [Ch. 42, Sec. 14] Certificate of audit - claims reduced to
judgment certified to County Clerk or County Board.
The Board shall make a certificate to be signed by a majority of the said
Board, specifying the nature of the claim or charge and to whom the amount
is allowed and shall cause such certificate to be delivered to the Town
Clerk of said town to be by him kept on file for the inspection of any of
the inhabitants of said town. The aggregate amount of any such claims
or charges which have been reduced to judgment shall be certified to
the County Clerk at the same time and in the same manner as the other
amounts required to be raised for town purposes, which shall be levied and
collected as other town taxes except that in the towns mentioned in Section
4 of Article IV of this Act, the amount shall be certified to the County Board,
who shall include the same in their estimate of the town's expenses.
§ 42-207. [Ch. 42, Sec. 15] Tentative budget and appropriation
ordinance of township.
Unless provision has otherwise been made for the preparation of the
tentative budget and appropriation ordinance by the town meeting, such
tentative ordinance required by Section 365.3 of Chapter 120 of the Revised
Statutes of Illinois, 195986 shall be prepared by the City Council. At least
one public hearing shall be held as to such budget and appropriation
ordinance prior to final action thereon, notice of which shall be given by
publication in a newspaper published in such municipality, at least one week
prior to the time of such hearing. If there is no newspaper published in such
municipality, notice of such public hearing shall be given by posting notices
thereof in five of the most public places in such municipality. It shall be
the duty of the Clerk, secretary, or other similar officer of such municipality
to make such tentative budget and appropriation ordinance available to
public inspection and to arrange for such public hearing or hearings. Except
as otherwise provided by law, no further appropriations shall be made at
any other time within such fiscal year, provided that the governing body
of such municipality may from time to time make transfers between the
various items in any fund in such appropriation ordinance not exceeding in
the aggregate 10% of the total amount appropriated in such fund by such
ordinance and may amend such budget and appropriation ordinance from
time to time by the same procedure as is herein provided for the original
adoption of a budget and appropriation ordinance; provided that nothing in
this section shall be construed to permit transfers between funds required
by law to be kept separate.
§ 42-208. [Ch. 42, Sec. 16] Authorization and issuance of tax
anticipation warrants.
The City Council exercising the powers of the Board of Town Auditors shall
authorize the issuance and disposal of tax anticipation warrants drawn
86.Editor's Note: See now 60 ILCS 1/80-60.
§ 42-206 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 42-208
1:1652
against and in anticipation of all taxes levied by the electors of the Town of
the City of Bloomington at a town meeting.
§ 42-209. [Ch. 42, Sec. 17] Fix salary of Supervisor of General
Assistance.
The City Council Shall fix the salary of the supervisor for tending to his
duties as general assistant supervisor to be paid out of the town fund.
§ 42-210. [Ch. 42, Sec. 18] Fix salary of Town Assessor.
§ 42-211. [Ch. 42, Sec. 19] Provide for Deputy Assessors and fix the
amount to be paid them.
Whenever the Town Assessor shall be unable alone to perform all the duties
of his office, the City Council may advise and consent to the appointment by
the Township Assessor of one or more suitable persons to act as deputies to
assist the Town Assessor in making the assessment. No such deputy shall
be appointed without such consent of the City Council being first had and
obtained. The City Council shall fix the sum to be received by said deputies,
which sum is not to exceed the amount provided in Section 483 of Chapter
120, Illinois Revised Statutes 1959.
§ 42-212. [Ch. 42, Sec. 20] Vacancies in town offices - exceptions.
Vacancies in any of the town offices, except that of Justice of the Peace and
Constable, within such City and town may be filled by the City Council.
A. The City Council shall fix the salary of the Township Assessor in
accordance with the provisions of Section 483 of Chapter 120, Illinois
Revised Statutes 1959.
B. In addition to the above compensation, the City Council shall determine
and fix the amount of travel and transportation expenses to be allowed
the Township Assessor.
§ 42-208 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 42-212
1:1653

ARTICLE III
Other Township Officers
§ 42-301. [Ch. 42, Sec. 21] City Treasurer and Town Collector -
offices consolidated - duties of City Treasurer.
The offices of City Treasurer of the City of Bloomington and Town Collector
of the Town of the City of Bloomington shall be and hereby are united in
the same person, and the City Treasurer of the City of Bloomington shall
perform all the duties required of the Town Collector of the Town of the City
of Bloomington, and no Town Collector shall be elected for the Town of the
City of Bloomington.
§ 42-302. [Ch. 42, Sec. 22] Highway Commissioners - offices
discontinued.
The offices of Highway Commissioners shall be and the same are hereby
discontinued in the Town of the City of Bloomington and there shall be no
Highway Commissioners elected for the Town of the City of Bloomington.
§ 42-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 42-302
1:1655
Chapter 43
MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS
§ 42-302 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 42-302
1:1656
ARTICLE I
§ 43-101. [] Title.
This chapter of the Bloomington City Code, 1960, as amended, shall be
known, cited and referred to as the Manufactured Home and Recreation
Vehicle Park Ordinance of the City of Bloomington, Illinois and at times
referred to as "this Ordinance" in this chapter.
§ 43-102. [Ch. 43, Sec. 1.0 through Ch. 43, Sec. 1.4] Rules and
definitions.
A. Context. Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the words and
phrases in this Ordinance shall have the meaning as set forth in
Subsection D of this section. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
B. Language. The language set forth in the text of this Ordinance shall be
interpreted in accordance with the following rules of construction,
unless the context clearly requires a different construction:
(1) The singular number includes the plural and the plural the
singular;
(2) The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the
future tense includes the present;
(3) When used in connection with an action of an owner or park
manager, the word "shall" is mandatory, while the word "may" is
permissive;
(4) Terms connotating a particular gender shall include each and every
gender;
(5) Whenever a word or term defined hereinafter appears in the text of
this Ordinance, its meaning shall be construed as set forth in the
definition thereof, and any word appearing in parenthesis between
a word and its definition shall be construed in the same sense as
that word;
(6) All measured distances shall be to the nearest integral meter, if a
fraction is 1/2 meter or more, the integral meter next above shall be
taken;
(7) All words and terms not defined herein shall be construed in their
generally accepted meanings; and
(8) All provisions of this Ordinance imposing duties upon the City, its
officers or agents are directory, unless the context clearly requires
that the provision be construed as mandatory. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
C. Definitions not included herein. The definition of any word not included
in Subsection D of this section shall be construed to be the same as
§ 43-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 43-102
1:1657
defined in Chapter 44 of the Bloomington City Code, 1960, as amended,
i.e. the Bloomington Zoning Code. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
D. Definitions. The following words and terms, wherever they occur in this
Ordinance shall be construed as herein defined:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A subordinate use which is clearly and
customarily incidental to the principal use of a building or premises
and which is located on the same lot as the principal building or use.
Accessory structures or buildings are not to be considered permanent
and shall not have permanent foundations (foundations 40 inches or
more below grade). They shall be constructed to be free standing and
shall not apply any additional loading situations to the manufactured
home it is associated with. The structural integrity of such structures
shall be in compliance with the CABO One and Two Family Dwelling
Code, as adopted by the City Council in the Bloomington City Code,
Chapter 10. At no time shall an accessory structure be used for
habitable space. The accessory structure shall not be larger than the
principal structure that it serves.[Ord. No. 1996-84]
ANSI A225.1 - 1994 — The American National Standards Institute
Article A225.1 - 1994, as adopted by the City of Bloomington,
Illinois.[Ord. No. 1996-84]
CITY — The City of Bloomington, Illinois, a municipal corporation,
whose actions and duties herein prescribed shall be carried out through
and by its duly authorized representatives.[Ord. No. 1996-84]
CLERK — The City Clerk of the City of Bloomington, Illinois.[Ord. No.
1996-84]
COMMISSION — The Bloomington Planning Commission of the City of
Bloomington, Illinois.[Ord. No. 1996-84]
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT — The Department of Community
Development for the City of Bloomington, Illinois.[Ord. No. 2017-96]
COUNCIL — The City Council of the City of Bloomington, Illinois.[Ord.
No. 1996-84]
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS — The Department of Public Works
of the City of Bloomington, Illinois.[Ord. No. 2018-93]
DIRECTOR OF THE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS — The Director
of the Department of Public Works of the City of Bloomington,
Illinois.[Ord. No. 2018-93]
DRIVEWAY — A minor private way used by vehicles and pedestrians on
a manufactured home lot or used for common access to a small group
of lots or facilities.[Ord. No. 1996-84]
FAMILY — One or more persons, each related to the other by blood,
adoption or marriage, living in a dwelling unit. One or more persons
each related to the other by blood, adoption or marriage and not more
than two other persons not related by blood, adoption or marriage
living in a dwelling unit shall also be deemed to constitute a family. Any
§ 43-102 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 43-102
1:1658
child living in a "Foster Family Home" as that term is defined in Chapter
44 of the Bloomington Zoning Code, § 44-1607, shall also be deemed to
be part of a family. However, in no case shall more than two persons not
related by blood, adoption or marriage occupy any efficiency unit or a
one bedroom dwelling unit as defined in Chapter 44 of the Bloomington
Zoning Code, § 44-1605, of this Code.[Ord. No. 1996-84]
FIRE CHIEF — The Fire Chief for the City of Bloomington, Illinois.[Ord.
No. 1996-84]
HABITABLE ROOM — A room or enclosed floor space arranged or
living, eating, food preparation, or sleeping purposes, not including
bathrooms, toilet compartments, laundries, pantries, foyers, hallways,
and other accessory spaces.[Ord. No. 1996-84]
HEREAFTER — After the effective date of this ordinance.[Ord. No.
1996-84]
LICENSE — A license issued by the City of Bloomington allowing a
person to operate and maintain a manufactured home park under the
provisions of this Ordinance and regulations issued hereunder.[Ord.
No. 1996-84]
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in
width or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is
320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis
and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without permanent
foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes
plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained
therein. This structure shall meet the requirements of the Federal
Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974,
effective June 15, 1976 (24CFR3280).[Ord. No. 1996-84]
MANUFACTURED HOME/MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land for
the placement of one manufactured home which is designated for the
exclusive use of the occupant.[Ord. No. 1996-84]
MANUFACTURED HOME/MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel of land
which has been developed for the placement of two or more
manufactured homes and is owned by an individual, firm, trust,
partnership, public or private association or corporation.[Ord. No.
1996-84]
MANUFACTURED HOME/MOBILE HOME STAND (PAD) — That part of
a manufactured home lot which has been reserved for the placement
of one manufactured home with accessory structures.[Ord. No.
1996-84]
MOBILE HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which, in the travel mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40
body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is 320 or more
square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to
be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when
§ 43-102 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 43-102
1:1659
connected to the required utilities and includes plumbing, heating,
air-conditioning and electrical systems contained therein and
manufactured prior to June 15, 1976.[Ord. No. 1996-84]
PARK MANAGER — The person who owns or has charge, care or control
of the mobile home or manufactured home park.[Ord. No. 1996-84]
PARK STREET — A private way, including on-street parking lanes where
applicable, which affords principal means of access to the individual
manufactured home lots or service buildings.[Ord. No. 1996-84]
PERMIT — A written certification issued by the City of Bloomington
or its duly authorized representative permitting the construction,
alteration or extension of a manufactured home park under the
provisions of this Ordinance and regulations issued hereunder. This
certification shall also be used for approval of plans for additions,
accessory structures, installations, or repair of structures on a
manufactured home lot.[Ord. No. 1996-84]
PERSON — Any and all individuals, firms, trusts, partnerships, public
or private associations or corporations or owners of beneficial interest
in a land trust.[Ord. No. 1996-84]
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV) — A vehicular type unit primarily
designed as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or
travel use, which either has its own motor power or is mounted on or
towed by another vehicle. The basic entities are:
CAMPING TRAILER — A vehicular portable unit mounted on
wheels and constructed with collapsible partial side walls which
fold for towing by another vehicle and unfold at the camp site
to provide temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or
travel use.
(1)
MOTOR HOME — A vehicular unit designed to provide temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use, built on or
permanently attached to a self-propelled motor vehicle chassis or
on a chassis cab or van which is an integral part of the completed
vehicle.
(2)
TRUCK CAMPER — A portable unit constructed to provide
temporary living quarters for recreational, travel or camping use,
consisting of a roof, floor, and sides, designed to be loaded onto and
unloaded from the bed of a pickup truck.
(3)
TRAVEL TRAILER — A vehicular unit, mounted on wheels,
designed to provide temporary living quarters for recreational,
camping or travel use and of such size or weight as not to require
special highway movement permits when towed by a motorized
vehicle, and with a living area of less than 220 square feet,
excluding building equipment (such as wardrobes, closets,
cabinets, kitchen units or fixtures) and bath and toilet rooms. [Ord.
No. 1996-84]
(4)
§ 43-102 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 43-102
1:1660
§ 43-103. [Ch. 43, Sec. 2.0 through Ch. 43, Sec. 2.6] Permits.
SERVICE BUILDING — To a permanent structure housing toilet,
lavatory, park manager's office, laundry facilities and such other
facilities as may be required or permitted by this Ordinance.[Ord. No.
1996-84]
SEWER CONNECTION — The construction consisting of all pipes,
fittings, and appurtenances from the drain outlets of the manufactured
home to the inlet or the corresponding sewer riser pipe of the sewage
system serving the manufactured home lot.[Ord. No. 1996-84]
SEWER RISER PIPE — That portion of the sewer lateral which extends
vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at each manufactured
home lot.[Ord. No. 1996-84]
WATER CONNECTION — The connection consisting of all pipes, fittings
and appurtenances from the water riser pipe to the water inlet pipe
of the distribution system within the manufactured home.[Ord. No.
1996-84]
WATER RISER PIPE — That portion of the water supply system serving
the manufactured home park which extends vertically to the ground
elevation and terminates at a designated point of each manufactured
home lot.[Ord. No. 1996-84]
A. Necessity of permit. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct,
alter or extend any manufactured home park or stage thereof within the
corporate limits of the City unless such person holds a valid
construction permit. Permits for streets, sewers and watermains, if
public, shall be issued by the Director of Public Works. The Building
Safety Division of Community Development shall issue all permits for
manufactured home stands and plumbing/electrical/mechanical service
to each manufactured home; all related to the construction, alteration
or extension of said manufactured home park including all private
streets, sewers, and watermains. Plans and specifications for the
manufactured home park, and facilities must be prepared by a licensed
professional engineer. Building plans must be prepared by an architect
or structural engineer, licensed in the State of Illinois. [Ord. No.
2018-93]
B. Requirements of permit application. The applicant shall submit four
copies of the application and plans to the Director of Community
Development and shall be distributed to the Fire Chief, the City Clerk
and to the Director of the Department of Public Works. All applications
shall include:
(1) Name and address of the applicant, including the names of owners
of beneficial interest in a land trust;
(2) Location and legal description of the tract of land in question;
§ 43-102 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 43-103
1:1661
(3) Site plans conforming to the requirements of § 43-103C. [Ord. No.
2018-93]
C. Site plan - contents - approval.
(1) Submittal.
(a) Except where required in Subsection C(3) of this section, all
applicants for a construction permit shall be accompanied by
16 copies of the site plan, which shall contain the following
information:
[1] The area and dimensions of the tract of land;
[2] The number, location and size of all manufactured home
lots;
[3] The location, width and type of surface material of all park
streets, walkways and driveways;
[4] The location and size of water and sewer lines;
[5] Existing topography at two foot (or one-half meter)
contour intervals;
[6] Boundaries and sequence of completion of any stages of
development (if any) of the manufactured home park;
[7] The location and type of fire hydrants;
[8] The location of all existing underground utilities such as
telephone cables, gas mains and TV cables;
[9] The location of stormwater drainage ways and detention/
retention facilities;
[10] An Erosion Control Plan;
[11] Location of required recreation area;
[12] Location of any manufactured home park service buildings
and storm shelters.
(b) Site plans shall be drawn on paper not more than 24 inches by
36 inches, in a manner allowing clear and legible prints to be
made from said plan using the scale of one inch equals not
more than 20 feet. "As Built" plans shall be drawn on Mylar not
more than 24 inches by 36 inches. Metric equivalents shall be
accepted. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
(2) Upon review of the site plan, as provided in § 43-103D of this
chapter, the Council shall approve or disapprove said plan as
presented, or approve it subject to reasonable modifications. [Ord.
No. 1996-84]
§ 43-103 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 43-103
1:1662
(3) Site plan approval is not required for:
(a) Minor alterations of a presently existing manufactured home
park; or
(b) Any stage of a manufactured home park contained in a site
plan approved by the City Council within three years
immediately preceding commencement of its construction.
(4) The Director of Community Development shall review minor
alterations and approve them if consistent with the requirements of
this chapter. Items constituting a minor alteration shall be left to
the discretion of the Director of Community Development. [Ord.
No. 2017-96]
D. Review of the site plan.
(1) Upon receipt of the items enumerated in Subsections A and C, the
Clerk shall retain one copy of the documents filed and shall
distribute copies as follows to:
(a) Executive Secretary of the Bloomington Planning Commission,
11 copies;
(b) The Director of Public Works, two copies;
(c) The Director of Community Development, one copy;
(d) The Fire Chief, one copy. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
(2) The Director of Public Works, Director of Community Development
and Fire Chief shall review all documents and submit their findings
to the Executive Secretary of the Commission. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
(3) The Commission shall hold a public hearing on the manufactured
home site plan and shall provide at least a seven day notice of said
public hearing. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
(4) The Commission, upon review of those documents submitted under
Subsections A and C, and the findings of the appropriate
governmental officials, shall find that:
(a) All laws and standards have been met; or
(b) Problems exist with the site plan as presented.
(5) The Commission shall recommend either that the Council approve
the site plan as presented or with reasonable modifications, or that
the Council disapprove the site plan. The Commission shall state
the reason for its recommendation. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
(6) Approved site plans or portions thereof which have expired three
years after approval by the City Council may be extended by action
of the City Council. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
§ 43-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 43-103
1:1663
E. Construction plans.
(1) Upon receipt of the building and related plans, they shall be
reviewed for code compliance with the building, fire, and other
applicable codes. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
(2) Approval of the plans except those dealing with manufactured
home stands and service utilities shall not affect the Commission's
recommendation to the Council regarding the site plan and
subsequent action by the Council. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
(3) Fee for Review of Construction Plans and Specifications: The cost
incurred by the Department of Public Works for the review of the
construction plans and specifications for streets, sewers, and
watermains and for the inspection of the same in the manufactured
home park shall be paid by the applicant. Such cost shall be equal
to the actual cost incurred by the Department of Public Works in
labor, materials, transportation, and overhead for such review and
inspection as calculated by the Director of Public Works. At the
time such plans and specifications are filed with the Director of
Public Works, the applicant shall pay to the City a fee of 2% of the
cost, as estimated by the Director of Public Works, of such streets,
sewers and watermains; said fee shall be applied as a credit against
the actual cost incurred by the Department of Public Works for the
review of such plans and the inspection of such improvements. The
balance of such actual cost shall be paid to the City by the applicant
at the time that such review and inspection has been completed by
the Department of Public Works. All such improvements to be
installed under the provisions of this Code shall be inspected by the
Department of Public Works during the course of construction.
[Ord. No. 2018-93]
F. Construction permit.
(1) Within three years after the approval of the site plan, the applicant
shall submit four copies of construction plans prepared by an
Illinois Licensed Professional Engineer for all or any stage of land
included in the application described in Subsection A of this
section.
(a) These plans shall be consistent with the approved site plan and
shall contain:
[1] The area and dimensions of the tract of land;
[2] The number, location and size of all manufactured home
lots;
[3] The location, width and type of surface material of all park
streets, walkways, driveways;
§ 43-103 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 43-103
1:1664
[4] The location of water, sewer lines, services and types of
materials;
[5] Specifications of the water distribution and sewer facilities
located within the manufactured home park including a
profile showing elevations and grades of said
improvements;
[6] Locations, plans and specifications of all permanent
buildings to be constructed or placed within the
manufactured home park, which are signed and sealed by
an Illinois Licensed Professional Architect or Engineer;
[7] Plans and specifications of the streetlighting system and
the location of easements and the source of power for
other electrical systems;
[8] The typical location, size, type of material and elevation for
each manufactured home stand;
[9] The location and size of required recreation areas;
[10] An erosion control plan shall also be provided;
[11] Building plans shall include mechanical plans as well.
Permit fees shall be as prescribed in Chapter 10 (Building
Code), Chapter 15 (Electrical Code), and Chapter 34
(Plumbing Code).
(b) The form of the plans shall conform to the requirements of
Subsection C(1) of this section. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
(2) Review - Approval. Upon receipt of the construction plans and
accompanying documents, the Clerk shall retain one copy and shall
distribute one copy of the plans to:
(a) The Director of Community Development;
(b) The Director of Public Works;
(c) The Fire Chief; [Ord. No. 2018-93]
(3) The officials enumerated in Subsection F(2) above shall review the
documents and submit their findings and recommendations to the
Director of Community Development. The Director of Community
Development shall review these recommendations and shall
approve the plans as presented or with reasonable modifications or
disapprove the plans. Upon approval of the plans, the Director of
Community Development shall issue a construction permit to the
applicant. The Director of Public Works shall be responsible for
issuing permits for any City maintained facilities. [Ord. No.
2018-93]
§ 43-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 43-103
1:1665
(4) Any applicant may appeal any of the following decisions to the
Construction Board of Appeals:
(a) Disapproval of construction plans;
(b) Modifications of construction plans ordered by the Director of
Community Development. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
(5) Construction permits, for the manufactured home park only, shall
be valid for a time frame not to exceed three years from the date of
issuance. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
(6) Director of Community Development or the Director of Public
Works may grant reinstatements or extensions of construction
plans. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
(7) The applicant shall be allowed to appear before the Construction
Board of Appeals, as set forth in Chapter 10 of the Bloomington
City Code, in person or by attorney, and present their reasons for
contesting the decision of the Director of Community Development.
After hearing the matter, the Construction Board of Appeals may
approve the decision of the Director of Community Development in
whole, in part or as modified or may reverse it. [Ord. No.
2017-96]
G. Code compliance and other permits. The issuance of a construction
permit by the Director of Community Development does not relieve the
applicant from complying with the Zoning Ordinance, the Building
Code, and other related codes. Permits required by each of the
applicable codes shall be obtained prior to any corresponding work
being started. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
H. Final inspections.
(1) The Director of Public Works, the Director of Community
Development and the Fire Chief shall inspect the manufactured
home park and recommend to the City Clerk approval or
disapproval and the reasons for their recommendation for
occupancy. Upon approval, the City Clerk shall issue a
manufactured home park license to the person or agent thereof in
accordance with § 43-104D of this Ordinance. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
(2) Before any manufactured home park or portion thereof shall be
occupied, permanent markers shall be installed at all lot corners.
These markers shall be of a minimum 5/8 inch diameter and three
feet long. These markers shall be installed and maintained by the
park manager. Markers shall also be placed on existing lots as they
become empty and said lots shall not be occupied until these
markers are installed. It shall be unlawful for permanent markers
to be removed or otherwise altered without the approval of the
Director of Community Development. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
§ 43-103 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 43-104
1:1666
§ 43-104. [Ch. 43, Sec. 3.0 through Ch. 43, Sec. 3.4] Manufactured
home park licenses.
A. Licenses. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or continue to
operate any manufactured home park or any stage of such park within
the corporate limits of the City unless such person holds a valid license
issued annually by the City in the name of such person for the specific
manufactured home park or stage. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
B. Expiration of licenses. All licenses shall expire at midnight December
31st following issuance thereof, and the license shall be renewed from
year to year. The City Clerk shall notify all current license holders 90
days in advance of the expiration of their licenses. A copy of this notice
should be sent to the Director of Community Development and the Fire
Chief. All applications for license renewal shall be transmitted to the
City Clerk at least 30 days in advance of the above date. [Ord. No.
2017-96]
C. Transfer of licenses. Every person holding a license shall give notice in
writing to the City at least 30 calendar days before having sold,
transferred, given away, or otherwise disposed of interest in, or control
of, any manufactured home park. Such notice shall include the name
and address of the person succeeding to the ownership or control of
such manufactured home park. Upon application in writing for transfer
of the license and deposit of a fee, in an amount as set forth in the
Schedule of Fees, the license shall be transferred subject to an
agreement to comply according to § 43-107 of this Ordinance, or if the
manufactured home park is in compliance with all applicable provisions
of this Ordinance. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
D. License renewal application.
(1) One copy of the license application shall be submitted to the City
Clerk.
(a) All applications shall contain the following information:
[1] The name, address and telephone numbers of the owner
and manager, including owners of beneficial interest in a
land trust;
[2] The location and legal description of the manufactured
home park;
[3] An affidavit stating that all improvements have been
constructed according to the approved plans, or that the
manufactured home park, or stage as it exists, conforms to
all local laws and standards of this Ordinance.
(b) The application shall be accompanied by the deposit of a fee in
an amount as set forth in the Schedule of Fees. This fee, once
§ 43-104 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 43-104
1:1667
§ 43-105. [Ch. 43, Sec. 4.0] Inspection of manufactured home
parks.
paid to the City Clerk, shall not be refunded. [Ord. No.
2018-89]
(2) Applications - notification for renewal of a license. The City Clerk
shall notify the Director of Community Development, the Director
of Public Works and the Fire Chief that an application for the
issuance of a license has been filed. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
(3) Annual inspections, reports to director of community development.
The Director of Community Development and the Fire Chief shall
inspect the manufactured home park and recommend to the City
Clerk approval or disapproval and the reasons for their
recommendation. The City Clerk, upon receipt of the appropriate
officials' comments, shall transmit them to the owners of the
manufactured home park. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
(4) Approval or disapproval. The Director of Community Development
shall approve or disapprove the application for renewal on the
basis of the information presented to him. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
(5) Issuance of a license. The City Clerk, upon authorization by the
Director of Community Development, shall issue a license. [Ord.
No. 2017-96]
(6) Rules and regulations. The City shall supply licensee with any and
all rules and regulations pertaining thereto made by the City and
any change or changes that may be made from time to time which
shall be kept on-site in each manufactured home park and shall be
made available for use upon request by residents of said
manufactured home park by the park management. [Ord. No.
1996-84]
(7) Appeal of license denial. Any person whose application for renewal
of a license under this Ordinance has been denied may request and
shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the Construction
Board of Appeals as stated under the procedure provided by
§ 43-106 of this Ordinance. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
A. The City shall have the power to enter the manufactured home park at
reasonable times for the purpose of inspecting and investigating
conditions relating to the enforcement of this Ordinance. [Ord. No.
1996-84]
B. It shall be the duty of the park management to give the City free access
to all lots at reasonable times for the purpose of inspection. [Ord. No.
1996-84]
C. It shall be the duty of every occupant of a manufactured home park to
give the owner thereof or his agent or employee access to their
§ 43-104 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 43-105
1:1668
§ 43-106. [Ch. 43, Sec. 5.0 through Ch. 43, Sec. 5.3] Notices,
hearings and orders.
manufactured home, at reasonable times, for the purpose of making
such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect the compliance
with this Ordinance. Prior to performing the repairs or alterations, the
owner thereof or his agent or employee shall provide the tenant with
a written notice of intent to perform the repairs or alterations one day
prior to the start of the repairs or alterations. All efforts should be
made to obtain the tenant's permission prior to the start of the work.
In the event of an emergency, the park owner or his agent or employee
may perform the necessary repairs and shall provide the tenant with a
written notice of such repairs being made on the first business day after
the repairs were started. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
A. Notification of violations. Whenever the City determines that there are
reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any
provision of this Ordinance, the City shall give notice of such alleged
violation to the person whom the permit or license was issued as
hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
(3) Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires;
(4) Be served upon the owner or his agent as the case may require;
provided that such notice or order shall be deemed to have been
properly served upon such owner or agent when a copy thereof has
been sent by registered mail to his last known address, or when he
has been served with such notice by any method authorized or
required by the laws of this state;
(5) Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance. [Ord. No.
1996-84]
B. Appeals. Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in
connection with the enforcement of any provisions of this Ordinance,
may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the
appropriate Board of Appeals as provided by Chapter 10 (Building
Code), Chapter 15 (Electrical Code), Chapter 34 (Plumbing Code) or
Chapter 44 (Zoning Code). The appeal should be filed in accordance
with the appropriate procedures specified in the Chapter(s) pertaining
to the violation(s); provided that such person shall file in the office of
the Director of Community Development a written petition requesting
such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds
therefor, accompanied by the appropriate fees, within 10 days after the
day the notice was served. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
§ 43-105 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 43-106
1:1669
§ 43-107. [Ch. 43, Sec. 6.0 through Ch. 43, Sec. 6.2] Exemptions.
C. Emergency response. Whenever the City finds an emergency exists
which requires immediate action to protect the public health, the City
may, without notice or hearing, require that such action be taken as the
City may deem necessary to meet the emergency including the
suspension of the permit or license. Upon conclusion of the emergency,
a hearing shall be afforded as soon as possible. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
A. Nonconforming mobile home parks.
(1) Any manufactured home park duly licensed on the effective date of
this chapter within the City of Bloomington, or any manufactured
home park outside the corporate limits upon being forcibly
annexed after the date of this Ordinance, shall in each instance be a
valid, nonconforming manufactured home park with respect to the
particular requirements set out in this Ordinance which constitute
a change from the requirements of the predecessor to this chapter
(unless such changes are required in order to avoid a condition
which is hazardous to human life, health or safety).
(a) Manufactured home parks described in the preceding sentence
are specifically exempted from the following sections of this
Ordinance:
[1] § 43-108E: Required Lot Area and Separation Between
Manufactured Homes;
[2] § 43-108H: Required Recreation Areas;
[3] § 43-108I: Required Setbacks, Buffer Strips and
Screening, as to Subsections I(1) and (2);
[4] § 43-108J: Park Street System, Subsections (2), (3), (4),
(5)(a), (5)(b) and (7).
(b) This section on nonconformities shall apply to individual
manufactured homes and accessory structures which were
installed in a manufactured home park described in this
Subsection A(1) prior to the effective date of this ordinance.
[Ord. No. 1996-84]
(2) Any manufactured home park or stage thereof, construction of
which is commenced within two years after approval of the site
plan, shall be exempt from any change in this chapter which
conflicts with the site plan and construction plans approved by the
City. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
(3) Requirements which are applied to manufactured home parks
described in Subsection A(1) on the grounds that they are
necessary to avoid a condition which is hazardous to human life,
§ 43-106 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 43-107
1:1670
§ 43-108. [Ch. 43, Sec. 7.0 through Ch. 43, Sec. 7.10] Manufactured
home park development standards.
health or safety shall be mandatory for the issuance or re-issuance
of the next annual license as herein provided. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
(4) A manufactured home park described in Subsection A(1) which
proposes new construction shall be required to conform to the
requirements of this Ordinance in such areas of new construction.
[Ord. No. 1996-84]
(5) A manufactured home park described in Subsection A(1) which
proposes expansion or alteration (as opposed to ordinary repairs)
to such a manufactured home park shall be required to conform to
the requirements of this Ordinance in such areas of expansion or
alteration. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
B. Variances. The Director of Community Development may or may not
recommend to the Council a variance or extension of time for
compliance by existing or annexed courts as may be consistent with the
purposes of this Ordinance as to sections not constituting
nonconforming exceptions. The City Council shall give final
consideration to all variance requests, but in no event shall such
variance or extensions exceed three years. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
A. General requirements. Condition of soil, ground water level, drainage
and topography shall not create unreasonable hazards to the property
or the health or safety of the occupants. The site shall not be exposed to
objectionable smoke, noise, odors, or other adverse influences created
within the manufactured home park. Land within the manufactured
home park which is located within a flood hazard area as defined by
Chapter 18 of the Bloomington City Code, 1960 as amended, shall not
be used for manufactured home lots. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
B. Conformance with City plans. All manufactured home parks shall be
designed in such a manner as to conform to the provisions of the major
street and highway plan for the City of Bloomington. The owner shall
dedicate all rights-of-way and construct his proportionate share of all
major, local or collector streets, sewers, feeder water mains and storm
drainage facilities as required under Chapter 24 of the Bloomington
City Code (Subdivision Regulations). All construction of the above
public improvements shall be completed in accordance with applicable
City construction standards, and shall after their acceptance become
the maintenance responsibility of the City. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
C. Soil and ground cover requirements. Exposed ground surfaces in all
parts of every manufactured home park shall be paved, or substantially
covered with other solid material, or protected with a vegetative
growth that is capable of preventing soil erosion and of eliminating
objectionable dust. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
§ 43-107 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 43-108
1:1671
D. Site drainage requirements. The ground surface in all parts of every
manufactured home park shall be graded and equipped to drain all
surface water in a safe, efficient manner. Proposed drainage
improvements shall maintain any natural watercourses and shall
prevent the collection of water at any low spot. An underground or
surface storm sewer system shall be constructed and connected to an
adequate outfall as approved by the Director of the Department of
Public Works. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
E. Required lot area and separation between manufactured homes.
(1) All manufactured home lots shall contain a minimum of 4,100
square feet. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
(2) No manufactured home or accessory structure shall be located
closer than five feet from any rear or side lot line, and no closer
than 10 feet to any front lot line. Corner lots shall be considered as
having two frontages. In such measurement, the hitch or other
appurtenance less than four feet high or any other protrusion of 18
inches or less from the side of a manufactured home shall not be
considered. Manufactured homes shall not be placed closer than 10
feet from another manufactured home or accessory structure on an
adjoining lot in any direction. In order to ensure the proper
placement of permanent marking devices, the City shall have the
ability to determine the location of manufactured home lot lines
with the assistance of the park management. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
(3) In no case shall the sum of the area covered by the manufactured
home, accessory structures or existing additions exceed more than
1/2 of the manufactured home lot. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
(4) All accessory structures are to be built in accordance with the
standards specified in the One and Two Family Dwelling Code as
adopted in Chapter 10 of the Bloomington City Code. Accessory
structures may be built on a floating slab or on grade. [Ord. No.
2000-43]
(5) All accessory structures shall be built as free standing structures
and shall not be permanently attached to any manufactured home.
The exceptions include factory built structures that are designed as
"tip out" style structures. Double-wide manufactured homes which
are factory designed to be assembled by joining two or more
individual units shall not be considered accessory structures. [Ord.
No. 1996-84]
(6) All accessory structures will be placed at either zero feet or a
minimum of three feet from any manufactured home. An accessory
structure may be located in the side or rear yard of a manufactured
home lot. No accessory structure shall be located in the required
front yard areas. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
§ 43-108 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 43-108
1:1672
(7) An accessory structure such as an awning, cabana, storage shed,
carport, windbreak, or porch which has a floor area exceeding 25
square feet, or has an opaque top or roof, shall for the purposes of
all yard or separation requirements, be considered to be a part of
the manufactured home. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
(8) The adjoining of two manufactured home sections not originally
designed by its production facility as double wide sections shall not
be allowed. Nor shall the adjoining of two separate pieces of
different double wide units be allowed. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
(9) In no case shall the area covered by an accessory structure be
greater than the area covered by the manufactured home or 1,000
square feet, whichever is less. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
(10) Accessory structures closer than five feet to a manufactured home
shall not obstruct openings for natural light and ventilation. [Ord.
No. 1996-84]
(11) Fences shall be installed in accordance with Chapter 44 of the
Bloomington City Code. The same lot requirements for lots of
records shall also apply to lease lots in accordance with Chapter
44, when pertaining to fences. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
F. Manufactured home installation, repair and/or alteration.
(1) All manufactured homes for installation in any manufactured home
park shall be one that was constructed in compliance with the
Department of Housing and Urban Development's (HUD) Mobile
Home Construction and Safety Standard. The data plate of the
home shall reference snow/roof loading for the South Zone of 20
pounds per square foot and Zone I wind load of 15 pounds per
square foot as identified by NCSBCS/ANSI A225.1-1994. [Ord. No.
1996-84]
(2) An older mobile home not in compliance with the HUD standards or
local building codes may be replaced with another manufactured
home that conforms with the Federal Manufactured Housing and
Construction Safety Standards Act of 1974, which became effective
June 16, 1976 (24CFR3280). No manufactured home shall be
installed in the City of Bloomington if it does not meet the Federal
Manufactured Housing and Construction Safety Standards Act of
1974, effective June 16, 1974 (24CFR3280) or if it is in violation of
any applicable property maintenance standards as provided by
Chapter 45 of the Bloomington City Code. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
(3) The manufactured home stand shall be designed by an Illinois
licensed architect or engineer and be constructed of reinforced
concrete material. The stand shall have a minimum design of the
floating slab design and the top of the stand shall be level (within a
one inch in ten-foot maximum grade) or shall be stepped
accordingly. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
§ 43-108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 43-108
1:1673
(4) The length and width of a manufactured home stand shall be at
least equivalent to the length and width of the manufactured home
to be placed on that stand. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
(5) Stands that do not meet the requirement stated in Subsection F(4)
shall require an extension to be poured prior to the placement of a
longer and/or wider manufactured home on that stand. This
extension shall be designed by an Illinois licensed architect or
engineer. Deviations from this requirement shall be at the
discretion of the Director of Community Development. [Ord. No.
2017-96]
(6) Each manufactured home shall be anchored and installed in
accordance with the manufacturer's instructions or in accordance
with the requirements set forth in ANSI A225.1-1994, but not less
than that prescribed by the most current edition of the State of
Illinois regulations regarding Tie Down Requirements for Mobile
Homes or Manufactured Homes.87 [Ord. No. 2000-43]
(7) In no case shall an addition for a habitable space be constructed;
except as may be properly designed as part of plans approved by
the manufactured home manufacturer.
(8) The manufactured home shall be properly skirted with
noncombustible materials. There shall be a section of the skirting
36 inches in length and located in the area of the utility connections
which shall be easily removable for inspection. All skirting shall be
installed and mounted to the concrete stand. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
(9) Alterations or repairs to an existing manufactured home which are
nonstructural and do not adversely affect any structural member or
any part of the building or structure may be made with materials
equivalent to those of which the manufactured home structure is
constructed, subject to approval by the Director of Community
Development. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
(10) Manufactured homes shall be installed with permits and by
personnel who have successfully completed the Illinois
Manufactured Home Association manufactured home installation
course or an otherwise approved course of instruction. A copy of
said certification shall be provided to the Building Safety office at
the time of permit application. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
G. Permits, fees and inspections.
(1) Permits are required for, but are not limited to, the following items
in regards to manufactured homes:
(a) To install or remove a manufactured home into, on, off, or out
of a park under the jurisdiction of this Ordinance. The
87.Editor's Note: See the Illinois Mobile Home Tiedown Act, 210 ILCS 120/1 et seq.
§ 43-108 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 43-108
1:1674
movement of a manufactured home from one lot within a park
to another lot within the same park shall also require a permit;
(b) To build, modify or locate any accessory structures or
permanently designed additions approved by the
manufactured home manufacturer;
(c) To perform any electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilation or air
conditioning work, except those items listed as ordinary
repairs in the One and Two Family Dwelling Code as adopted in
Chapter 10 of the Bloomington City Code.
(d) Solid fuel and gas fireplace installation shall require a permit;
(e) To pour additional foundation or concrete style slab to be used
in expanding the existing manufactured home stand or for use
in increasing available parking space or for use as the
foundation for an accessory structure or principal structure.
[Ord. No. 2000-43]
(2) All other general electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilation, and/or
air conditioning work including those required for new
construction are to be done by licensed and registered contractors
with proper permits. An owner-occupant shall be allowed to
perform the above listed work on their own manufactured home
and/or lot after obtaining the proper permits. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
(3) Prior to the issuance of a permit for the moving of a manufactured
home onto a lot, building or placing of an addition or accessory
structure, a site plan for the lot in question shall be provided to the
Building Safety Division of Community Development. This site plan
shall contain measurements that reflect the total lot size, the size of
the manufactured home, all accessory structures already in place,
or to be placed onto the lot. Measurements will also be provided to
show the distance between all existing structures and the distances
to the nearest manufactured home, principal structure, or property
line on all sides of the lot in question. The Building Safety Division
of Community Development reserves the right to conduct a field
inspection prior to the issuance of the permit. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
(4) Framing inspections shall be required for any accessory structure
built on-site. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
(5) Rough in inspections shall be required for any building, electrical,
plumbing, heating, ventilation, and/or air conditioning work
performed on any manufactured home or accessory structure.
[Ord. No. 1996-84]
(6) A final inspection must be performed upon completion of any
building, electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilation and/or air
conditioning work performed on any manufactured home or
accessory structure. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
§ 43-108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 43-108
1:1675
(7) Fees for permits shall be based upon the valuation of the work to be
performed including the cost of labor and materials. These fees are
set forth in accordance with Chapter 3 (Sign Code), Chapter 10
(Building Code), Chapter 15 (Electrical Code) and Chapter 34
(Plumbing Code). [Ord. No. 1996-84]
H. Required recreation areas.
(1) In all parks accommodating or designed to accommodate 25 or
more manufactured homes, there shall be one or more recreation
areas which shall be easily accessible to all park residents. [Ord.
No. 1996-84]
(2) The size of such recreation areas shall be based upon a minimum of
10% of the gross land area of the manufactured home park. The
total of all outdoor recreation areas shall be no less than 10,000
square feet in area. Any lot to be considered recreational area shall
have no dimension being less than 25 feet in length along any one
side and shall have a minimum area of 1,000 square feet.
Stormwater basins shall not be used to meet the minimum
recreation area requirement. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
(3) Recreation areas shall be so located as to be free of traffic hazards
and shall be centrally located. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
(4) The completion percentage of the recreation areas shall be equal to
the completion percentage of the manufactured home park.
Further, a development plan for the recreation area shall be
submitted prior to the start of the development of the
manufactured home park. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
I. Required setbacks.
(1) All manufactured homes shall be located at least 25 feet from any
park property boundary line. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
(2) Buffer strips shall be installed and shall be at least five feet wide
along all property boundary lines, except those boundaries which
are adjacent to a public street. Where effective visual barriers do
not exist, the buffer strip shall consist of fences, free standing walls
or natural growth of shrubbery, hedges, evergreens or other
suitable planning sufficient to serve as an effective visual screen.
Said buffer strips shall be considered part of the manufactured
home lot when calculating lot areas and setbacks. [Ord. No.
1996-84]
J. Park street system.
(1) General requirements: All parks shall provide safe, continuous and
convenient vehicular access from abutting public streets or roads
to each manufactured home space. For the purposes of this
Ordinance, all streets or roads providing such vehicular access
§ 43-108 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 43-108
1:1676
shall hereinafter be referred to as the "Park Street System" and
shall be maintained by the owner. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
(2) Primary entrance road: A primary entrance road connecting the
Park Street System with a public street or road shall be provided
and shall have a minimum road pavement width of 24 feet. [Ord.
No. 1996-84]
(3) Secondary entrance road: In addition to the required primary
entrance road, all parks containing 25 or more acres in total area
and/or providing for the accommodation of 200 or more
manufactured homes, shall have at least one secondary entrance
road connecting the Park Street System with a public street or
road. Such secondary road or roads shall have a minimum
pavement width of 24 feet. Where primary and secondary entrance
roads connect to the same public street or road, there shall be a
minimum separation of 300 feet between such access points. [Ord.
No. 1996-84]
(4) Interior streets: All interior streets in the Park Street System shall
have a minimum pavement width of 24 feet. Dead-end streets shall
be limited in length to 300 feet and shall provide, at the closed end,
a minimum forty-foot turning radius cul de sac. [Ord. No.
1996-84]
(5) Street construction and design standards:
(a) Pavements: All streets shall be provided with a smooth
bituminous concrete or Portland cement concrete surface
which shall be durable and well drained under normal use and
weather conditions. Streets shall be designed with a normal
crown with curb and gutter arrangement that will allow for the
quick disposal of surface water. Streets shall be maintained
free of holes, raveled edges and other hazards. The thickness
and construction materials utilized in building and maintaining
the streets shall be in compliance with Chapter 24 of the
Bloomington City Code.
(b) Intersections: The acute angles of street intersections shall be
not less than 85°. A distance of at least 80 feet shall be
maintained between the center lines of offset intersecting
streets. Intersections of more than two streets at one point
shall be prohibited. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
(6) Street signs and manufactured home lot numbers:
(a) Street signs conforming to the specifications as provided by
the Department of Public Works shall be installed by the owner
so as to identify every street in the manufactured home park.
Street names shall be assigned or approved by the Director of
the Department of Public Works.
§ 43-108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 43-108
1:1677
§ 43-109. [Ch. 43, Sec. 8.0 through Ch. 43, Sec. 8.3] Water system.
(b) Each manufactured home lot shall be designated by a
consecutive number as a means of identification which has
been approved by the Director of the Department of Public
Works. Each number shall be constructed of weather resistant
material and located in such a manner as to permit lot
identification from the park street. These numbers shall be of a
color which contrast the colors in use on the manufactured
home, and shall be a minimum of three inches in height. [Ord.
No. 2018-93]
(7) Car Parking: Off-street parking areas or on-street parking lanes
shall be provided for the use of park occupants and guests. Such
areas shall:
(a) Be furnished at a rate of at least two spaces for each
manufactured home lot;
(b) Be located within a distance of 200 feet from the manufactured
home to be served;
(c) The minimum street width requirement under Subsection J
shall be increased by seven feet per side if on-street parking is
permitted in the manufactured home park. This additional
width shall be clearly marked to provide two lanes of moving
traffic at all times. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
A. Water supply. The City of Bloomington Water System shall be the source
of supply used by all manufactured home parks. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
B. Water distribution system.
(1) The water distribution system serving each manufactured home lot,
accessory buildings and fire hydrants shall be designed and
constructed according to the applicable provisions of the Plumbing
Code of the City of Bloomington being Chapter 34 of the City Code,
and the rules and regulations of the Department of Public Works.
[Ord. No. 2018-93]
(2) All City water mains shall be constructed on public utility
easements and dedicated to the City of Bloomington. [Ord. No.
1996-84]
C. Individual water connections.
(1) Individual water service connections shall be provided at each
manufactured home lot in the manufactured home park. All water
service connections shall be watertight and located at least 10 feet
from sanitary sewer connections. The minimum pipe size of
connections shall be 3/4 inch Type K copper pipe or as allowed by
§ 43-108 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 43-109
1:1678
§ 43-110. [Ch. 43, Sec. 9.0 through Ch. 43, Sec. 9.2] Service
buildings and other community service facilities.
the Plumbing Codes of the City of Bloomington. [Ord. No.
1996-84]
(2) Approved methods shall be used to prevent freezing of service
lines, meters, valves and riser pipes. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
(3) Individual water service connections shall be capped using
appropriate materials upon removal of the manufactured home to
which it serviced. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
(4) All newly developed manufactured home parks installing water
meters shall be constructed with water meters in meter pits in
accordance with the rules and regulations of the Department of
Public Works. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
(5) All existing manufactured home parks not presently utilizing water
meters shall conform with Subsection C(4) when installing water
meters. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
A. General requirements. The requirements of this section shall apply to
buildings and structures and community service facilities in all parks
that are constructed as provided for park management and for the
servicing and well being of park residents. Such buildings or structures
may include, but are not limited to service buildings or other
community structures containing one or more of the following uses and
must be constructed or placed in accordance with applicable local
regulations for buildings or structures:
(1) Park Management Offices;
(2) Community Laundry Facilities;
(3) Community Sanitary Facilities;
(4) Indoor Community Recreation Areas;
(5) Repair Shops and Community Storage Buildings;
(6) Postal Pickup and Delivery Facilities;
(7) Convenient Stores;
(8) Barber and/or Beauty Shops;
(9) Emergency Stations;
(10) Emergency/Storm Shelters. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
B. Required community service facilities.
§ 43-109 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 43-110
1:1679
§ 43-111. [Ch. 43, Sec. 10.0 through Ch. 43, Sec. 10.4] Sewage
disposal.
§ 43-112. [Ch. 43, Sec. 11.0 through Ch. 43, Sec. 11.3] Refuse
disposal.
(1) Hereafter, every park constructed or added to, shall be provided
with a park management office and postal pickup and delivery
facilities as approved by the U. S. Post Office. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
(2) Every park constructed or added to, shall provide a tornado shelter
capable of housing all occupants of the park. These shelters shall
be structurally sound and strategically located throughout the park
to accommodate the residents of the park. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
A. General requirements. All sewage and other water carried wastes shall
be disposed of into the City of Bloomington Sewage system or facilities
of the Bloomington and Normal Water Reclamation District. [Ord. No.
1996-84]
B. Public sewage systems. Those manufactured home park sewage
systems connected to the Bloomington Sewage System shall be
designed and constructed according to the applicable provisions of the
Plumbing Code, Chapter 34 and the Sewers and Sewage Code, Chapter
37, of the City Code, and the rules and regulations of the Department of
Public Works. [Ord. No. 2018-93]
C. Private sewage systems disconnect. All private sewage systems serving
existing manufactured home parks shall be abandoned within six
months of annexation of such manufactured home park into the City of
Bloomington. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
D. Individual sewer connections. All manufactured homes shall be
installed and maintained in accordance with the City Plumbing Code,
Chapter 34, in addition to the following items:
(1) Each manufactured home lot shall be provided with a sewer
connection for the combined liquid waste outlet or outlets of each
manufactured home.
(2) It shall be the duty of the owner of said manufactured home to
provide an approved type of water and odor tight connection from
the manufactured home water drainage to the sewer connection.
(3) Sewer connections in unoccupied manufactured home lots shall be
so enclosed that they will emit no odors or cause a breeding place
for flies.
(4) No wastewater shall be allowed to fall on the ground from a
manufactured home. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
§ 43-110 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 43-112
1:1680
§ 43-113. [Ch. 43, Sec. 12.0 through Ch. 43, Sec. 12.3] Insect, rat,
rodent and weed control.
§ 43-114. [Ch. 43, Sec. 13.0 through Ch. 43, Sec. 13.5] Electrical
distribution system.
A. General requirements. The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in
the manufactured home park shall be so managed as to create no health
hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding areas, fire hazards or air
pollution and shall follow the guidelines set forth in the Chapter 21,
Refuse Code, of the City of Bloomington. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
B. Collection. The collection of refuse in manufactured home parks shall
be performed in accordance with the requirements set forth in Chapter
21, Refuse Code, of the City of Bloomington. Park managers or owners
shall be responsible to ensure that residents comply with these
regulations. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
C. Open burning. Open burning of any substance or material within the
confines of a manufactured home park shall not be performed except in
accordance with Chapter 17, Fire Department and Fire Prevention
Code, of the City of Bloomington. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
A. General requirements. Ground, buildings, and structures shall be
maintained free of insects, vermin and rat harborage and infestation in
accordance with the requirements set forth in Chapter 21, Refuse Code
and Chapter 45, Property Maintenance Code, of the City of
Bloomington. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
B. Weed control. The growth of brush, weeds, and grass shall be controlled
in accordance with Chapter 21, Refuse Code and Chapter 45, Property
Maintenance Code, of the City of Bloomington. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
C. Compliance with property maintenance code. All manufactured home
parks and the manufactured homes within their boundaries shall
comply with the Property Maintenance Code, Chapter 45, of the
Bloomington City Code. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
A. Underground utilities. All utility lines including electric, telephone and
other communication or television signal cables shall be laid
underground within all manufactured home parks in accordance with
the National Electrical Code and Chapter 3 of N.F.P.A. Standard 501A.
The methods of construction shall be those commonly used in the utility
industry with above ground access points for distribution and
maintenance purposes. The installation of such lines shall be in
compliance with applicable orders, rules and regulations of the Illinois
Commerce Commission pursuant to the Illinois Public Utilities Act.
[Ord. No. 1996-84]
B. Required illumination of park street systems. All park drives shall be
furnished with illumination with an average illumination value average
§ 43-112 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 43-114
1:1681
§ 43-115. [Ch. 43, Sec. 14.0 through Ch. 43, Sec. 14.2] Fuel supply
and storage.
§ 43-116. [Ch. 43, Sec. 15.0 through Ch. 43, Sec. 15.2] Fire
protection.
of one footcandle at ground level. Power for individually arranged lights
shall be from a Ground Fault Circuit Interrupter Breaker and shall not
be used for any other purpose. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
C. Electrical facilities. All electrical facilities required shall be installed
prior to the issuance of a license to any manufactured home park or any
stage thereof. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
D. Electrical alterations. All electrical alterations, modifications, or
connections performed on any manufactured home or accessory
structure shall be made in accordance with Chapter 15, Electricity
Code of the City of Bloomington. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
E. Grounding of manufactured home chassis. All manufactured home
chassis shall be grounded in accordance with the National Electrical
Code as adopted by the City of Bloomington. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
A. Fuel supply. Any fuel supply or distribution system for heating and/or
cooking shall be installed and maintained in accordance with N.F.P.A.
Standard 501 A, N.F.P.A. 54, the One and Two Family Dwelling Code as
adopted in Chapter 10 of the Bloomington City Code, accepted
engineering practices and the rules and regulations of the authority
having jurisdiction. [Ord. No. 2000-43]
B. Fuel storage. All fuels, whether for use in heating, cooking or other
purposes, shall not be stored underneath any manufactured home or
accessory structure. These fuels shall be stored in accessory structures
in accordance with N.F.P.A. Standard 501A. The accumulation of
firewood or other materials to be used as fuel in an approved fireplace
like structure shall be neatly stacked and shall be kept 18 inches above
the ground. This total accumulation, on any single lot, shall not exceed
one cord (four feet by four feet by eight feet) in volume and shall not
cover an area greater than 128 cubic feet. Additionally, said
accumulation shall not exceed 5 1/2 feet in height. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
A. Flammable materials. Manufactured home parks shall be kept free of
litter, rubbish and other highly combustible materials. No combustible
materials shall be stored underneath any manufactured home or
accessory structure. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
B. Location of fire hydrants. Approved steamer hydrants shall be spaced a
maximum of 500 feet apart and shall be located at each intersection of
two or more streets or as otherwise specified in Chapter 24 of the City
of Bloomington Codes. No obstacle shall be placed around or on the fire
§ 43-114 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 43-116
1:1682
§ 43-117. [Ch. 43, Sec. 16.0] Abandoned manufactured homes.
[Ord. No. 1996-84]
Manufactured homes must meet the requirements set forth in the Illinois
Abandoned Mobile Home Act to be considered abandoned. All
manufactured homes meeting these criteria shall be disposed of in
accordance with this Act.88
§ 43-118. [Ch. 43, Sec. 17.0 through Ch. 43, Sec. 17.3]
Miscellaneous requirements.
hydrant or within a ten-foot radius of the hydrant. [Ord. No.
2000-166]
A. Manufactured home occupancy.
(1) No manufactured home shall be occupied by more than one family
as defined in Chapter 44, Zoning Code, of the City of Bloomington,
and Chapter 45, Section 403.0, Occupancy Limitations. [Ord. No.
1996-84]
(2) No manufactured home shall be occupied prior to the proper
installation of tie downs. Each manufactured home shall be
anchored and installed in accordance with the manufacturer's
instructions or in accordance with the requirements set forth in
ANSI A225.1-1994, but not less than that prescribed by the most
current edition of the State of Illinois regulations regarding Tie
Down Requirements for Mobile Homes or Manufactured Homes.
Occupancy shall be allowed after the appropriate inspection is
performed by a member of the Building Safety Division of
Community Development. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
(3) No manufactured home shall be occupied prior to the completion of
a final inspection of the plumbing, electrical and gas pipe or oil
hookup connections by a member of the Building Safety Division of
Community Development. Skirting around the base of the
manufactured home shall not be installed prior to the inspection of
the utilities housed underneath the manufactured home. [Ord. No.
2017-96]
B. Responsibilities of the park management.
(1) The person to whom a license for a manufactured home park is
issued shall operate the park in compliance with this Ordinance
and shall provide management to maintain the park, its facilities
and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition.
[Ord. No. 1996-84]
88.Editor's Note: See 210 ILCS 117/1 et seq.
§ 43-116 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 43-118
1:1683
(2) The park management shall notify park occupants of all applicable
provisions of this Ordinance and inform them of their duties and
responsibilities under this Ordinance. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
(3) Management shall also make certain that any repairs, additions or
alterations to manufactured homes including accessory structures
are done by registered or licensed contractors and that the proper
permits were obtained prior to the start of the work. All plans for
improvement to a manufactured home or lot shall be signed by the
manufactured home park manager to signify approval of such
improvements. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
(4) The park management shall maintain a register containing the
names of all permanent park occupants identified by lot number or
street address. Such register shall be available to any authorized
person inspecting the park. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
(5) Park management shall maintain all existing screening buffer strips
in accordance with § 43-108I(2) of this Code. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
(6) The management shall provide an office where each manufactured
home owner entering the manufactured home park shall be
assigned a lot, given a copy of the Manufactured Home Park Rules
and shall have the manufactured home vehicle identification
number and site address maintained in a file in the park office. The
register shall be available at all times for inspection by authorized
officials. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
(7) A copy of the proposed park street system and lot numbering
system shall be submitted to the Director of the Department of
Public Works, who will then assign addresses to the park streets
and lots in accordance with § 43-108J(6)(a) of this Ordinance. [Ord.
No. 2018-93]
(8) All manufactured home park owners shall provide the City with
written notice of change of managers within seven days of said
change becoming effective. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
C. Responsibilities of manufactured home owners and/or occupants.
(1) The manufactured home owner and/or occupant shall place skirting
around the base of the manufactured home. The skirting shall be
made of an approved nonflammable material and shall be properly
maintained. A thirty-six-inch section of the skirting shall be located
in the area of the plumbing and sewage connections to allow for
inspection of these services at any time. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
(2) It shall be the responsibility of the manufactured home owner to
affix and maintain all manufactured home address identification
numbers in accordance with § 43-108J(6)(b) of this Ordinance.
§ 43-118 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 43-119
1:1684
§ 43-119. [Ch. 43, Sec. 18.0] Unlawful to park a manufactured
home except as permitted herein. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
It shall be unlawful for any purpose to keep, park, store or maintain a
manufactured home in the City outside a duly licensed manufactured home
park, except as permitted by other City Ordinances.
§ 43-120. [Ch. 43, Sec. 19.0] Penalty. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this Ordinance shall be punished upon conviction by a fine of not less than
$50 and not more than $500. Each day that such violation continues to
exist shall constitute a separate offense. Such fines shall not preclude the
City from its other remedies such as revocation of license as established
in the preceding sections of this Ordinance. The Director of Community
Development shall insure compliance with this chapter.
§ 43-121. [Ch. 43, Sec. 20.0] Partial invalidity. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
If any one or more of the provisions of this Ordinance is declared
unconstitutional or the application thereof is held invalid, the validity of the
remainder of the said Ordinance and the application of such provisions to
the other persons and circumstances shall not be affected thereby. If any
one or more of the provisions of this Ordinance is in conflict with another
Ordinance or City Code, the more stringent of the two shall apply.
§ 43-119 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 43-121
1:1685

ARTICLE II
Recreational Vehicles
§ 43-201. [Ch. 43, Sec. 21.0] Parking of recreational vehicles in
manufactured home parks. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
All recreational vehicles used for habitation shall be considered incidental
to a manufactured home park. No more than 10% or a maximum of 20
manufactured home lots, whichever is the lesser, may be designated as
recreational vehicle parking spaces. All recreational vehicle parking spaces
shall be located together in one area of the manufactured home park
which is separate from all other manufactured home park lot areas. All
recreational vehicle pads shall be used only by guests of permanent
residents of the respective manufactured home park.
§ 43-202. [Ch. 43, Sec. 22.0] Length of stay. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
Recreational vehicles shall not occupy a space in a manufactured home park
during the months of December, January and February.
§ 43-203. [Ch. 43, Sec. 23.0] Parked but not used for living or
sleeping purposes. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
A trailer, travel trailer or recreational vehicle may be parked or stored in
the City regardless of the other provisions hereof provided it shall not be
used for living or sleeping purposes. The travel trailer shall be stored in a
manner to prevent it from protruding into the front yard area where it is to
be stored as permitted by Chapter 44 of the Bloomington City Code.89
§ 43-204. [Ch. 43, Sec. 24.0] Penalty. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this article shall be punished upon conviction by a fine of not less than $50
nor more than $500. Each day that such violation continues to exist shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 43-205. [Ch. 43, Sec. 25.0] Management responsibilities.
The park manager shall ensure that the following is adhered to by the
tenants of the recreational vehicle section of the park:
A. Recreational vehicle pads shall not be used as temporary dump stations
where individuals briefly stop to dump the recreational vehicle sewage
holding tank into a City Sewer connection.
B. No recreational vehicle shall be allowed to have its wheels or axles
removed, nor shall any park allow mechanical repairs of any type to be
performed within the confines of the manufactured home park.
89.Editor's Note: See Ch. 44, § 44-1203E.
§ 43-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 43-205
1:1687
§ 43-206. [Ch. 43, Sec. 26.0] Pad size requirements.
C. It shall be the responsibility of the park manager to ensure that all
recreational vehicle connections to or from the recreational vehicle pad
are made in a proper manner and that approved materials are used to
make these connections. All water connections to the recreational
vehicle pad shall be made in a clean and sanitary manner;
D. The park manager shall ensure that all sewer connection points are
plugged in an approved manner when the pad is not in use. All sewer
connections shall be made utilizing odor tight barrier fittings and shall
be made in a clean and sanitary manner.
E. The park manager shall ensure that all means of providing electrical
power to an recreational vehicle pad are secured in a manner to
prevent the improper energizing of electrical circuits when the
recreational vehicle pad is not in use.
F. It shall be the park management's responsibility to provide the
appropriate trash receptacle for each recreational vehicle pad. If a
dumpster style trash receptacle is utilized, it shall be of such design as
to conform with all applicable City Codes and Ordinances. It shall be
emptied at least once weekly and shall be maintained in an approved
manner that will prevent it from becoming unsightly or from emitting
offensive odors.
G. The park manager shall ensure that all electrical connections are made
in accordance with the latest version of the National Electrical Code as
adopted by the City of Bloomington and shall contain at least one
receptacle of the Ground Fault Circuit Interrupter type to be installed in
the same pedestal as the primary power connection for the recreational
vehicle pad. This receptacle may be allowed to have flexible extension
cords plugged into it provided they are equipped with the appropriate
grounding materials intact.
H. The park manager shall ensure that all recreational vehicles to be
placed in an recreational vehicle area of a manufactured home park
contain self contained sanitary facilities within the unit itself. [Ord. No.
1996-84]
A. All recreational vehicle pads shall be constructed of concrete not less
than six inches thick. All pads shall be of a minimum size of 20 feet wide
and 50 feet in length. Each recreational vehicle lot shall be a minimum
size of 1,500 square feet of land area. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
B. Each pad shall provide a minimum of one parking space located
adjacent to or within 300 feet of each pad. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
C. Each recreational vehicle pad shall be provided with sewer, water, and
electrical services. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
§ 43-205 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 43-206
1:1688
D. The water risers required for each pad shall be of the hydrant design
and shall allow for the attachment of garden hose style fittings to
provide water service to the recreational vehicle. [Ord. No. 1996-84]
§ 43-206 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 43-206
1:1689
Chapter 43.5
URBAN DEVELOPMENT
§ 43-206 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 43-206
1:1690
ARTICLE I
Commercial Rehabilitation
§ 43.5-101. [Ch. 43.5, Sec. 1] Establishment of commercial
rehabilitation loan program. [Ord. No. 1988-114]
The City Council of the City of Bloomington hereby establishes a special
program to be known as the "Commercial Rehabilitation Loan Program"
for the purpose of allocating public funds and encouraging the investment
of private capital in a joint public-private effort to restore and rehabilitate
commercial buildings located in the Central Bloomington Project Area by
providing lower interest loans to owners or tenants of such buildings,
provided that such rehabilitation meets minimum, acceptable commercial
building standards and all applicable Codes of the City.
§ 43.5-102. [Ch. 43.5, Sec. 2] Terms of loans. [Ord. No. 1976-11]
The City Council is hereby empowered and authorized to establish and
amend by Resolution and thereby prescribe from time to time such terms,
conditions, rules and regulations as it shall deem appropriate for the
establishment and funding of the revolving fund account, including the right
to contract with private organizations for the administration of said fund;
and the approval of loans from said fund, including the right to establish
a loan committee consisting of representatives of private enterprises to
approve said loans.
§ 43.5-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 43.5-102
1:1691

ARTICLE II
Residential Rehabilitation
§ 43.5-201. [Ch. 43.5, Sec. 10] Rehabilitation loan revolving fund
and grant program - residential. [Ord. No. 1976-10]
The City Council of the City of Bloomington hereby establishes a Special
Fund to be known as the "Rehabilitation Loan Revolving Fund-Residential"
for the purpose of allocating public funds made available to the City through
the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development Community
Development. Grants for low interest loan to homeowners to rehabilitate
residential buildings in the Community Development Area of the City in
order to correct all Code violations in such residential buildings.
§ 43.5-202. [Ch. 43.5, Sec. 11] Rehabilitation grant program
established. [Ord. No. 1976-10]
The City Council also hereby establishes a rehabilitation grant program
for the purpose of providing direct grants to eligible recipients for
rehabilitation of their residential buildings.
§ 43.5-203. [Ch. 43.5, Sec. 12] Program, fund-resolutions. [Ord. No.
1976-10]
The City Council is hereby empowered and authorized to establish by
Resolution and thereby shall prescribe from time to time such terms,
conditions, rules and regulations as it shall deem appropriate for the
establishment and funding of the revolving loan fund amount and the
administration of the loan amount.
§ 43.5-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 43.5-203
1:1693
Chapter 44
ZONING
§ 43.5-203 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 43.5-203
1:1694
ARTICLE I
Title, Intent, and Purpose
§ 44-101. [Ch. 44, 1-1] Title.
This chapter of the Bloomington City Code, as amended, shall be known,
cited, and referred to as the Zoning Code of the City of Bloomington, Illinois
in this chapter at times referred as "this Code."
§ 44-102. [Ch. 44, 1-2] Purpose.
A. It is the general purpose and intent of this Code to foster the use and
development of land in an orderly manner by both private and public
interests with consideration being given to the City's social,
environmental, economic, and physical development goals and
objectives. It is further recognized that the City needs to regulate and
manage land use in order to implement sound Comprehensive Planning
policies, and to protect individual landowners and general
neighborhoods from incompatible and detrimental land uses.
Therefore, the establishment of zoning districts and the regulations
pertaining thereto as provided in this Code are declared to be essential
to the public interest and are expressly found to be a matter pertaining
to the City's government and affairs.
B. In addition to this general purpose and intent, this Code or portions
thereof are further intended to give effect to the following specific
purposes.
(1) To provide for the orderly and functional arrangement of land uses
and buildings;
(2) To establish standards for the orderly development or
redevelopment of geographic areas within the City;
(3) To facilitate the adequate and economical provision of
transportation, water, sewage disposal, stormwater drainage,
schools, parks, and other public facilities;
(4) To conserve and protect natural resources including prime
agricultural land, mineral resources, and areas of scientific
interest;
(5) To permit public involvement in the planning of private land uses
which have the potential for significant impact on the use and
enjoyment of surrounding property or on the public resources and
facilities of the City of Bloomington;
(6) To secure for the public, locations for housing, employment,
shopping, education, and recreation that are adequate in terms of
health, safety, convenience and number;
(7) To conserve and protect the taxable value of land and buildings;
§ 44-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-102
1:1695
§ 44-103. [Ch. 44, 1-3] Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect and be in force on and after March 11, 2019.
§ 44-104. [Ch. 44, 1-4] Severability.
It is hereby further declared to be the intention of the City Council of the
City of Bloomington, Illinois that the several provisions of this Code are
separable in accordance with the following:
§ 44-105. [Ch. 44, 1-5] Interpretation.
(8) To preserve the integrity of neighborhoods in the community;
(9) To protect the air, water, and land resources within the City from
the hazards of pollution and misuse;
(10) To protect land and structures from natural hazards including
flooding and erosion;
(11) To preserve and protect historic locations, structures, and groups
of structures;
(12) To preserve and protect and encourage the development of
buildings, groups of buildings and neighborhoods of distinctive
architectural character and appearance; and
(13) To promote the Comprehensive Plan adopted by the City of
Bloomington, Illinois and coordinate said Plan with land use plans
adopted by other governmental entities.
A. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this
Code to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provisions
of this Code not specifically included in said judgment order.
B. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this
Code invalid as it applies to a particular property, building, or other
structure, such judgment shall not affect the application of said
provision to any other property, building, or structure not specifically
included in such judgment order.
A. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Code shall
be held to be the minimum requirements deemed necessary for the
promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare.
B. This Code is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant, or other
private agreement, provided that where the regulations of this Code are
more restrictive than such easements, covenants, or other private
agreements, the requirements of this Code shall govern.
C. To the extent that a building, structure or use not lawfully existing at
the time of the adoption of this Code is in conflict with the requirements
§ 44-102 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-105
1:1696
§ 44-106. [Ch. 44, 1-6] Application.
The regulations and requirements for the districts established by this Code
are to apply uniformly to each class or kind of use, structure, or land.
of the Code, said building, structure or use shall remain unlawful
hereunder.
D. Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this Code are either
more or less restrictive than conditions imposed by any other law,
ordinance, resolution, rule, or regulation applicable to property or to
the use of property with the City of Bloomington, the regulation which
is more restrictive, or which imposes the higher standard or
requirement shall govern.
E. In cases where two or more standards in this chapter conflict with one
another, the more restrictive standard shall not necessarily control.
Rather, the Director of Community Development shall determine which
standard controls based on the degree to which a particular standard
results in:
(1) Greater consistency with the goals and objectives contained in the
Comprehensive Plan;
(2) The greatest level of compatibility with the intent and purpose of
this Code;
(3) Increased compatibility with adjacent development and
surrounding community character;
(4) Enhanced environmental quality and natural resources protection;
(5) Greater protection and preservation of historic and cultural
resources; and
(6) Higher quality of building form, design and/or architecture.
F. Headings and illustrations are provided for convenience and reference
only and do not define or limit the scope of any provision of this Code. In
the case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of
this Code and any heading, drawing, table, figure, or illustration, the
text shall govern.
A. No person shall hereafter use or occupy a building, structure or land or
establish a use or construct, erect, place, structurally alter or maintain
any building, structure, or part thereof within the City unless such use,
building, structure, or land is in conformity with all the regulations
herein specified for the district in which it is located.
B. It shall be the duty, obligation, and responsibility of the owner of
property within the City to permit and maintain its use and occupancy
only in strict accordance with the requirements of this Code.
§ 44-105 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-106
1:1697
C. No lot or yard existing on the effective date of this Code shall be
reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set
forth herein, unless a variation for such reduction is granted by the
Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance with § 44-1708 of this Code.
D. Unless otherwise specifically permitted or authorized pursuant to a
special use permit or by an approved final plan for a planned unit
development, no person shall use any part of a lot, yard or other open
space or off-street parking or loading space required about or in
connection with any use or structure for the purpose of complying with
this Code for any other use or structure.
E. Any lot or parcel of land which permits residential uses by right or
special use permit, shall not be developed into a residential occupancy
without first meeting the parkland dedication and reservation
requirements of Article VII of the Subdivision Code, Chapter 24.
F. All parcels of land, in any zoning classification, which are improved with
the addition of impervious surface (such as paved parking, sidewalks,
roofs, etc.) shall be sloped and/or drained so as to prevent surface
water from such impervious areas from running onto adjoining property
in unreasonable volumes.
G. Any parcel of land, except those improved with a single one or twofamily
dwelling unit on a single lot, in any zoning classification, which
are improved with the addition of 1,400 square feet or more of
impervious surface, or any existing impervious surface in excess of
1,400 square feet which is being reconstructed, shall dispose of surface
water in one or more of the following methods approved by the Director
of Engineering and compliant with Chapter 6 of the Manual of Practice
for the Design of Public Improvements in the City of Bloomington.
§ 44-106 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-106
1:1698
ARTICLE II
Zoning Districts and Map
§ 44-201. [Ch. 44, 2-1] Establishment of districts.
A. The provisions of this Code are intended to govern the use of land,
buildings, and structures; and establish bulk and off-street parking and
loading, and landscaping requirements applicable thereto. It is
essential that each new use of land, buildings, or structures become an
integral part of the overall function and pattern of community
development. All development subject to the provisions of this Code,
except as provided hereinafter for Planned Unit Developments, as
provided in Ordinances authorizing special use permits or pursuant to
variations granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals or City Council shall
conform to the standards of the district in which it is located.
B. In order to carry out the intent, purposes and provisions of this Code,
the City of Bloomington, Illinois, is hereby divided into the following
districts:
(1) Agricultural Districts:
A-Agricultural District
(2) Residential Districts:
R-1A Single-Family Residence District
R-1B Single-Family Residence District
R-1C Single-Family Residence District
R-2 Mixed Residence District
R-3A Multiple-Family Residence District
R-3B Multiple-Family Residence District
R-4 Manufactured Home Park District
GAP 1
GAP 2
GAP 3
GAP 4
(3) Business Districts:
B-1 General Commercial District
B-2 Local Commercial District
C-1 Office District
D-1 Central Business District
D-2 Downtown Transitional District
D-3 Downtown Warehouse and Arts District
§ 44-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-201
1:1699
§ 44-202. [Ch. 44, 2-2] Official Zoning Map.
GAP 5
(4) Manufacturing Districts:
M-1 Restricted Manufacturing District
M-2 General Manufacturing District
GAP 6
(5) Public Interest Districts:
P-1 University District
P-2 Public Lands and Institutions District
P-3 Airport District
(6) Zoning Overlay Districts:
S-1 Aircraft Noise Impact District
S-4 Historic Preservation District
Note: GAP District regulations included in Article XVIII of this
Code.
A. The location and boundaries of the districts provided in this Code as of
March 11, 2019, the effective date of the Ordinance adopting this
Zoning Code (Chapter 44 of the Bloomington City Code), are hereby
established as shown on the Official Zoning Map and such map and all
notations, references and other information shown thereon shall be as
to the boundaries of the districts provided herein. Amendments to such
map shall be by ordinance duly adopted by the City Council.
B. Annually, not later than the 31st day of March of each year, the City
Council shall, by Resolution cause the publication in pamphlet form of a
revised Zoning Map indicating to the practicable changes made during
the preceding calendar year.
C. The original Official Zoning Map shall be the final authority on the
zoning status of land, buildings and other structures and land uses
within the City as of the effective date of the ordinance adopting this
Code. The original Official Zoning Map or after the publication and
effective date of an annual Revised Official Zoning Map, the latest
Revised Official Zoning Map in effect on a specific date, shall raise a
rebuttable presumption as to the zoning status of land, buildings and
other structures and land uses within the City as of said date,
rebuttable solely and exclusively by the provisions of an Ordinance duly
adopted by the City Council after the effective date of this Code (or
after the effective date of the Official Zoning Map or after the effective
date of any annual revision thereto).
§ 44-201 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-202
1:1700
§ 44-203. [Ch. 44, 2-3] District boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the
Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
D. Two copies of the original Official Zoning Map and thereafter two
copies of the current Zoning Map are to be kept available for public
inspection; one in the Office of the City Clerk and the other in the office
of Community Development Department. Each such map shall be
identified by the signature of the Mayor, attested by the City Clerk and
bearing the seal of the City under the words: "This is to certify that this
Official Zoning Map supersedes and replaces the Official Zoning Map
adopted on (date of adoption of the map being replaced) and is part of
Chapter 44 of the Bloomington City Code, 2019, as amended."
A. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of
streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such center
lines;
B. Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall
be construed as following such lot lines;
C. Boundaries indicated as approximately following City limits shall be
construed as following such City limits;
D. Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to lie
midway between the main tracks of such railroad lines;
E. Boundaries indicated as following shore lines shall be construed to
follow such shore lines, and in the event of change in the shore line the
boundary shall be construed as moving with the actual shore line;
boundaries indicated as approximately following the center line of
streams, rivers, canals, lakes, or other bodies of water shall be
construed to follow such center lines;
F. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center line of
streams, canals, creeks, or other bodies of water shall be construed to
follow such center lines;
G. Boundaries indicated as parallel to an extensions of features indicated
in Subsections A through F above shall be so construed. Distances not
specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall be determined by
the scale of the map;
H. Where cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with
those shown on the Official Zoning Map, or in other circumstances not
covered by subsections A through G above, the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall interpret the district boundaries;
I. Where a district boundary line divides a lot in single ownership at the
time of the passage of this Code, the Zoning Board of Appeals may
extend the regulations of either zoning district beyond the district line
§ 44-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-203
1:1701
§ 44-204. [Ch. 44, 2-4] Forcibly annexed and reverted public lands.
The following shall apply to all property which is hereafter annexed by the
City or any publicly owned land which is transferred to private ownership:
§ 44-205. [Ch. 44, 2-5] Replacement of Official Zoning Map.
In the event that the Official Zoning Map becomes damaged, destroyed,
lost or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes
and additions, the City Council may by resolution adopt a new Official
Zoning Map which shall supersede the prior map. The new map may correct
drafting or other errors or omission in the prior map, but no such correction
shall have the effect of amending the original Official Zoning Map or any
subsequent amendment thereof.
into the remaining portion of the lot, provided that the extension shall
not apply to any area more than 50 feet beyond the boundary line of the
district;
J. Where, due to the scale, lack of detail, illegibility, or where physical
features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the
Official Zoning Map, and there exists any uncertainty, contradiction or
conflict as to the intended location of any boundary as shown thereon,
the Director of Community Development shall make an interpretation of
said map upon request of any person and within a reasonable period.
Any person aggrieved by such interpretation may appeal such
interpretation to the Board of Zoning Appeals pursuant to § 44-1712.
A. All property hereafter forcibly annexed to the City and without further
action of the City Council, shall automatically assume the classification
of A - Agricultural District unless otherwise classified by amendment;
B. Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by the City,
the zoning district adjoining each side of such street, alley or other
public way shall automatically, and without further action of the City
Council, be extended to the center line of such street, alley or other
public way existing prior to such vacation.
§ 44-203 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-205
1:1702
ARTICLE III
Agricultural District Regulations
§ 44-301. [Ch. 44, 3-1] Purpose and intent.
The intent of this A-Agriculture District is to govern the use of land,
buildings, and structures within areas of the City where soil, topographic,
and other conditions are best suited for the pursuit of agriculture or where
essential community facilities or utilities do not yet or are not reasonably
expected to serve the property. These regulations are further intended to
provide for the protection and conservation of natural resources, to prevent
or minimize conflicts between agriculture and non-agricultural land uses;
act as a holding zone for annexed land prior to timely development; and to
facilitate orderly and efficient urban development by preventing a scattered
and indiscriminate pattern of urban growth.
§ 44-302. [Ch. 44, 3-2] Agricultural districts - permitted and special
uses.
Refer to Article XVI, Definitions, for clarity on the uses listed.
A. Land uses. Uses are allowed in the A-Agricultural District in accordance
with Table 302A. The following key is to be used in conjunction with the
Use Table.
(1) Permitted uses. A "P" indicates that a use is considered permitted
within that district as of right subject to compliance with all other
requirements of this Code.
(2) Special uses. An "S" indicates that a use is permitted, though its
approval requires review by the City Council as required in Article
XVII, subject to compliance with all other requirements of this
Code and contingent upon conditions of approval which may be
imposed by the City.
(3) Uses not permitted. A blank space or the absence of the use from
the table indicates that the use is not permitted within that district.
(4) Use regulations. Many allowed uses, whether permitted by right or
as a Special Use, are subject to compliance with Article XVII.
(5) Unlisted uses. If an application is submitted for a use not listed, the
Zoning Enforcement Officer shall make a determination as to the
proper zoning district and use classification for the new or unlisted
use. If no permitted or special use is similar in character, intensity,
and operations to that of the proposed use, a text amendment may
be initiated pursuant to Article XVII to establish parameters for
permitting such use within the City of Bloomington.
B. Allowed Uses Table.
§ 44-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-302
1:1703
Table 302A: Agricultural District - Permitted and Special Uses
A Reference
Agricultural
Agriculture P
Apiary, Beekeeping P § 44-1005
Aquaculture,
Aquaponics,
Hydroponics
P
Animal Breeding
Services
S
Fish Hatcheries,
Poultry Hatcheries
P
Forestry P
Horticultural Services P
Urban Agriculture P
Urban Garden P
RESIDENTIAL
Household Living
Dwelling Unit, Single-
Family
P
INSTITUTIONAL
Government
Government Services
and Facilities
P
Police Stations, Fire
Stations
P
Religious
Place of Worship S1
Cemetery and
Columbarium
S § 44-1010
RECREATIONAL
Country Clubs, Golf
Clubs, Golf Courses
S § 44-1016
Fairgrounds,
Agricultural Exhibits
S § 44-1017
Parks and Recreation
Facilities
P
§ 44-302 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-302
1:1704
§ 44-303. [Ch. 44, 3-3] Agricultural bulk and site standards.
Table 302A: Agricultural District - Permitted and Special Uses
A Reference
Riding Stables, Riding
Schools
P
Swimming Pools,
Community
S § 44-1032
COMMERCIAL
Personal Services
Veterinary Office or
Clinic
S § 44-1035
Retail and Service
Roadside Markets P
INDUSTRIAL
Transportation
Airport and Landing
Fields
S § 44-1003
Heliports, Heliport
Terminals
S
Utilities
Commercial Solar
Energy Conversion
Facilities
P § 44-1031
Commercial Wind
Energy Conversion
Facilities
S § 44-1036
Private Solar Energy
Conversion Facilities
P § 44-1031
Private Wind Energy
Conversion Facilities
P § 44-1036
Wireless
Communication
Facilities
S § 44-1037
Notes:
1. Maximum permitted height is 45 feet or three stories, whichever is
lower.
A. Site Dimensions Table. All development in Agricultural District must
comply with the requirements in Table 303A and Diagram 303A unless
otherwise expressly stated.
§ 44-302 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-303
1:1705
§ 44-304. [Ch. 44, 3-4] General standards.
Diagram 303A
Table 303A: Agricultural District Bulk and Site Standards
Lot Characteristics Site Design Development Intensity
Front
Yard
(F)
Side Yard
(S)
Rear
Yard
(R)
Min. Lot
Area per
Dwelling
Unit 1 acre

District
Min. Lot
Width
(W)
Min. Lot
Area
(square
feet) 
Max. Building
Height Min. Min. Min. Feet Stories
A 150 feet  50 ft 20 ft 50 ft 1 acre 35 feet 2.5
A. On-site development standards. See Article IX, General Provisions, for
various on-site development standards such as exterior lighting
requirements, permitted encroachments, accessory uses and
structures.
B. Use provisions. See Article X, Use Provisions, for standards governing
permitted and special uses.
C. Off-street parking and loading. See Article XII, Off-Street Parking and
Loading, for standards governing off-street parking and loading.
D. Landscaping. See Article XIII, Landscaping and Screening, for
standards regarding landscaping and screening.
E. Signs. See Article XIV, Signs, for standards governing the type,
placement, size, and scale of signs.
§ 44-303 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-305
1:1706
§ 44-305. [Ch. 44, 3-5] Development standards applicable to
agricultural districts.
(Reserved)
§ 44-305 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-305
1:1707

ARTICLE IV
Residential District Regulations
§ 44-401. [Ch. 44, 4-1] Purpose and intent.
A. R-1A Single-Family Residence District. The R-1A Residence District is
intended to provide for the establishment of areas characterized by
large lot single-family dwelling units for occupancy by families, and
related recreational, religious, and cultural facilities that serve the
immediately surrounding residents, as well as those living in the
district. The R-1A district provides for approximately two dwelling units
per acre.
B. R-1B Single-Family Residence District. The R-1B Residence District is
intended to provide primarily for the establishment of areas
characterized by moderate sized lots and single-family detached
dwelling units for occupancy by families. In addition to these dwelling
units, related recreational, religious, and cultural facilities intended to
serve the immediately surrounding residents are allowed where such
facilities are found to be compatible with surrounding residential
development. The R-1B district allows densities of up to approximately
six dwelling units per acre.
C. R-1C Single-Family Residence District. The R-1C Residence District is
intended to provide primarily for the establishment of areas of higher
density single-family detached dwelling units while recognizing the
potential compatibility of two-family dwelling units as special uses.
Densities of approximately eight dwelling units per acre are allowed.
This district may be applied to newly developing areas as well as the
older residential areas of the City where larger houses have been or can
be converted from single-family to two-family residences to extend the
economic life of these structures and allow the owners to justify the
expenditures for repairs and modernization.
D. R-1H Single-Family Manufactured Home Residence District. The R-1H
Single-Family Manufactured Home Residence District is intended to
allow primarily for the establishment of a manufactured home
subdivision wherein individual lots are provided for ownership.
Densities of approximately eight dwelling units per acre are allowed.
Manufactured homes are to be placed on permanent foundations.
E. R-2 Mixed Residence District. The R-2 Residence District is intended to
accommodate development characterized by a mixture of housing types
at a high single-family and a low multiple-family dwelling unit density.
Densities of up to approximately 13 dwelling units per acre are allowed.
This district allows for the conversion of dwelling units in older
residential areas of mixed dwelling unit types in order to extend the
economic life of these structures and allow owners to justify
expenditures for repairs and modernization and serves as a zone of
transition between lower density residential districts and residential
§ 44-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-401
1:1709
§ 44-402. [Ch. 44, 4-2] Residential districts - permitted and special
uses.
Refer to Article XVI, Definitions, for clarity on the uses listed.
districts that permit greater land use intensity and dwelling unit
density.
F. R-3A Multiple-Family Residence District. The R-3A Residence District is
intended to facilitate the development of residential districts for
primarily multiple-family dwelling units which may generally serve as a
zone of transition between nonresidential districts and residential
districts of more moderate density. This district is further intended to
provide for the needs of persons desiring multiple-family dwelling units
at densities from 12 to 29 dwelling units per acre.
G. R-3B Multiple-Family Residence District. The R-3B Residence District is
intended to allow for increased neighborhood density through the
development of small-lot single-family housing, townhomes, duplexes,
and multifamily complexes, while being supportive of the overall
historic character of the neighborhoods to which it is applied and the
preservation of historic structures. The district allows for a maximum
density of 70 dwelling units per acre and may be applied to areas best
suited for such intense residential usage, principally on the fringes of
the Bloomington Central Business District. It may also be applied to
other areas in the City where comparable physical arrangements of
land uses are present.
H. R-4 Manufactured Home Park District. The R-4 Manufactured Home
Park District is intended to provide for the establishment of
manufactured home parks wherein manufactured home stands or pads
are provided in a safe, sanitary, and economical manner in conformance
with the Manufactured Home Park Ordinance, Chapter 43 of the
Bloomington City Code, 1960, as amended.
A. Land uses. Uses are allowed in the Residential Districts in accordance
with Table 402A. The following key is to be used in conjunction with the
Use Table.
(1) Permitted uses. A "P" indicates that a use is considered permitted
within that district as of right subject to compliance with all other
requirements of this Ordinance.
(2) Special uses. An "S" indicates that a use is permitted, though its
approval requires review by the City Council as required in Article
XVII, subject to compliance with all other requirements of this
Code and contingent upon conditions of approval which may be
imposed by the City.
(3) Uses not permitted. A blank space or the absence of the use from
the table indicates that the use is not permitted within that district.
§ 44-401 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-402
1:1710
(4) Use regulations. Many allowed uses, whether permitted by right or
as a Special Use, are subject to compliance with Article XVII.
(5) Unlisted uses. If an application is submitted for a use not listed, the
Zoning Enforcement Officer shall make a determination as to the
proper zoning district and use classification for the new or unlisted
use. If no permitted or special use is similar in character, intensity,
and operations to that of the proposed use, a text amendment may
be initiated pursuant to Article XVII to establish parameters for
permitting such use within the City of Bloomington.
B. Allowed Uses Table.
Table 402A: Residential Districts - Permitted and Special Uses
R-1A R-1B R-1C R-1H R-2 R-3A R-3B R-4 Reference
Agricultural
Apiary/Bee
Keeping
P P P P P P P P § 44-1005
Chicken Keeping S S S S S S S S § 44-1011
Urban
Agriculture
S S
Urban Garden P P P P P P
RESIDENTIAL
Household
Living
Dwelling Unit,
Single-Family
P P P P P P P
Dwelling Unit,
Single-Family
Attached
S P P
Dwelling Unit,
Two-Family
S S P P P
Dwelling Unit,
Multiple-Family
S P P
Manufactured
Homes
P P
Mobile Homes P
Dwelling Unit,
Accessory
Live/Work Unit S
Group Living
§ 44-402 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-402
1:1711
Table 402A: Residential Districts - Permitted and Special Uses
R-1A R-1B R-1C R-1H R-2 R-3A R-3B R-4 Reference
Agency
Supervised
Homes
P P S S § 44-1019
Agency-Operated
Family Homes
P P P P P P P § 44-1019
Agency-Operated
Group Homes
S P P § 44-1019
Convents,
Monasteries
S S P § 44-1019
Dormitories S S P § 44-1019
Group Homes for
Parolees
S S S S S S S S § 44-1019
INSTITUTIONAL
Education
Pre-schools S S S S S S S
Government
Government
Services and
Facilities
P P P P P P P
Police Stations,
Fire Stations
P P P P P P P
Religious
Place of Worship S1 S1 S1 S1 S1 S1 S1 S1
Cemetery and
Columbarium
S S S S S S S S § 44-1010
Residential-
Type
Domestic
Violence Shelter
P P P
Home for the
Aged
S S § 44-1019
Other
Institutional,
Cultural
Clubs and
Lodges
S
Food Pantry S § 44-1018
§ 44-402 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-402
1:1712
Table 402A: Residential Districts - Permitted and Special Uses
R-1A R-1B R-1C R-1H R-2 R-3A R-3B R-4 Reference
RECREATIONAL
Country Clubs,
Golf Clubs, Golf
Courses
S S S S S S S S § 44-1012
Community
Center
S S S § 44-1013
Parks and
Recreation
Facilities
P P P P P P P P
Swimming Clubs S S S
Swimming Pools,
Community
S S S S S S S S § 44-1032
COMMERCIAL
Entertainment
and Hospitality
Sports and
Fitness
Establishments
S S S § 44-1013
Lodging
Bed-andbreakfast
Establishments
S S § 44-1007
Boarding and
Rooming Houses
S S P § 44-1019
Offices
Medical or
Dental Office or
Clinic
S § 44-1024
Medical
Laboratory
S
Personal
Services
Clothing Care:
Tailor, Dry
Cleaning, Coin
Laundry, Shoe
Repair, etc.
S2 S2
§ 44-402 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-402
1:1713
§ 44-403. [Ch. 44, 4-3] Residential bulk and site standards.
Table 402A: Residential Districts - Permitted and Special Uses
R-1A R-1B R-1C R-1H R-2 R-3A R-3B R-4 Reference
Personal Care:
Barber Shop,
Beauty Salon,
Day Spa, etc.
S2 S2
Day-care centers S S S S S S S S
Retail and
Service
Drug Stores and
Pharmacies
S2 S2
Grocery Stores,
Supermarkets
S2 S2
INDUSTRIAL
Utilities
Public or Private
Utility Facility,
Minor
P P P P P P P
Private Solar
Energy
Conversion
Facilities
P P P P P P P § 44-1031
Wireless
Communication
Facilities
S S S S S S S § 44-1037
Notes:
1.Maximum permitted height is 45 feet or three stories, whichever is lower.
2.The use shall be located within a building containing multiple-family or office uses in the R-3B District
and shall not be permitted within a Mobile Home or Dwelling Unit in the R-4 District. The maximum
permitted floor area is 1,600 square feet for Clothing Care; 1,000 square feet for Personal Care or
5,000 square feet for Drug Stores, Pharmacies, and Grocery Stores
A. Site dimensions table. All development in Residential Districts District
must comply with the requirements in Tables 403A through 403D and
Diagram 403A unless otherwise expressly stated.
§ 44-402 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-403
1:1714
Diagram 403A
Table 403A: Bulk and Site Standards R-1 Districts
Lot Characteristics Site Design Development Intensity
Front
Yard
(F)
Side Yard
(S)
Rear
Yard
(R)
Max. Building
Height
District
Min. Lot
Width
(W)
Min. Lot
Area
(square
feet) Min. Min. Min.
Min. Lot
Area per
Dwelling
Unit
(square
feet) Feet Stories
R-1A 125 feet 22,500 40 feet 16 feet 40 feet 22,500 35 feet 2.5
R-1B 70 feet 7,000 30 feet 6 feet 30 feet 7,000 35 feet 2.5
R-1C 50 feet 5,400 25 feet 6 feet 25 feet 5,400 35 feet 2.5
R-1H 50 feet 5,400 25 feet 6 feet 25 feet 5,400 35 feet 2.5
Table 403B: Bulk and Site Standards R-2 District
Lot Characteristics Site Design Development Intensity
Front
Yard
(F)
Side
Yard
(S)
Rear
Yard
(R)
Max. Building
Height
District
Min. Lot
Width
(W)
Min. Lot
Area
(square
feet) Min. Min. Min.
Min. Lot
Area
per
Dwelling
Unit
(square
feet) Feet Stories
R-2
Detached
Residential
50 feet 6,600 25 feet 6 feet 25 feet 6,600 35 feet 2.5
§ 44-403 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-403
1:1715
Table 403B: Bulk and Site Standards R-2 District
Lot Characteristics Site Design Development Intensity
Front
Yard
(F)
Side
Yard
(S)
Rear
Yard
(R)
Max. Building
Height
District
Min. Lot
Width
(W)
Min. Lot
Area
(square
feet) Min. Min. Min.
Min. Lot
Area
per
Dwelling
Unit
(square
feet) Feet Stories
Attached and
Multi-
Residential
75 feet 7,000 25 feet 6 feet 25 feet 3,300 35 feet 2.5
Other Uses 50 feet 7,000 25 feet 6 feet 25 feet 7,000 15 feet 1
Table 403C: Bulk and Site Standards R-3 Districts
Lot
Characteristics Site Design Development Intensity
Front
Yard
(F)
Side
Yard
(S)
Rear
Yard
(R)
Max. Building
Height
District
Min.
Lot
Width
(W)
Min. Lot
Area
(square
feet) Min. Min. Min.
Min.
Lot
Area
per
Dwelling
Unit
(square
feet)
Floor
Area
Ratio
(FAR) Feet Stories
R-3A
Single- and
Two-Family
Residential
70 feet 6,600 30 feet 10 feet 30 feet 6,600 — 35 2.5
Attached and
Multi-
Residential
70 feet 7,000 30 feet 10 feet 30 feet 1,500 0.5 35 2.5
Other Uses 70 feet 7,000 30 feet 10 feet 30 feet 7,000 — 35 2.5
R-3B
Single- and
Two-Family
Residential
60 feet 5,000 20 feet 6 feet 25 feet 2,500 — 35 2.5
§ 44-403 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-403
1:1716
Table 403C: Bulk and Site Standards R-3 Districts
Lot
Characteristics Site Design Development Intensity
Front
Yard
(F)
Side
Yard
(S)
Rear
Yard
(R)
Max. Building
Height
District
Min.
Lot
Width
(W)
Min. Lot
Area
(square
feet) Min. Min. Min.
Min.
Lot
Area
per
Dwelling
Unit
(square
feet)
Floor
Area
Ratio
(FAR) Feet Stories
Attached and
Multi-
Residential
60 feet 5,000 20 feet Min. 9
feet or 1/
3 of
building
height
for
buildings
> 3
stories
25 feet 620 0.8 651 61
Other Uses 60 feet 7,000 20 feet Min. 9
feet or 1/
3 of
building
height
for
buildings
> 3
stories
25 feet 7,000 — 651 61
Notes:
1.Adjacent to any parcel improved with a single family or two-family dwelling unit, the maximum
permitted height is reduced to 55 feet or four stories, whichever is lower.
Table 403D: Bulk and Site Standards R-4 District
Lot Characteristics Site Design Development Intensity
Side Yard
(S)
Rear
Yard
(R)
Min. Lot
Area per
Dwelling
Unit
(square
feet)
Max. Building
Height
District
Min. Lot
Width
(W)
Min. Lot
Area
(square
feet)
Front
Yard
(F) Min. Min. Min. Feet Stories
R-4 40 feet 4,100 10 5 5 — 25 feet 2
§ 44-403 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-404
1:1717
§ 44-404. [Ch. 44, 4-4] General standards.
A. On-site development standards. See Article IX, General Provisions, for
various on-site development standards such as exterior lighting
requirements, permitted encroachments, accessory uses and
structures. In addition to the requirements of Article IX and § 44-403,
the following regulations apply to residential front yards.
(1) Where lots comprising 50% of a block frontage in a residence
district are improved with buildings, the required front yard shall
be the average of front yard depths of residences on each
developed site on the block frontage. For the purposes of this
section, a traffic control device, block numbering system or street
curve in excess of a 45° angle may be considered as a line of
demarcation.
(2) Lots rezoned to the R-3A, R-3B and R-4 District that are adjacent to
a lot in the R-1A, R-1B, R-1C, R1-H or R-2 District shall provide
transitional front, side and rear yards as follows:
(a) Front yard: equal to the required front yard of the adjacent
R-1A, R-1B, R-1C, R1-H or R-2 District.
(b) Side yard: equal to 10 feet plus the required minimum side
yard of the adjacent R-1A, R-1B, R-1C, R-1H or R-2 District.
(c) Rear yard: equal to 15 feet plus the required minimum rear
yard of the adjacent R-1A, R-1B, R-1C, R-1H, or R-2 District.
B. Use provisions. See Article X, Use Provisions, for standards governing
permitted and special uses.
C. Off-street parking and loading. See Article XII, Off-Street Parking and
Loading, for standards governing off-street parking and loading. In
addition to the requirements of Article XII, the following regulations
apply to residential driveways.
(1) Required off-street parking spaces for residential uses shall be
located on the same lot as the use requiring such parking or on an
adjoining lot. Except as provided in Subsection C(2) below,
required off-street parking spaces in residence districts shall be
located on the same lot as the use requiring such parking.
(2) Off-street parking spaces shall be located as follows:
(a) All new and approved off-street parking spaces and driveways
shall be located at least three feet from any side lot line. All
legal nonconforming driveways may be reconstructed, but not
expanded, at their existing location.
(b) In the R-1A, R-1B, R-1C, R-1H, and R-2 Districts, no off-street
parking shall be permitted in the front yard except on
approved driveways of single-family, two-family, and attached
§ 44-404 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-404
1:1718
§ 44-405. [Ch. 44, 4-5] Development standards applicable to
residential districts.
single-family dwelling units. On driveways leading to only one
legal off-street parking space, the parking of no more than
two cars side-by-side is allowed only under the following
conditions:
[1] The driveway must be paved;
[2] The width of the driveway approach and the driveway at
the sidewalk must be a minimum of 16 feet and shall not
exceed 24 feet. The required width shall be maintained to
a sufficient length to allow parking of cars on private
property. Existing driveways less than 16 feet wide may be
flared to the required width and length without widening
the driveway approach only if plans are approved by the
Director of Community Development.
[3] Parked vehicles shall not overhang or extend over public
sidewalks.
(c) In all other districts, off-street parking spaces shall only be
permitted on approved driveways in the required front yards,
unless otherwise provided by this Zoning Ordinance.
D. Landscaping. See Article XIII, Landscaping and Screening, for
standards regarding landscaping and screening.
E. Signs. See Article XIV, Signs, for standards governing the type,
placement, size, and scale of signs.
A. Temporary sales. Temporary sales that may be allowed in residential
districts are garage sales, auction sales of real estate or estate
disposition, and neighborhood block sales that do not use public rightof-
way. Such sales may be conducted so long as the following
requirements are met:
(1) No more than three garage/group sales are held on the same
premises during any calendar year.
(2) The duration of said sales is limited to no more than three
consecutive days or two consecutive weekends and during daylight
hours.
(3) A group sale shall be considered as having been conducted for and
by all premises from which merchandise is contributed or on which
merchandise is sold.
(4) The Director of Community Development or his or her appointee
may enter any premises within the City of Bloomington to
determine compliance with this section or any applicable Code and
may terminate said sale if violations are found; and
§ 44-404 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-405
1:1719
(5) Sound systems can only be used at an auction.
§ 44-405 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-405
1:1720
ARTICLE V
Business District Regulations
§ 44-501. [Ch. 44, 5-1] Purpose and intent.
A. B-1 General Commercial District. The intent of this B-1 General
Commercial District is to facilitate the development of community and
regional commercial areas. Customers in this district will generally use
a motor vehicle to reach a desired establishment. The development
contemplated in this district has such distinguishing characteristics as
unified site planning and development that promotes a safe and
conducive atmosphere for large volumes of shoppers; site accessibility
such that the high volumes of traffic generated create minimal
congestion and adverse impact upon surrounding land use; and unified
architectural treatment of buildings rather than an assemblage of
separate, conflicting store and structural types.
B. B-2 Local Commercial District. The intent of this B-2 Local Commercial
District is to provide retail, commercial and service establishments,
including retail stores and personal service facilities, which serve the
frequently recurring needs of surrounding local employment areas and
residential neighborhoods. In addition to serving commercial purposes,
this district encourages a mix of land uses, continued community
investment through infill and site renovations, and a development form
that supports mixed transportation modes, such as bicycle, pedestrian,
and public transportation in addition to personal vehicles.
Neighborhood shopping centers, particularly with a supermarket as a
principal or anchor tenant, are appropriate at prominent intersections.
The protection of surrounding residential properties from adverse
impacts is a primary focus of this district.
C. C-1 Office District. The intent of this C-1 Office District is to
accommodate office buildings primarily. Related retail, service,
institution, and multiple-family uses commonly associated with office
uses are allowed to a limited extent. This district may be applied as a
transitional use buffer between residential uses and uses which would
be incompatible with residential districts. The prime characteristics of
this district are the low intensity of land coverage and the absence of
such nuisance factors as noise, air pollutant emission, and glare.
D. D-1 Central Business District. The intent of this D-1 Central Business
District is to provide for a variety of retail, office, service, residential
and cultural amenities in the central business area of the City. This area
has historically served as Bloomington's major retail and community
center and will continue in this capacity moving forward. In addition to
commercial and governmental functions, arts and establishments
supporting the arts are emphasized. Residential uses, particularly
mixed-use or multifamily residential development at a high density, are
recognized as essential to the vitality of the district. While visitors are
likely to access the D-1 district by vehicle, pedestrian access and
circulation is prioritized in the downtown core. Recognizing the
§ 44-501 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-501
1:1721
§ 44-502. [Ch. 44, 5-2] Permitted uses.
Refer to Article XVII, Definitions, for clarity on the uses listed.
essential importance of building proximity to the public sidewalk and
adjoining structures, provisions are made for the development of
collective off-street parking facilities by public and private interests.
E. D-2 Downtown Transitional District. The intent of this D-2 Downtown
Transitional District is to complement and support the uses located in
the D-1 Central Business District. Office, service and civic uses, as well
as residential apartments and multifamily dwelling units, are
appropriate in this district. Due to its transitional location between the
central business district and outlying residential areas, the D-2 District
permits development at a lower intensity and density than the
downtown core. Pedestrian circulation is prioritized. To this end,
buildings should be located close to the sidewalk with on-site parking
located to the rear of the parcel and accessed from secondary roadways
or alleys, though modest setbacks for courtyards, gardens and other
similar amenities may be provided.
F. D-3 Downtown Warehouse and Arts District. The intent of this D-3
Downtown and Arts District is to facilitate entrepreneurship and
innovation by accommodating mixed uses that complement the
downtown and support various parts of the value-added chain. Uses
permitted in this district support Bloomington's artist community and
small scale "craftsman" industries with little to no noxious by-products.
Although not the focus of this district, live-work studios, multifamily
residential buildings, and loft-type residences above the first floor, are
permitted. Due to the intended use of this district, the urban form may
include buildings with larger footprints and greater setback distances
than would be acceptable in the central business district. Pedestrian
safety is emphasized in the context of increased truck and other
vehicular traffic that may be present in the area.
A. Land uses. Uses are allowed in the Business Districts in accordance
with Table 502A. The following key is to be used in conjunction with the
Use Table.
(1) Permitted uses. A "P" indicates that a use is considered permitted
within that district as of right subject to compliance with all other
requirements of this Code.
(2) Special uses. An "S" indicates that a use is permitted, though its
approval requires review by the City Council as required in Article
XVII, subject to compliance with all other requirements of this
Code and contingent upon conditions of approval which may be
imposed by the City.
(3) Uses not permitted. A blank space or the absence of the use from
the table indicates that the use is not permitted within that district.
§ 44-501 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-502
1:1722
(4) Use regulations. Many allowed uses, whether permitted by right or
as a Special Use, are subject to compliance with Article XVII.
(5) Unlisted uses. If an application is submitted for a use not listed, the
Zoning Enforcement Officer shall make a determination as to the
proper zoning district and use classification for the new or unlisted
use. If no permitted or special use is similar in character, intensity,
and operations to that of the proposed use, a text amendment may
be initiated pursuant to Article XVII to establish parameters for
permitting such use within the City of Bloomington.
B. Allowed Uses Table.
Table 502A: Business Districts - Permitted and Special Uses
B-1 B-2 C-1 D-1 D-2 D-3 Reference
Agricultural
Forestry P P
Horticultural
Services
P P
Urban Agriculture P
Urban Garden P P
RESIDENTIAL
Household Living
Dwelling Unit,
Single-Family
P2 P1
Dwelling Unit,
Single-Family
Attached
S P P1
Dwelling Unit,
Two-Family
P1 S P2 P P1
Dwelling Unit,
Multiple-Family
P1 S P2 P P
Live/Work Unit S P2 P P
Group Living
Agency Supervised
Homes
S P2 P § 44-1019
Agency-Operated
Family Homes
S P2 P § 44-1019
Agency-Operated
Group Homes
S P2 P P1 § 44-1019
Convents,
Monasteries
P § 44-1019
§ 44-502 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-502
1:1723
Table 502A: Business Districts - Permitted and Special Uses
B-1 B-2 C-1 D-1 D-2 D-3 Reference
Dormitories S S § 44-1019
Group Homes for
Parolees
S S S S § 44-1019
INSTITUTIONAL
Education
Pre-schools P P P S
Business and Trade
Schools
P P
College and
University
Classrooms
P S
Government
Courthouses P
Government
Services and
Facilities
P P P P P P
Police Stations,
Fire Stations
P P P P P P
Religious
Place of Worship S2 P2 P2 P2
Health
Ambulatory
Surgical Treatment
Center
P P P P
Hospital or Medical
Center
S S
Residential-Type
Domestic Violence
Shelter
P P P P
Home for the Aged P S § 44-1019
Other
Institutional,
Cultural
Clubs and Lodges P P P S P § 44-1012
Food Pantry P P P P § 44-1018
Libraries P P P
§ 44-502 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-502
1:1724
Table 502A: Business Districts - Permitted and Special Uses
B-1 B-2 C-1 D-1 D-2 D-3 Reference
Museums and
Cultural
Institutions
P P P P
Zoos S
RECREATIONAL
Country Clubs, Golf
Clubs, Golf Courses
P § 44-1016
Community Center P P P S § 44-1013
Fairgrounds,
Agricultural
Exhibits
S § 44-1017
Parks and
Recreation
Facilities
P P P P P P
Riding Stables,
Riding Schools
S
Swimming Clubs P P
Swimming Pools,
Community
P P P § 44-1032
COMMERCIAL
Aircraft and
Automotive
Car Wash P3 S § 44-1009
Farm Machinery
Sales and Service
P3
Towing Services
Truck Stops, Truck
Plazas
S
Truck Wash S
Vehicle Fueling
Station
P S
Vehicle Repair and
Service
S § 44-1034
Vehicle Rental
Service
P3
Vehicle Sales and
Service
S
§ 44-502 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-502
1:1725
Table 502A: Business Districts - Permitted and Special Uses
B-1 B-2 C-1 D-1 D-2 D-3 Reference
Entertainment
and Hospitality
Amusement Parks S
Commercial
Recreation
Facilities
P P S § 44-1015
Community
Reception
Establishments
S § 44-1014
Entertainment and
Exhibition Venues
P3 S
Miniature Golf
Courses
P
Sexually Oriented
Entertainment
Businesses
P5
Sports and Fitness
Establishments
P P P P S S § 44-1013
Theaters and
Auditoriums
P P S
Lodging
Bed-and-breakfast
Establishments
P P6 P P § 44-1007
Boarding and
Rooming Houses
P P S § 44-1019
Camp and Camping
Establishments
S § 44-1008
Hotel or Motel P P S S § 44-1021
Offices
Financial Services P P P P P
General Offices,
Business or
Professional
P P P P P P
Medical or Dental
Office or Clinic
P P P P P § 44-1024
Medical Laboratory P P P
§ 44-502 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-502
1:1726
Table 502A: Business Districts - Permitted and Special Uses
B-1 B-2 C-1 D-1 D-2 D-3 Reference
Printing, Copying
and Mailing
Services
P P P P P P
Recording and
Broadcast Studios
P P7 P P
Research Facility
or Laboratory
S S P
Personal Services
Clothing Care:
Tailor, Dry
Cleaning, Coin
Laundry, Shoe
Repair, etc.
P P P7 P P P
Funeral Parlor,
Mortuary
P P P S
Instructional
Studios
P P P7 P P P
Kennels, with no
outdoor exercise
areas
P3 P3 P3 P3
Kennels, with
outdoor exercise
areas
S
Personal Care:
Barber Shop,
Beauty Salon, Day
Spa, etc.
P P P7 P P P
Pet Care:
Grooming, Day
Care, Training
P P P P P P
Veterinary Office or
Clinic
P P S P § 44-1035
Day-care centers P P P S
Retail and
Service
Artisanal/Craft
Production and
Retail
P P P P P
Auction Houses P P
§ 44-502 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-502
1:1727
Table 502A: Business Districts - Permitted and Special Uses
B-1 B-2 C-1 D-1 D-2 D-3 Reference
Bars, Taverns,
Nightclubs
P3 S P7 P S P
Building Materials
and Supplies
P
Catering Services P P P
Drive-Through,
attached to a retail
or service use
P3 P3 S S
Drug Stores and
Pharmacies
P P S P P
Farmers Market P
Grocery Stores,
Supermarkets
P P
Gun Shops P3 P3
Liquor Stores P P P7
Manufactured and
Mobile Home Sales
S § 44-1023
Medical Marijuana
Dispensing
Organization
P P P P P P
Mobile Food and
Beverage Vendor
P P P P P § 44-1027
Restaurants P P P7 P P P
Retail Sales,
General
P P P7 P P P
Retail sales,
Outdoor
P S S P
Roadside Markets P
Sexually Oriented
Business
P5
Specialty Food
Shops
P P P6 P P P
INDUSTRIAL
Manufacturing
and Production,
Light
§ 44-502 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-502
1:1728
Table 502A: Business Districts - Permitted and Special Uses
B-1 B-2 C-1 D-1 D-2 D-3 Reference
Apparel, Fabrics,
Leather Industries
P
Commercial
Cleaning and
Repair Services
P P
Commercial
Community Kitchen
P P S P
Electronics
Assembly Plants
Fabricated Metal
Industries
S
Furniture and
Fixtures Industries
S
Trade and
Construction
Services
P P P
Storage and
Equipment Yards
Mini Warehouses S § 44-1026
Parking Lot,
Commercial
S S S S S
Transportation
Bus and Taxi
Passenger
Terminals
S S
Heliports, Heliport
Terminals
S S
Rail Passenger
Terminals
P P
Utilities
Commercial Solar
Energy Conversion
Facilities
P P P § 44-1031
Private Solar
Energy Conversion
Facilities
P P P P P P § 44-1031
Private Wind
Energy Conversion
Facilities
P P § 44-1036
§ 44-502 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-502
1:1729
§ 44-503. [Ch. 44, 5-3] Business district bulk and height standards.
Table 502A: Business Districts - Permitted and Special Uses
B-1 B-2 C-1 D-1 D-2 D-3 Reference
Public or Private
Utility Facility,
Minor
P P P P P P
Radio, Television
Stations-Towers
P P P
Wireless
Communication
Facilities
P P P P P P § 44-1037
Notes:
1.A Special Use is required when the use adjoins a Residential District boundary line.
2.The use is permitted only when located above the first story above grade
3.Maximum permitted height is 45 feet or three stories, whichever is lower.
4.A Special Use is required when the use adjoins a Residential District boundary line.
5.The use is allowed in the zoning district represented by that column provided that no lot line of the lot
to be occupied by such use shall be located closer than 1,000 feet to the lot line of a lot occupied by a
Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business, or other Sexually Oriented Business, and further provided
that no lot line of the lot to be occupied by such use shall be located closer than 500 feet to the lot
line of a lot used for a Commercial Recreation Facility, a Day-care center, children's museum, Agency-
Operated Family Home, Agency-Operated Group Home, Agency-Supervised Home, hobby shop or toy
store, Pre-school, Public or Private School, Boarding School, Park or Recreation Facility, Sports and
Fitness Establishment, Community Center, Place of Worship, Residential Dwelling Unit, Hospital or
Zoo.
6.The use is allowed in that zoning district only as an accessory use occupying not more than 40% of the
floor area of any story within a Business, Office or Residential Building or combination thereof;
7.The use is allowed in that zoning district only as an accessory use occupying not more than 25% of the
floor area of any story within an Office or Residential Building or combination thereof;
A. Site Dimensions Table. All development in Business Districts must
comply with the requirements in Tables 503A and 503B and Diagram
503A, unless otherwise expressly stated.
§ 44-502 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-503
1:1730
Diagram 503A
Table 503A: Bulk and Site Standards B-1, B-2 and C-1 Districts
Lot Characteristics Site Design Development Intensity
Front
Yard
(F)
Side
Yard
(S)
Rear
Yard
(R)
Maximum Building
Height
District
Minimum
Lot
Width
(W)
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet) Min. Min. Min.
Floor
Area
Ratio
(FAR) Feet Stories
B-1 — — — Minimum 5 feet or 1/
3 of building height
for buildings > 3
stories
0.8
B-2 — — — Minimum 5 feet 0.5 30 feet 2
C-1 — — 20 feet Min. 5
feet or 1/
3 of
building
height for
buildings
> 3
stories
20 feet 1.0
§ 44-503 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-503
1:1731
§ 44-504. [Ch. 44, 5-4] General standards.
Table 503B: Bulk and Site Standards D-1, D-2, D-3 Districts
Lot
Characteristics Site Design Development Intensity
Front
Yard
(F)
Side
Yard
(S)
Rear
Yard
(R)
Maximum
Building Height
District
Minimum
Lot
Width
(W)
Minimum
Lot
Area
(square
feet) Min. Max. Min. Min.
Floor
Area
Ratio
(FAR) Feet Stories
D-1 25 feet — — 5 feet — — 12.0
D-2
In General 40 feet — 5 feet 15 feet 5 feet 5 feet 65 feet 6
Adjoining
Res. District
40 feet — 15 feet 25 feet Min. 6
feet; or
1/3 of
building
height
for
buildings
> 3
stories
Min. 12
feet; or
1/3 of
building
height
for
buildings
> 3
stories
55 feet 4
D-3
In General 50 feet — — 15 feet 5 feet 5 feet 55 feet 4
Adjoining
Res. District
50 feet — 15 feet 25 feet Min. 6
feet; or
1/3 of
building
height
for
buildings
> 3
stories
Min. 12
feet; or
1/3 of
building
height
for
buildings
> 3
stories
55 feet 4
A. On-site development standards. See Article IX, General Provisions, for
various on-site development standards such as exterior lighting
requirements, permitted encroachments, temporary sales, accessory
uses and structures. In addition to the requirements of Article IX and
Table 503A, the following regulations apply.
(1) Lots zoned to the B-1, B-2 and C-1 District that are adjacent to a
Residential District shall provide transitional front, side and rear
yards as follows:
§ 44-503 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-504
1:1732
§ 44-505. [Ch. 44, 5-5] Development standards applicable to
business districts.
(a) Front Yard adjoining a Residential District: equal to the
required front yard of the adjacent Residential District.
(b) Side Yard adjoining a Residential District: equal to 10 feet plus
the required minimum side yard of the adjacent Residential
District.
(c) Rear Yard adjoining a Residential District: equal to 15 feet plus
the required minimum rear yard of the adjacent Residential
District.
(2) The transitional yard shall be maintained free of buildings,
structures, parking facilities or outdoor storage; provided,
however, that parking may be permitted in a rear transitional yard
if such parking is located no closer than 10 feet from the rear
property line and screening is provided pursuant to Article XIII.
B. Use provisions. See Article X, Use Provisions, for standards governing
permitted and special uses.
C. Off-street parking and loading. See Article XII, Off-Street Parking and
Loading, for standards governing off-street parking and loading. In
addition, the following regulations apply:
(1) In the D-1 District, off-street parking areas shall not occupy any
space between the building facade and a public street.
(2) In the D-2 and D-3 Districts, off-street parking areas may be located
to the side or rear of a building but shall not occupy any space
between the building facade and the front property line.
D. Landscaping. See Article XIII, Landscaping and Screening, for
standards regarding landscaping and screening.
E. Signs. See Article XIV, Signs, for standards governing the type,
placement, size and scale of signs.
A. Site plan review. Development proposals meeting the following criteria
shall be subject to Site Plan Review in accordance with the
requirements of Article XVII.
(1) New development, infill or redevelopment in any Business District.
(2) Building or site alteration in any Business District that includes one
or more of the following:
(a) Expansion of the floor area or height of any building or
structure by 20% or more.
(b) Alterations to off-street parking areas that increase or
decrease the number of parking spaces by 20% or more.
§ 44-504 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-505
1:1733
(c) Exterior alterations that substantially modify a building's
architectural appearance, including alteration of exterior
building materials, rooflines or window openings.
(d) Other significant changes to site access, landscaping, parking
and site characteristics as determined by the Zoning
Administrator.
B. Regulations Applicable to the D-1, D-2 and D-3 Districts.
(1) Building Characteristics in the D-1 District.
(a) The primary ground-floor entrance shall face a public street.
(b) A building facade shall occupy at least 95% of the front setback
line.
(c) Clear, non-reflective windows shall comprise at least 75% of
the front facade between two and eight feet above the
sidewalk.
(d) All entries shall be recessed from the front building wall a
minimum of three and a maximum of eight feet deep, and be no
greater than eight feet in width.
(e) Any building that exceeds 25 feet in width along a public street
shall be designed to appear as a series of two or more buildings
no wider than 25 feet each.
(f) Loading docks, overhead doors and other service entry areas
are prohibited on street-facing building facades.
(g) Exterior storage and refuse facilities shall not adjoin a public
street or sidewalk. Such facilities shall be fully screened on all
sides by an opaque enclosure.
(2) Building Characteristics in the D-2 District.
(a) The primary ground-floor entrance shall face a public street.
(b) For commercial and recreational buildings: clear, nonreflective
windows shall comprise at least 50% of the front
facade between three and nine feet above the sidewalk.
(c) For residential buildings: clear, non-reflective windows shall
comprise at least 20% of the front facade between three and
nine feet above the sidewalk.
(d) Any building that exceeds 50 feet in width along a public street
shall be designed to appear as a series of two or more buildings
no wider than 50 feet each.
(e) A building facade shall occupy at least 60% of the front setback
line.
§ 44-505 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-505
1:1734
(f) Loading docks, overhead doors and other service entry areas
are prohibited on street-facing building facades.
(g) Exterior storage and refuse facilities shall not adjoin a public
street or sidewalk. Such facilities shall be fully screened on all
sides by an opaque enclosure.
(3) Building characteristics in the D-3 District.
(a) The primary ground-floor entrance shall face a public street.
(b) A building facade shall occupy at least 40% of the front setback
line.
(c) Exterior storage and refuse facilities shall not adjoin a public
street or sidewalk. Such facilities shall be fully screened on all
sides by an opaque enclosure.
§ 44-505 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-505
1:1735

ARTICLE VI
Manufacturing District Regulations
§ 44-601. [Ch. 44, 6-1] Purpose and intent.
§ 44-602. [Ch. 44, 6-2] Permitted uses.
Refer to Article XVI, Definitions, for clarity on the uses listed.
A. M-1 Restricted Manufacturing District. The intent of this M-1
Restricted Manufacturing District is to provide for industrial,
warehouse, storage and transfer service uses with an absence of
objectionable external effects in areas that are suitable for this type of
development by reason of topography, relative location, and adequate
utility and transportation systems. Compatibility with surrounding
districts is further assured by limiting development to low industrial
densities. Just as industrial uses are excluded from residential areas to
promote public health, safety, and welfare, so are residential
subdivision developments excluded from this district.
B. M-2 General Manufacturing District. The intent of this M-2 General
Manufacturing District is to provide for the more intense types of
industrial and manufacturing uses which generally exhibit higher levels
of objectionable external effects. This district should not be located
adjacent to residential districts, and its contiguity to commercial and
business areas should, wherever possible, be avoided. Uses permitted
in this district will provide for those basic industries needed to expand
employment opportunities within the City.
A. Land uses. Uses are allowed in the Manufacturing Districts in
accordance with Table 602A. The following key is to be used in
conjunction with the Use Table.
(1) Permitted uses. A "P" indicates that a use is considered permitted
within that district as of right subject to compliance with all other
requirements of this Code.
(2) Special uses. An "S" indicates that a use is permitted, though its
approval requires review by the City Council as required in Article
XVII, subject to compliance with all other requirements of this
Code and contingent upon conditions of approval which may be
imposed by the City.
(3) Uses not permitted. A blank space or the absence of the use from
the table indicates that the use is not permitted within that district.
(4) Use regulations. Many allowed uses, whether permitted by right or
as a Special Use, are subject to compliance with Article XVII.
(5) Unlisted uses. If an application is submitted for a use not listed, the
Zoning Enforcement Officer shall make a determination as to the
proper zoning district and use classification for the new or unlisted
§ 44-601 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-602
1:1737
use. If no permitted or special use is similar in character, intensity,
and operations to that of the proposed use, a text amendment may
be initiated pursuant to Article XVII to establish parameters for
permitting such use within the City of Bloomington.
B. Allowed Uses Table.
Table 602A: Manufacturing District - Permitted and Special Uses
M-1 M-2 Reference
Agricultural
Apiary, Beekeeping S § 44-1005
Aquaculture,
Aquaponics,
Hydroponics
P P
Animal Breeding
Services
P1 P1
Fish Hatcheries, Poultry
Hatcheries
P1 P1
Horticultural Services P P
Urban Agriculture P P
Urban Garden P
RESIDENTIAL
Household Living
Dwelling Unit, Single-
Family
P2 P2
Dwelling Unit, Multiple-
Family
S S
INSTITUTIONAL
Education
Business and Trade
Schools
P
Government
Animal Detention
Facilities, w/o outdoor
exercise area
P1 P1
Animal Detention
Facilities, with outdoor
exercise area
S S § 44-1004
Government Services
and Facilities
P P
§ 44-602 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-602
1:1738
Table 602A: Manufacturing District - Permitted and Special Uses
M-1 M-2 Reference
Military Bases, Depots,
Communication
Facilities
S S
Police Stations, Fire
Stations
P P
Residential-Type
Adult and Juvenile
Detention Facilities
S S
COMMERCIAL
Aircraft and
Automotive
Car Wash P1 § 44-1009
Farm Machinery Sales
and Service
P1 P1
Towing Services S
Truck Stops, Truck
Plazas
P1
Truck Wash P1 P1
Vehicle Fueling Station P P
Vehicle Repair and
Service
P1 P1 § 44-1034
Vehicle Rental Service P1 P1
Vehicle Sales and
Service
P1 S
Vehicle Salvage and
Wrecking Operations
P1
Vehicle Storage P1 P1
Entertainment and
Hospitality
Entertainment and
Exhibition Venues
S
Sports and Fitness
Establishments
S
Offices
Financial Services P
§ 44-602 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-602
1:1739
Table 602A: Manufacturing District - Permitted and Special Uses
M-1 M-2 Reference
General Offices,
Business or Professional
P P
Medical or Dental Office
or Clinic
P § 44-1024
Medical Laboratory P P
Printing, Copying and
Mailing Services
P P
Research Facility or
Laboratory
S P1
Personal Services
Clothing Care: Tailor,
Dry Cleaning, Coin
Laundry, Shoe Repair,
etc.
P
Instructional Studios S
Kennels, with no outdoor
exercise areas
P1 P1
Kennels, with outdoor
exercise areas
S S
Personal Care: Barber
Shop, Beauty Salon, Day
Spa, etc.
P
Pet Care: Grooming, day
care, training
P P
Veterinary Office or
Clinic
P2 P2
Day-care centers S
Retail and service
Artisanal/Craft
Production and Retail
P P
Auction Houses P P
Bars, Taverns,
Nightclubs
P1
Building Materials and
Supplies
P P
Catering Services P P
Manufactured and
Mobile Home Sales
P P § 44-1023
§ 44-602 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-602
1:1740
Table 602A: Manufacturing District - Permitted and Special Uses
M-1 M-2 Reference
Medical Marijuana
Dispensing Organization
P1 P1
Mobile Food and
Beverage Vendor
P P § 44-1027
Professional Office
Furniture Sales
P P
Restaurants, Cafeterias P P
Retail Sales, General S S
Retail sales, Outdoor S
Specialty Food Shops S S
INDUSTRIAL
Manufacturing and
Production, Light
Apparel, Fabrics,
Leather Industries
P P
Commercial Cleaning
and Repair Services
P P
Commercial Community
Kitchen
P P
Crematories S3 S3
Electronics Assembly
Plants
P P
Fabricated Metal
Industries
S P1
Furniture and Fixtures
Industries
P P
Lumber and Wood
Industries
P P
Professional, Scientific
Industries
P P
Secondary
Manufacturing Assembly
Plants
S P
Textile Mill Products
Industries
P1
Trade and Construction
Services
P P
§ 44-602 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-602
1:1741
Table 602A: Manufacturing District - Permitted and Special Uses
M-1 M-2 Reference
Wholesaling,
Distribution and Storage
Facilities
P1 P1
Manufacturing and
Production, Heavy
Asphaltic Concrete
Plants
S § 44-1006
Chemicals and Allied
Industries
P
Food and Kindred
Industries
S P
Paper and Allied
Products Industry
P P
Petroleum Refining,
Related Uses
S
Mining, Quarrying S § 44-1025
Primary Metal Industries P
Recycling Facility S § 44-1028
Refractory Lined Pit
Burners
S § 44-1029
Refuse Disposal Services S § 44-1028
Rubber and Plastic
Industries
P
Sanitary Landfills S § 44-1028
Solid Waste Disposal
Area
S § 44-1028
Stone, Clay, Glass
Industries
S P
Waste Transfer Station S § 44-1028
Storage and
Equipment Yards
Aircraft Storage P P
Composting Facility P P
Junkyards S § 44-1022
Marine Craft Storage,
Marinas
P1 P1
Mini Warehouses P1 P1 § 44-1026
§ 44-602 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-602
1:1742
§ 44-603. [Ch. 44, 6-3] Site development standards.
Table 602A: Manufacturing District - Permitted and Special Uses
M-1 M-2 Reference
Parking Lot, Commercial P1 P1
Petroleum Products
Storage
P P
Railroad Marshalling
Yards
S
Transportation
Bus and Taxi Passenger
Terminals
P
Heliports, Heliport
Terminals
S S
Rail Passenger
Terminals
P
Utilities
Electricity or Natural
Gas Production Plant
S
Nuclear Power Plant S
Private Solar Energy
Conversion Facilities
P P § 44-1031
Private Wind Energy
Conversion Facilities
P P § 44-1036
Public or Private Utility
Facility, Minor
P P
Radio, Television
Stations-Towers
P P
Wireless Communication
Facilities
P4 P4 § 44-1037
Notes:
1.A Special Use is required when the use adjoins a Residential District boundary line.
2.The dwelling unit is allowed only as a residence for watchmen or caretakers of business or industrial
uses permitted in that zoning district.
3.A structure containing a Crematory shall be located no closer than 300 feet to a Residential District
boundary line.
4.The use is permitted as a principal use provided that the maximum height of the Wireless
Communication Facility shall not exceed one foot for each two feet that such Wireless Communication
Facility is set back from Protected Residential Property.
§ 44-602 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-603
1:1743
§ 44-604. [Ch. 44, 6-4] General standards.
A. Site Dimensions Table. All development in Manufacturing Districts
must comply with the requirements in Table 603A and Diagram 603A
unless otherwise expressly stated.
Diagram 603A
Table 603A: Bulk and Site Standards Manufacturing Districts
Lot Characteristics Site Design Development Intensity
Front
Yard
(F)
Side
Yard
(S)
Rear
Yard
(R)
Max. Building
Height
District
Min. Lot
Width
(W)
Min. Lot
Area
(square
feet) Min. Min. Min.
Floor
Area
Ratio
(FAR) Feet Stories
M-1 — — 20 feet Min. 5 feet or 1/3 of
building height for
buildings > 3 stories
1.0 — —
M-2 — — — — 1.0 — —
A. On-site development standards. See Article IX, General Provisions, for
various on-site development standards such as exterior lighting
requirements, permitted encroachments, temporary sales, accessory
uses and structures. In addition to the requirements of Article X and
Table 603A, the following regulations apply.
(1) Lots zoned to the M-1 and M-2 District that are adjacent to a
Residential District shall provide transitional front, side and rear
yards as follows:
(a) Front Yard adjoining a Residential District: equal to the
required front yard of the adjacent Residential District.
§ 44-603 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-604
1:1744
§ 44-605. [Ch. 44, 6-5] Development standards applicable to
manufacturing districts.
(b) Side Yard adjoining a Residence District: equal to 10 feet plus
the required minimum side yard of the adjacent Residential
District.
(c) Rear Yard: adjoining a Residential District equal to 15 feet plus
the required minimum rear yard of the adjacent Residential
District.
(2) The transitional yard shall be maintained free of buildings,
structures, parking facilities or outdoor storage; provided,
however, that parking may be permitted in a rear transitional yard
if such parking is located no closer than 10 feet from the rear
property line and screening is provided pursuant to Article XIII.
B. Use provisions. See Article X, Use Provisions, for standards governing
permitted and special uses.
C. Off-street parking and loading. See Article XII, Off-Street Parking and
Loading, for standards governing off-street parking and loading.
D. Landscaping. See Article XIII, Landscaping and Screening, for
standards regarding landscaping and screening.
E. Signs. See Article XIV, Signs, for standards governing the type,
placement, size and scale of signs.
A. Industrial transition areas.
(1) Purpose. Industrial Transition Areas are those areas where, due to
changes in adjoining land use or infrastructure over time, the use
and development of parcels has shifted from strictly manufacturing
to a mix of lower intensity uses such as offices and commercial.
(2) Location. Parcels in the M-1 District that abut vacated rail right-ofway
that has been converted to public use (e.g., Constitution Trail)
or a Residential District are considered Industrial Transition Areas.
(3) Land use. Land uses permitted in said Industrial Transition Areas
shall be those listed in the M-1 District. For residential,
entertainment and hospitality, personal services and retail and
service uses that require a special use, the Board of Zoning Appeals
shall consider the following factors, in addition to the standards in
§ 44-1707.
(a) Whether the proposed use is compatible with adjoining uses
and will not suffer from nor impose new conflicts associated
with noise, lighting, odors, hours of operation, vehicle
movement and pedestrian safety, or additional factors specific
to the location of the special use.
§ 44-604 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-605
1:1745
(b) Whether an adequate buffer is provided on the subject
property, with respect to physical separation and visual
screening, to minimize visual impacts associated with
adjoining lawful manufacturing uses.
(c) Whether noise attenuation, barriers, and other mitigating
factors shall be installed in new buildings for noise sensitive
uses (such as dwelling units and offices) to reduce noise
impacts associated with adjoining lawful manufacturing uses.
(d) Whether any site contamination exists on the subject property
that may present an immediate or future impact to the health
and safety of building occupants.
B. Outdoor storage.
(1) Outdoor storage of merchandise, materials, equipment, and
vehicles is permitted in a Manufacturing District subject to the
conditions provided herein.
(2) Screening for outdoor storage areas shall be provided in
accordance with the provisions of § 44-1308B.
(3) Outdoor storage areas shall be paved with a hard surface
consistent with the standards of § 44-1206F, except that storage of
landscape and building materials associated with horticultural
services and building materials and supply establishments may be
placed on an alternate surface of gravel or decomposed granite.
§ 44-605 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-605
1:1746
ARTICLE VII
Public Interest District Regulations
§ 44-701. [Ch. 44, 7-1] Purpose and intent.
§ 44-702. [Ch. 44, 7-2] Permitted uses.
Refer to Article XVI, Definitions, for clarity on the uses listed.
A. P-1 - University District. The intent of this P-1 University District is to
allow for the establishment and expansion of colleges, universities, or
theological schools. It shall be applied to property owned or leased and
used by a college, university, or theological school for educational or
education related activities. While providing for flexibility in land
usage, this district recognizes the multi-building, multi-acre, traffic
generating character of universities and the profound influence such a
school may have upon surrounding neighborhoods and public facilities
and utilities. This district is not to serve as a substitute for
comprehensive, cooperative, campus community planning but rather it
is intended to foster better relations and mutual problem solving
between the two.
B. P-2 - Public Lands and Institutions District. The intent of this P-2 Public
Lands and Institutions District is to allow for the establishment and
maintenance of public uses, publicly-regulated uses and private uses
that display an inherent relationship to the public interest. The creation
of such a district shall be provided for parcels of substantial size where
such community serving uses are necessary in order that adequate
community services may be rendered and where, through proper site
selection and planning, such uses are compatible with the surrounding
area.
C. P-3 - Airport District. The intent of this P-3 Airport District is to allow for
the establishment and maintenance of airports, heliports, and landing
fields and to promote the compatible usage of land adjacent to such
facilities.
A. Land uses. Uses are allowed in the Public Interest Districts in
accordance with Table 702A. The following key is to be used in
conjunction with the Use Table.
(1) Permitted uses. A "P" indicates that a use is considered permitted
within that district as of right subject to compliance with all other
requirements of this Code.
(2) Special uses. An "S" indicates that a use is permitted, though its
approval requires review by the City Council as required in Article
XVII, subject to compliance with all other requirements of this
Code and contingent upon conditions of approval which may be
imposed by the City.
§ 44-701 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-702
1:1747
(3) Uses not permitted. A blank space or the absence of the use from
the table indicates that the use is not permitted within that district.
(4) Use regulations. Many allowed uses, whether permitted by right or
as a Special Use, are subject to compliance with Article XVII.
(5) Unlisted uses. If an application is submitted for a use not listed, the
Zoning Enforcement Officer shall make a determination as to the
proper zoning district and use classification for the new or unlisted
use. If no permitted or special use is similar in character, intensity,
and operations to that of the proposed use, a text amendment may
be initiated pursuant to Article XVII to establish parameters for
permitting such use within the City of Bloomington.
B. Allowed Uses Table.
Table 702A: Public Interest Districts - Permitted and Special Uses
P-1 P-2 P-3 Reference
Agricultural
Agricultural P P
Apiary, Beekeeping S S S § 44-1005
Forestry P P
Horticultural
Services
P
Urban Agriculture S P P
Urban Garden P P P
RESIDENTIAL
Household Living
Dwelling Unit,
Single-Family
P
Dwelling Unit,
Single-Family
Attached
P P
Dwelling Unit,
Two-Family
P
Dwelling Unit,
Multiple-Family
P P
Group Living
Agency Supervised
Homes
P S § 44-1019
Agency-Operated
Family Homes
P P § 44-1019
§ 44-702 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-702
1:1748
Table 702A: Public Interest Districts - Permitted and Special Uses
P-1 P-2 P-3 Reference
Agency-Operated
Group Homes
P § 44-1019
Barracks P § 44-1019
Convents,
Monasteries
P § 44-1019
Dormitories P P § 44-1019
INSTITUTIONAL
Education
Pre-schools P P
Schools, public and
private
P P
Boarding Schools P P
Business and Trade
Schools
P
College and
University
Classrooms
P
College and
University
Facilities
P
Government
Animal Detention
Facilities, w/o
outdoor exercise
area
P1
Animal Detention
Facilities, with
outdoor exercise
area
S § 44-1004
Courthouses P
Government
Services and
Facilities
P P P
Military Bases,
Depots,
Communication
Facilities
P P
Police Stations,
Fire Stations
P P P
§ 44-702 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-702
1:1749
Table 702A: Public Interest Districts - Permitted and Special Uses
P-1 P-2 P-3 Reference
Adult Detention
Facility, accessory
and attached to
Police Station
S
Religious
Place of Worship P2 P2
Cemetery and
Columbarium
P § 44-1010
Health
Ambulatory
Surgical Treatment
Center
P
Hospital or Medical
Center
S S
Residential-Type
Adult and Juvenile
Detention Facilities
S
Domestic Violence
Shelter
P
Home for the Aged S § 44-1019
Other
Institutional,
Cultural
Clubs and Lodges P S P § 44-1012
Food Pantry P P § 44-1018
Libraries P P P
Museums and
Cultural
Institutions
P P P
Zoos P1
RECREATIONAL
Country Clubs, Golf
Clubs, Golf Courses
S P P § 44-1016
Community Center P P P § 44-1013
Fairgrounds,
Agricultural
Exhibits
S § 44-1017
§ 44-702 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-702
1:1750
Table 702A: Public Interest Districts - Permitted and Special Uses
P-1 P-2 P-3 Reference
Parks and
Recreation
Facilities
P P P
Swimming Clubs S S
Swimming Pools,
Community
P P § 44-1032
COMMERCIAL
Aircraft and
Automotive
Aircraft Sales and
Service
P
Vehicle Fueling
Station
S
Vehicle Rental
Service
P
Vehicle Storage P
Entertainment
and Hospitality
Commercial
Recreation
Facilities
P
Entertainment and
Exhibition Venues
P P1
Sports and Fitness
Establishments
P S P § 44-1013
Theaters and
Auditoriums
P
Lodging
Bed-and-breakfast
Establishments
S § 44-1007
Boarding and
Rooming Houses
P § 44-1019
Hotel or Motel S § 44-1021
Offices
Financial Services P3
General Offices,
Business or
Professional
P
§ 44-702 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-702
1:1751
Table 702A: Public Interest Districts - Permitted and Special Uses
P-1 P-2 P-3 Reference
Medical or Dental
Office or Clinic
P § 44-1024
Printing, Copying
and Mailing
Services
P P
Recording and
Broadcast Studios
P
Personal Services
Clothing Care:
Tailor, Dry
Cleaning, Coin
Laundry, Shoe
Repair, etc.
Instructional
Studios
P S
Personal Care:
Barber Shop,
Beauty Salon, Day
Spa, etc.
S4 P3
Day-care centers P S P3
Retail and
Service
Bars, Taverns,
Nightclubs
P3
Catering Services P P
Drug Stores and
Pharmacies
P P3
Mobile Food and
Beverage Vendor
P P P § 44-1027
Restaurants,
Cafeterias
P P3
Retail Sales,
General
P3
Specialty Food
Shops
P3
INDUSTRIAL
Manufacturing
and Production,
Light
§ 44-702 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-702
1:1752
Table 702A: Public Interest Districts - Permitted and Special Uses
P-1 P-2 P-3 Reference
Electronics
Assembly Plants
P
Trade and
Construction
Services
P3
Wholesaling,
Distribution and
Storage Facilities
P
Storage and
Equipment Yards
Aircraft Storage P
Composting
Facility
P
Marine Craft
Storage, Marinas
P
Mini Warehouses P § 44-1026
Parking Lot,
Commercial
P P P
Petroleum Products
Storage
P
Transportation
Airports and
Landing Fields
P § 44-1003
Airport Passenger
Terminals
P
Bus and Taxi
Passenger
Terminals
P P3
Heliports, Heliport
Terminals
P
Rail Passenger
Terminals
P3
Utilities
Commercial Solar
Energy Conversion
Facilities
P P S § 44-1031
Electricity or
Natural Gas
Production Plant
S
§ 44-702 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-702
1:1753
§ 44-703. [Ch. 44, 7-3] Site development standards.
Table 702A: Public Interest Districts - Permitted and Special Uses
P-1 P-2 P-3 Reference
Private Solar
Energy Conversion
Facilities
P P P § 44-1031
Private Wind
Energy Conversion
Facilities
P P § 44-1036
Public or Private
Utility Facility,
Minor
P P P
Radio, Television
Stations-Towers
P
Wireless
Communication
Facilities
P5 S P5 § 44-1037
Notes:
1.A Special Use is required when the use adjoins a Residential District boundary line.
2.Maximum permitted height is 45 feet or three stories, whichever is lower.
3.The use is allowed only when located within an Airport Passenger Terminal.
4.The use is permitted only within a multiple-family building. The maximum permitted floor area for the
use is 1,000 square feet.
5.The use is permitted as a principal use provided that the maximum height of the Wireless
Communication Facility shall not exceed one foot for each two feet that such Telecommunication
Antenna Facility is set back from Protected Residential Property.
A. Site Dimensions Table. All development in Public Interest Districts must
comply with the requirements in Table 703A and Diagram 703A unless
otherwise expressly stated.
§ 44-702 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-703
1:1754
§ 44-704. [Ch. 44, 7-4] General standards.
Diagram 703A
Table 703A: Bulk and Site Standards Public Interest Districts
Lot Characteristics Site Design Development Intensity
Front
Yard
(F)
Interior
Side
Yard
(S)
Rear
Yard
(R)
Max. Building
Height
District
Min. Lot
Width
(W)
Min. Lot
Area
(square
feet) Min. Min. Min.
Floor
Area
Ratio
(FAR) Feet Stories
P-1 — — — 0 feet or min. 5 feet if
side yard is provided;
or 1/3 of building
height for buildings >
3 stories
1.0 — —
P-2 — — — 0 feet or min. 5 feet if
side yard is provided;
or 1/3 of building
height for buildings >
3 stories
1.0 — —
P-3 Comply with FAA
Regulations and
Airport Hazard
Zoning Regulations
for Bloomington-
Normal Airport
125 125 125 Comply with FAA Regulations and
Airport Hazard Zoning
Regulations for Bloomington-
Normal Airport
§ 44-703 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-704
1:1755
§ 44-705. [Ch. 44, 7-5] Development standards applicable to public
interest districts.
A. On-site development standards. See Article IX, General Provisions, for
various on-site development standards such as exterior lighting
requirements, permitted encroachments, temporary sales, accessory
uses and structures. In addition to the requirements of Article IX and
Table 703A, the following regulations apply.
(1) Lots in the P-1, P-2 and P-3 Districts that are adjacent to a
Residential District shall provide a transitional front, side, or rear
yard equal to the minimum required front, side or rear yard of the
adjacent Residential District.
(2) Lots rezoned to the P-1, P-2 and P-3 Districts that are adjacent to a
Residential District shall provide transitional front, side and rear
yards as follows:
(a) Front Yard adjoining a Residential District: equal to the
required front yard of the adjacent Residential District.
(b) Side Yard adjoining a Residential District: equal to 10 feet plus
the required minimum side yard of the adjacent Residential
District.
(c) Rear Yard adjoining a Residential District: equal to 15 feet plus
the required minimum rear yard of the adjacent Residential
District.
B. Use provisions. See Article X, Use Provisions, for standards governing
permitted and special uses.
C. Off-street parking and loading. See Article XII, Off-Street Parking and
Loading, for standards governing off-street parking and loading.
D. Landscaping. See Article XIII, Landscaping and Screening, for
standards regarding landscaping and screening.
E. Signs. See Article XIV, Signs, for standards governing the type,
placement, size, and scale of signs.
A. Discontinuance of use. Whenever any use of property in a P-1 or P-2
district, whether permitted, special or nonconforming, is discontinued
for a period of 18 months, the zoning classification of such property
shall, as of the first day of discontinuance of such use, revert to the
classification of R-1A. The City Council, upon application for a map
amendment as provided in Article XVII of this Code, shall rezone such
property to any appropriate zoning classification.
§ 44-704 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-705
1:1756
ARTICLE VIII
Zoning Overlay District Regulations
§ 44-801. [Ch. 44, 8-1] Purpose and intent.
A. S-1 Aircraft Noise Impact District. The intent of this S-1 Aircraft Noise
Impact District is to restrict the development of noise sensitive uses in
areas with unique noise impacts emanating from aircraft operations.
This overlay district is generally defined as the area within the
significant noise impact area around the Central Illinois Regional
Airport. The Official Zoning Map establishes and defines the boundary
of this overlay district and is made a part of this Code and is established
to promote sound land use planning in noise impact areas through the
consideration of federal guidelines, the objectives of the City's Official
Comprehensive Plan, and past City action affecting land use near the
Central Illinois Regional Airport.
B. (Reserved)
C. S-4 Historic Preservation District. The intent of this S-4 Historic
Preservation District is to promote the-protection, enhancement,
perpetuation, and use of improvements of special character or special
historical interest or value. The City of Bloomington finds that the
preservation of such resources is a public necessity and is required in
the interest of the health, prosperity, safety, and welfare of its citizens.
This S-4 Historic Preservation District shall be applied as an overlay
district in combination with underlying base zoning districts as shown
on the Official Zoning Map. The purpose of the S-4 Historic
Preservation District is to:
(1) Effect and accomplish the protection, enhancement, and
perpetuation of such improvements and of such districts that
represent or reflect elements of the City's cultural, social,
economic, political, and architectural history;
(2) Safeguard the City's historic and cultural heritage, as embodied
and reflected in such landmarks and historic districts;
(3) Stabilize and improve property values;
(4) Foster civic pride in the beauty and noble accomplishments of the
past;
(5) Protects and enhance the City's attractions to residents, home
buyers, tourists, and visitors and shoppers, thereby supporting and
promoting business, commerce and industry;
(6) Strengthen the economy of the City; and
(7) Promote the use of historic districts and landmarks for education,
pleasure, and welfare of the people of the City.
§ 44-801 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-802
1:1757
§ 44-802. [Ch. 44, 8-2] S-1 Aircraft Noise Impact District.
A. Designation of district. The S-1 Aircraft Noise Impact District shall be
established as an overlay zone in combination with all other zoning
districts which lie within the boundaries of Airport Noise Impact Zones
as established by the Official Zoning Map. The boundaries of the Airport
Noise Impact Zones are in part, determined by the location of 60 Ldn
and 65 Ldn noise contours as designated on the Official Zoning Map.
Where a specific noise contour is referenced as a determinant of the
Airport Noise Impact Zone and/or the regulations pertaining thereto,
said noise contours will be identified by the year in which the
measurements and computations deriving said noise contour were
made. If no date is associated with a noise contour, the reference is to
the most recently derived noise contour of the given value.
B. Restricted uses.
(1) Areas within the 65 Ldn or higher Airport Noise Impact Zone. The
development or construction of any new child care facility,
residential building, structure designed or intended for overnight
stay, or similar use as determined by the Zoning Administrator is
prohibited.
(2) Areas between the 60 Ldn and 65 Ldn Airport Noise Impact Zones.
Any new child care facility, residential building, structure designed
or intended for overnight stay, or similar use as determined by the
Zoning Administrator meet the following standards.
(a) Buildings shall be constructed with the following sound
insulation materials to address the goal of achieving a day/
night average maximum interior noise level of 45 dBa and to
meet or exceed the following Sound Transmission Class (STC)
ratings:
[1] Exterior walls shall meet the STC rating of at least 30;
[2] Exterior doors shall include a storm door or meet the STC
rating of at least 28;
[3] Exterior windows shall meet the STC rating of at least 28;
[4] A minimum of R-30 insulation shall be provided in the attic
with soffit wind baffles or the roof shall meet the STC
rating of 39.
(b) Basement windows shall be insulated glass or have windows
well covers;
(c) Fireplaces shall be provided with a well-fitted damper or
fireplace doors if a damper is not allowed by City Code; and
(d) Central air conditioning shall be provided.
§ 44-802 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-802
1:1758
§ 44-803. [Ch. 44, 8-3] (Reserved)
§ 44-804. [Ch. 44, 8-4] Historic Preservation District.
C. Variations. The City shall consult and obtain a written recommendation
from the Bloomington-Normal Airport Authority prior to consideration
of any variation to this § 44-802. The Construction Board of Appeals
shall be responsible for reviewing variations of the provisions of this
§ 44-802 pertaining to building construction and/or acoustical
insulation. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall be responsible for
reviewing all other variations of this § 44-802 not pertaining to building
construction or sound insulation.
A. Applicability.
(1) The S-4 Historic Preservation District is an overlay district which
shall be applied in combination with one or more underlying base
zoning districts, as shown on the Official Zoning Map. The S-4
Historic District designation may be applied to a single property
(historic landmark) or group of properties (historic district) subject
to the nomination process defined herein.
(2) In an S-4 Historic Preservation District, all regulations of the
underlying Agriculture District, Residence District, Business
District, Manufacturing District or Public Interest District shall
apply, except insofar as such regulations are in conflict with the
special regulations applicable to the S-4 Historic Preservation
District, and in the event of such conflict, the regulations governing
such S-4 District shall apply. All permitted uses or special uses
otherwise allowable in the underlying Agriculture District,
Residence District, Business District, Manufacturing District or
Public Interest District shall continue to be allowable uses except
as provided in the designating ordinance, described in § 44-804B(6)
of this Code.
B. Designation of Landmarks and Historic Districts.
(1) Nominations. A nomination for a historic landmark or historic
district may be submitted by a member of the Preservation
Commission, owner of record of the nominated property or
structure, City Council, or any other person or organization and
shall be made on a form prepared by it by the Preservation
Commission.
(2) Criteria for consideration of nominations. The Preservation
Commission shall, upon such investigation as it deems necessary,
make a determination as to whether a nominated property,
structure, or area possesses sufficient integrity of location, design,
materials, and workmanship to make it worthy of preservation or
restoration and meets one or more of the following criteria:
§ 44-802 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-804
1:1759
(a) Its character, interest, or value as part of the development,
heritage, or cultural characteristics of the City, County of
McLean, State of Illinois, or the United States of America (the
Nation);
(b) Its location as a site of a significant local, county, state, or
national event;
(c) Its identification with a person or persons who significantly
contributed to the development of the City, County of McLean,
State of Illinois, or the Nation;
(d) Its embodiment of distinguishing characteristics of an
architectural style valuable for the study of a period, type,
method of construction, or use of indigenous materials;
(e) Its identification as the work of a master builder, designer,
architect, or landscape architect whose individual work has
influenced the development of the City, County of McLean,
State of Illinois, or the Nation;
(f) Its embodiment of elements of design, detailing, materials, or
craftsmanship that render it architecturally significant;
(g) Its embodiment of design elements that make it structurally or
architecturally innovative;
(h) Its unique location or singular physical characteristics that
make it an established or familiar visual feature;
(i) Its character as a particularly fine or unique example of a
utilitarian structure, including, but not limited to farmhouses,
gas stations, or other commercial structures, with a high level
of integrity or architectural significance; and/or
(j) Its suitability for preservation or restoration.
(3) Preservation Commission review procedures.
(a) Timeline. Within 45 days from receipt of a completed
nomination, unless as extended by mutual agreement of the
property owner(s), applicant and Director of Community
Development, the Preservation Commission shall conduct a
public hearing on the nomination of a historic landmark or
historic district.
(b) Public notice. Notice of the public hearing shall be distributed
at least 15 days prior to the hearing, in the following manner:
[1] By mail. Notice shall be sent by mail to the owner(s) of
record and to the nominators, as well as to property
owners adjoining the nominated historic landmark or
historic district. Notice shall include the date, time, place,
§ 44-804 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-804
1:1760
and purpose of the public hearing and a copy of the
completed nomination form.
[2] Newspaper. Notice shall also be published in a newspaper
having general circulation in the City. Notice shall include
the date, time, place, and purpose of the public hearing
and shall state the street address and legal description of
the nominated landmark and/or the boundaries of a
nominated historic district.
(c) Public hearing. Oral or written testimony concerning the
significance of the nominated historic landmark or historic
district shall be taken at the public hearing from any person
concerning the nomination. The owner of any nominated
landmark or of any property within a nominated historic
district shall be allowed reasonable opportunity to present
evidence regarding significance and shall be afforded the right
of representation by counsel and reasonable opportunity to
cross-examine expert witnesses. The hearing shall be closed
upon completion of testimony.
(d) Recommendation and report. Within 60 days from receipt of a
completed nomination, the Preservation Commission shall
make findings and a recommendation as to whether the
nominated landmark or historic district meets the criteria for
designation and adopt such findings by resolution. The
resolution shall be accompanied by a report to the Planning
Commission containing the following information:
[1] Explanation of the significance or lack of significance of
the nominated landmark or historic district as it relates to
the criteria for designation;
[2] Explanation of the integrity or lack of integrity of the
nominated landmark or historic district;
[3] In the case of a nominated landmark found to meet the
criteria for designation:
[a] The significant exterior architectural features of the
nominated landmark that should be protected;
[b] The types of construction, alteration, demolition, and
removal, other than those requiring a building or
demolition permit, that should be reviewed for
appropriateness pursuant to the provisions of
§ 44-1710 of this Code.
[4] In the case of a nominated historic district found to meet
the criteria for designation:
§ 44-804 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-804
1:1761
[a] The types of significant exterior architectural features
of the structures within the nominated historic district
that should be protected;
[b] The types of alterations and demolitions that should
be reviewed for appropriateness pursuant to the
provisions of § 44-1710 of this Code.
[5] Proposed design guidelines for applying the criteria for
review of certificates of appropriateness to the nominated
landmark or historic district;
[6] The relationship of the nominated landmark or historic
district to the ongoing effort of the Preservation
Commission to identify and nominate all potential areas
and structures that meet the criteria for designation;
[7] Recommendations as to appropriate permitted uses,
special uses, height and area regulations, minimum
dwelling unit size, floor area, sign regulations, and parking
regulations necessary or appropriate to the preservation
of the nominated landmark or historic district;
[8] A map showing the location of the nominated landmark
and the boundaries of the nominated historic district.
(e) Transmittal to Planning Commission. The recommendations
and report of the Preservation Commission shall be sent to the
Planning Commission within seven days following the vote on
the resolution and shall be available to the public in the Office
of the City Clerk.
(4) Planning Commission review procedures.
(a) Timeline. The Planning Commission shall schedule a public
hearing on the nomination within 30 days following receipt of a
report and recommendation from the Preservation Commission
regarding a nomination for a historic landmark or historic
district.
(b) Public notice. Notice of the public hearing shall be distributed
at least 15 days prior to the hearing, in the following manner:
[1] By mail. Notice shall be sent by mail to the owner(s) of
record and to the nominators, as well as to property
owners adjoining the nominated historic landmark or
historic district. Notice shall include the date, time, place,
and purpose of the public hearing and a copy of the
completed nomination form.
[2] Newspaper. Notice shall also be published in a newspaper
having general circulation in the City. Notice shall include
the date, time, place, and purpose of the public hearing
§ 44-804 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-804
1:1762
and shall state the street address and legal description
of the nominated landmark and/or the boundaries of a
nominated historic district.
(c) Public hearing. Oral or written testimony concerning the
significance of the nominated historic landmark or historic
district shall be taken at the public hearing from any person
concerning the nomination. The Preservation Commission may
present expert testimony or present its own evidence
regarding the compliance of the nominated historic landmark
or historic district with the criteria for consideration of a
nomination set forth in § 44-804B(2). The owner of any
nominated landmark or of any property within a nominated
historic district shall be allowed reasonable opportunity to
present evidence regarding significance and shall be afforded
the right of representation by counsel and reasonable
opportunity to cross-examine expert witnesses. The hearing
shall be closed upon completion of testimony.
(d) Determination by Planning Commission. Within 30 days
following close of the public hearing, the Planning Commission
shall make a determination, based upon the evidence
presented, as to whether the nominated historic landmark or
historic district meets the criteria for designation. Such a
determination shall be passed by resolution of the Planning
Commission and shall be accompanied by a report stating the
findings of the Planning Commission concerning the
relationship between the criteria for designation in
§ 44-804B(2) and the nominated historic landmark or historic
district and all other information required by § 44-804B(3). A
concurring vote by a 2/3 of Planning Commission members
then holding office shall be required to reach a determination
that a nominated historic landmark or historic district does not
meet the criteria for designation.
(e) Notification of determination. Within seven days following
determination by the Planning Commission, notice of the
Planning Commission's determination, including a copy of the
commission's resolution and report, shall be sent to the
following parties:
[1] By regular mail to the nominator, owner of record of a
nominated historic landmark and/or all owners of record of
properties within a nominated historic district; and
[2] By hard copy or electronic transmittal to the City Council.
(5) Appeal. A determination by the Planning Commission that the
nominated historic landmark or historic district does not meet the
criteria for designation shall be a final administrative decision
reviewable under the Illinois Administrative Review Act provided,
§ 44-804 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-804
1:1763
however, that the nominator or any owner of the nominated
landmark or of property within the nominated historic district may
within 30 days after the postmarked date of the notice of the
determination, file with the City Clerk a written appeal to the
Council pursuant to the procedures contained in Article XVII of this
Code.
(6) City Council action.
(a) Timeline. The City Council shall act upon a nomination to
designate a historic landmark or historic district, or upon an
appeal of the Planning Commission's findings to deny such
nomination, within 60 days after receiving the Planning
Commission's recommendation or a written appeal. The
Council's action to deny historic designation or to reject an
appeal shall be made in the form of a resolution; approval shall
be made by ordinance. Any resolution or ordinance shall be
accompanied by a written statement explaining the reasons for
the Council's action.
(b) Public hearing. The City Council may hold a public hearing
before enacting the resolution or ordinance and provide notice
and take testimony in the same manner as provided in
§ 44-804B(4)(a) and (b).
(c) Notification of action. Within seven days following City Council
action on a nomination or appeal, the City Clerk shall provide
written notification of the action of the Council by regular mail
to the nominator, the appellant, and/or the owner(s) of record
of the nominated landmark or all owners of record of
properties within a nominated historic district. The notice shall
include a copy of the designation ordinance or resolution
passed by the Council. A copy of each designation ordinance
shall be sent to the Preservation Commission, the Planning
Commission, and the Director of Community Development.
(d) Designating ordinance. Upon designation, the historic
landmark or historic district shall be classified as a "S-4
Historic Preservation District" overlay district as provided in
§ 44-804A of this Code. The designating ordinance may
prescribe the significant exterior architectural features; the
types of construction, alteration, demolition, and removal,
other than those requiring a building or demolition permit that
should be reviewed for appropriateness; the design guidelines
for applying the criteria for review of appropriateness; and
sign regulations. Procedures for issuance of certificates of
appropriateness are contained in Article XVII of this Code.
(7) Interim control. No building permit shall be issued by the Director
of Community Development for alteration, construction,
demolition, or removal of a nominated historic landmark or of any
§ 44-804 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-804
1:1764
property or structure within a nominated historic district from
the date of the Preservation Commission meeting at which a
nomination form is first presented until the final disposition of the
nomination by the City Council unless such alteration, removal, or
demolition is authorized by formal resolution of the City Council as
necessary for public health, welfare, or safety. Unless extended by
mutual agreement of the property owner(s), applicant and Director
of Community Development, the delay of the permit shall not
exceed 180 days.
C. Amendment and rescission of designation. Designation may be
amended or rescinded upon application to the Preservation
Commission and compliance with the same procedure and according to
the same criteria set forth herein for designation.
D. Bulk regulations.
(1) The following bulk regulations shall apply to all permitted uses:
(a) Lot regulations. To the extent that existing lot patterns,
including lot size, shape, and orientation, contribute to the
character of the S-4 Historic Preservation District, it is the
intent of this section to encourage continuation of such
patterns and prevent future fragmentation of landownership in
a manner that would be inconsistent with, or have adverse
effects on such character.
[1] Lots or portions of lots existing at the time of the S-4
Historic Preservation District designation may be
combined subject to compliance with the designating
ordinance and the general exceptions cited in § 44-902 of
this Code.
[2] Lots or combinations of lots or portions thereof may only
be reduced in width, depth, or area subject to compliance
with the standards of the underlying zoning district, the
designating ordinance, and approval by the Preservation
Commission in accordance with the procedures defined in
Article XVII of this Code.
(b) Yard regulations. Subject to the general exceptions cited by
§ 44-902 of this Code and compliance with the standards of the
underlying zoning district and designating ordinance, front
yards, side yards, rear yards or portions thereof may be
reduced in width, depth, or area only upon approval by the
Preservation Commission in accordance with the procedures
defined in Article XVII of this Code.
(c) Height regulations.
[1] Existing buildings or structures. Subject to the general
exceptions cited by § 44-902 of this Code and compliance
§ 44-804 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-804
1:1765
with the standards of the underlying zoning district and
designating ordinance, the height of buildings or
structures or portions thereof may be altered only upon
approval by the Preservation Commission in accordance
with the procedures defined in Article XVII of this Code.
[2] New buildings or structures. Subject to the general
exceptions cited by § 44-902 of this Code and compliance
with the standards of the underlying zoning district and
designating ordinance, a building or structure may be
constructed, placed, or erected to any height above grade
only upon approval by the Preservation Commission in
accordance with the procedures defined in Article XVII of
this Code.
(d) Building permit review. A building permit authorizing a new
building or structure, or an exterior alteration or addition to
any existing building or structure shall only be issued by the
Director of Community Development subject to compliance
with the designating ordinance and subsequent to review and
approval by the Preservation Commission in accordance with
the procedures defined in Article XVII of this Code.
§ 44-804 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-804
1:1766
ARTICLE IX
General Provisions
§ 44-901. [Ch. 44, 9-1] Applicability.
The provisions of this article apply to all zoning districts unless indicated
otherwise. If there is a conflict between this article and the individual
requirements of a zoning district, the Zoning Administrator shall determine
which standards control.
§ 44-902. [Ch. 44, 9-2] General exceptions.
§ 44-903. [Ch. 44, 9-3] Lots and yards.
A. Building under construction. Where a building permit has been lawfully
issued prior to the effective date of this Code, and if construction is
begun within six months of the effective date of this Code and is
diligently pursued thereafter, said building or structure may be
completed in accordance with approved plans and may be occupied by
the use originally intended. If the building, structure, or use is
nonconforming, it shall be subject to the provisions of Article XVII of
this Code.
B. Uses and structures permitted in all districts. The following uses and
structures are permitted in all districts: light poles, traffic regulatory
signs, directional signs, street name signs, utility poles, wires, cables,
conduits, vaults, laterals, pipes, mains, valves, railroad rights-of-way
containing railroad tracks, public rights-of-way, temporary buildings at
construction sites (but only for the period of such construction), gas
regulator stations, sewage lift stations, water wells and pumping
stations. However, installation of the above-mentioned uses shall
conform with all other applicable federal, state, or local government
rules and regulations not included in this Code.
C. Height regulation exemptions. The following uses and structures are
exempted from the height regulations in this Code: spires, belfries,
cupolas, water tanks, flag poles, public monuments, chimneys,
ventilators, or other appurtenances usually required to be placed above
the roof level and not intended for human occupancy. Heights for signs
shall be regulated by Article XIV of the Bloomington City Code, 1960, as
amended.
D. Conversion back to single-family dwelling unit. It shall be permitted to
convert any structure originally designed as a single-family dwelling
unit back to a single-family dwelling unit in any zoning district
established by Chapter 44 of the Bloomington City Code, 1960, as
amended. Such conversion shall be allowed regardless of past or
present use of the structure, or the zoning district which is regulating
that use.
§ 44-901 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-903
1:1767
§ 44-904. [Ch. 44, 9-4] Permitted encroachments.
A. The minimum yard space required for one structure or use shall not
again be considered as the yard of any other, including an adjoining
structure or use.
B. Yards required by this Code shall be located on the same lot as the
principal building or use.
C. No lot shall hereafter be divided into two or more lots and no part of a
lot shall be sold unless all lots resultant lots conform to all yard
regulations in the district where the lot is located.
D. The right-of-way of any public roadway, public alley or public accessway
that exists by dedication, recorded easement, or prescription and that is
located on the lot shall not be included as part of the required yard.
E. When two or more parcels of land, each of which lacks adequate area
and dimension to qualify for a permitted use under the requirements of
the zoning district in which they are located, are contiguous and are
held in one ownership, they shall be used as one zoning lot for such use.
A. Permitted encroachments in required yards. No obstructions shall be
allowed in any yard required by this Code. However, the following shall
not be considered obstructions when located in the required yards
specified, subject to the applicable requirements of Table 904 and this
Article IX.
Table 904: Permitted Encroachments
Encroachment Front Yard Side Yard Rear Yard
Accessory buildings and uses
as provided in § 44-908 of this
Code
No No Yes
Advertising signs, devices, and
nameplates in accordance with
the Sign Code of the
Bloomington City Code
Yes No No
Agricultural use Yes - Excludes buildings and structures
Air conditioning compressors Yes Yes Yes
Arbors, trellises, trees, shrubs,
and similar landscaping
features
Yes Yes Yes
Awnings or canopies Projecting < 25% of required yard depth
Bay windows Projecting < 3 feet
into required yard
No Projecting < 3 feet
into required yard
§ 44-903 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-904
1:1768
Table 904: Permitted Encroachments
Encroachment Front Yard Side Yard Rear Yard
Canopies over fuel pumps;
fuel, air, and water pumps in
conjunction with automobile
service stations
Set back > 13 feet
from front lot line
No No
Chimneys Projecting < 2 feet into required yard
Detached residential garages
and carports
No No Yes
Eaves and Gutters Yes Projecting < 2 feet
into required yard
Yes. Accessory
structure eaves and
gutters set back > 2
feet from lot line
Fences as provided in § 44-910
of this Code
Yes Yes Yes
Off-street parking facilities as
provided in Article XII of this
Code
No Yes Yes
Balconies, open porches,
terraces, and decks
Projecting < 10 feet
into required yard
No Yes
Refuse storage areas
(dumpsters)
No Yes1 Yes
Sills, belt cornices, and other
similar architectural features
Extending < 18 inches into required yard
Steps, fire escapes, ramps
necessary for access
Yes Yes Yes
Swimming pools, tennis courts
and other similar recreational
facilities
No No Yes
Storage buildings permitted as
accessory structures
No No Yes
Notes:
1. If in side yard, must be screened from view from public and/or private streets, as approved by the
Director of Community Development.
B. Permitted encroachments in Public Rights-of-Way. In the D-1, D-2, and
D-3 zoning districts, the following items are permitted to encroach into
the public right-of-way. Any permitted encroachment in the public rightof-
way shall be permitted to occupy a maximum of 50% of the sidewalk
directly fronting the building or use with which they are associated,
provided a minimum four feet wide clear path be maintained within the
sidewalk running parallel to the fronting street. Any permitted
§ 44-904 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-904
1:1769
§ 44-905. [Ch. 44, 9-5] Principal building on a lot.
§ 44-906. [Ch. 44, 9-6] Access for buildings.
Every building hereafter erected or moved shall be on a lot that abuts
upon a public street, or with access to an approved private street, and all
structures shall be so located on lots as to provide safe and convenient
access for servicing, rescue and fire protection vehicles and required offstreet
parking.
§ 44-907. [Ch. 44, 9-7] Temporary uses.
encroachment shall not inhibit the ingress and egress from buildings
nor the free flow of pedestrian traffic.
(1) Planters.
(2) Hanging planters (attached to building, canopy, or awning).
(3) Sidewalk dining.
(4) Sidewalk sales (related merchandising and displays).
(5) Sandwich Board signs (as regulated in Article XIV of this code).
(6) Awnings and canopies (not more than four feet from the face of the
building; eight feet min clearance above sidewalk).
A. In an R-1A, R-1B, R-1C, R1-H, or R-2 District, not more than one
principal building shall be located on a lot of record or on a lot
described by metes and bounds, except in the case of planned unit
developments, special uses and developments that require site plan
review, as provided in this Code.
B. In all other districts and subject to the site plan review requirements in
§ 44-1709 of this Code, more than one principal building may be
erected on a lot of record or on a lot described by metes and bounds
provided that the yard, lot area, height and other requirements of this
Code shall be met for each structure as though it were on an individual
lot.
A. Farmers' markets and temporary sales on business premises. A farmers'
market may be permitted as an accessory use to any principal
permitted use in B-1, B-2, C-1 District; or as an accessory to school,
place or worship or other institutional use in all districts. Temporary
sales of goods and services may be conducted on the premises of
business in any nonresidential zoning district. The following
requirements shall apply:
(1) Excluding farmers' markets, no more than three temporary sales
may be held on the same premises during any calendar year.
§ 44-904 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-907
1:1770
(2) Excluding farmers' markets, the duration of temporary sales shall
be limited to no more than three consecutive days and during the
regular hours of the principal business.
(3) Farmers' markets may be conducted on a weekly or semi-weekly
basis for a period of up to six consecutive months during any
calendar year.
(4) Farmers' markets and sales by other than the principal business or
principal use must be licensed by the City of Bloomington. Such
license shall be granted upon submission of the following:
(a) Description of good/services to be sold;
(b) Duration of the sale including days and hours of operation;
(c) Site plan showing the location of the proposed farmers' market
or sale approved by the Community Development Department;
(d) Consent of the principal business owner/property owner;
(e) A surety bond of at least $3,000;
(f) A minimum of $20,000 in liability insurance;
(g) Arrangements for customer parking;
(h) Arrangements for use of the principal business or owner's
sanitary facilities, if any;
(i) IRS Tax Identification No.;
(j) Illinois sales tax number;
(k) Contact information including name, mailing address, email
address and telephone number of the home base and manager
of the transient business or farmers' market;
(l) Plans for temporary structures that may be constructed/
installed for the use of the transient business approved by the
Community Development Department; and
(m) A filing fee per location or annual fee as detailed in Appendix A
of this Code shall be required.
(5) Sales by the principal business itself shall be without a license,
bond, liability insurance, etc. except that the activity must be
registered with the City of Bloomington. Said registration shall
require the submission of the items described in § 44-907A(3)(a),
(b), (c) and (l).
(6) No farmers' market or sale on a parking lot shall be allowed that
would obstruct traffic in the lot or reduce the number of parking
spaces for the principal business below the number required by
City Code.
§ 44-907 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-907
1:1771
(7) No farmers' market or sale shall be allowed closer than 15 feet
from the front property line.
(8) No farmers' market or sale will be allowed that involves the use,
placement, distribution, or sale of hazardous materials as
determined by the Bloomington Fire Chief or his or her designee.
(9) No food sale for consumption shall be allowed without approval of
the McLean County Health Department.
(10) Where businesses abut a residential property, no farmers' market
or sale will be allowed without the installation of an opaque fence
at least six feet high to protect said property from the activity.
(11) The premises must be cleaned of goods and debris after each
farmers' market or sale.
(12)No sound system shall be used in conjunction with the farmers'
market or sale.
B. Temporary seasonal sales. Temporary sales involving agricultural
products such as fresh produce and Christmas trees which by their
nature are seasonal, may be allowed on the premises of a business in
any commercial zoning district for the entire season on a daily basis,
weather permitting, without regard to the limitations in § 44-907A and
B herein.
C. Temporary sales on vacant land. Temporary sales on vacant land may
only occur in business and manufacturing districts. Such sales will only
be permitted after the Director of Community Development has
determined that the requirements of other applicable City Codes have
been met. Such sales must conform to the requirements of this section
with the additional requirement that sales may not be conducted
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
D. Temporary sales conducted during a civic event recognized by the City
of Bloomington shall not be subject to the provisions of this section.
E. Temporary outdoor storage (in shipping containers, storage containers,
or in trailers) of materials for charitable and philanthropic
organizations in business and manufacturing districts-shall be
permitted in front, rear, and side yards subject to the following:
(1) Temporary outdoor storage shall be accessory to a principal
permitted use;
(2) Such temporary outdoor storage shall not be in any way that
impedes on-site circulation or the use of any required off-street
parking or loading spaces required by Article XII of this Code;
(3) A permit for temporary outdoor storage use shall be obtained from
the Community Development Director prior to the placement of any
containers or materials.
§ 44-907 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-907
1:1772
§ 44-908. [Ch. 44, 9-8] Accessory buildings and uses.
On a lot devoted to a permitted principal use, customary accessory uses,
and structures are authorized subject to the following standards and any
applicable off-street parking requirements:
(4) No containers shall be permitted on a site more than 90 days in any
calendar year.
F. All signs and their use shall comply with 14 of the Bloomington City
Code, 1960, as amended.
A. Accessory uses shall be compatible with the principal use and shall not
be established prior to the establishment of the principal use, except as
permitted hereafter.
B. Temporary storage for goods, products and materials associated with
construction or remodeling of the principal structure shall not be
subject to this section.
C. Accessory uses. In addition to those uses permitted in a zoning district,
the following accessory uses are permitted subject to the provisions of
this subsection and any additional requirements of Article X.
(1) Beekeeping.
(2) Chicken keeping.
(3) Columbariums, when accessory to a place of worship, cemetery,
mortuary.
(4) Home occupations.
(5) Roadside stands.
D. An accessory building or structure hereafter constructed, erected,
placed, structurally altered, enlarged, or moved, except as otherwise
permitted in this Code shall be subject to the following bulk
requirements:
(1) Except for roadside markets, no accessory building or structure
shall be permitted within the required front or side yards of a lot, as
set forth in each district.
(2) Accessory buildings and structures shall comply with Table 908.
§ 44-907 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-908
1:1773
Table 908: Accessory Building and Structures
Districts Maximum Height
Min. Distance to
Principal
Building Wall
Min. Distance to
Rear or Side Lot
Line
Min. Distance to
Alley Right-of-
Way Line
Agricultural
Districts
Equal to permitted
height of district
10 feet 3 feet 10 feet*
Residential
Districts
14 feet 10 feet 3 feet 10 feet*
Business Districts Equal to permitted
height of district
10 feet 3 feet 10 feet*
Manufacturing
Districts
Equal to permitted
height of district
10 feet 3 feet 10 feet*
Public Interest
Districts
Equal to permitted
height of district
10 feet 3 feet 10 feet*
Notes:
* When the entrance to the accessory building for motor vehicles is parallel to and facing such alley
right-of-way line
Diagram 908D(2)
(3) The foregoing height limits shall not apply to telecommunication
antennas and telecommunication antenna facilities authorized
pursuant to Article IV and X of this Code.
(4) The gross floor area of an accessory building or structure to be
constructed in any zoning district shall not exceed 30% of the rear
yard, nor shall it exceed following:
(a) In an agricultural district or the R-1A, R-1B, R-1C, R1-H, R-2, or
R-4 District, the gross floor area of an accessory building or
§ 44-908 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-908
1:1774
structure shall not exceed the ground floor of the principal
building or 1,000 square feet, whichever is less.
(b) In a business district, manufacturing district, public interest
district or the R-3A or R-3B District, the cumulative gross floor
area of an accessory building or structure in combination with
the principal structure(s) shall comply with the gross floor area
regulations for the zoning district in which it is located.
(5) No manufactured home, mobile home or other similar portable
structure or building shall be used as an accessory building or
structure except when used incidentally to and temporarily for
construction operations of a principal use, notwithstanding the
following exceptions:
(a) Storage buildings not exceeding 144 square feet in area and a
maximum height of 12 feet to the highest point on such
building are permitted as accessory buildings.
(b) It shall be unlawful to use any portable on demand storage
container or other similar portable structure as an accessory
building or accessory structure located on any Residential
District lot except when used temporarily during construction
or moving operations of a principal use. Such portable
containers or structures shall be removed from such
Residential District lot within 14 consecutive days after the
date of completion of such construction or moving operations.
(6) An accessory building which is attached to a principal building
shall be considered as a part of the principal building and shall be
subject to all regulations governing the location of principal
buildings.
(7) An accessory building which is not attached to a principal building
may contain a rooming unit as an accessory use provided that such
rooming unit is occupied by a person who is related by blood,
adoption, or marriage to a member of the family occupying a singlefamily
dwelling unit in the principal building or provided that such
rooming unit is occupied by a household servant employed by the
family occupying a single-family dwelling unit in such principal
building.
(8) No incinerator shall be hereafter constructed, erected, placed,
structurally altered, or enlarged in or within 2,000 feet of property
in a residential district.
E. Agricultural structures. Agricultural buildings that are used only for
agricultural purposes, such as barns, silos, bins, sheds, and farm
machinery sheds, shall not be considered accessory buildings or
structures. Such buildings are principal agricultural buildings and shall
comply with the district bulk standards.
§ 44-908 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-909
1:1775
§ 44-909. [Ch. 44, 9-9] Sight distance requirements.
§ 44-910. [Ch. 44, 9-10] Fence regulations.
A. At street intersections. Except in the D-1 Central Business District,
nothing shall be erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow in such a
manner as to impede visibility between a height of 2 1/2 feet and 10 feet
above the top curbline grades of intersecting streets in the area defined
by the visibility triangles illustrated in Figure 909.
B. At intersections of streets with alleys and driveways. Except in the D-1
Central Business District, at the intersection of a public or private
street with a public or private driveway or alley no landscaping shall be
placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as to impede
visibility between a height of 2 1/2 and 10 feet above the curb top
elevation of the street within the visibility triangle area formed by the
street curbline intersection with the driveway or alley pavement line,
and with the hypotenuse (third side of the triangle) connecting said
curbline and said pavement line at distances from their intersection
equal to 20 feet along the driveway or alley line and 30 feet along the
street curbline.
Diagram 909
A. General standards. Fences erected in the City of Bloomington shall
comply with the following standards.
(1) A fence may be located on a lot line and shall not protrude in full or
in part onto any adjacent property or right-of-way.
(2) The fence height shall be measured from the established grade on
the fence owner's property to the top most section of said fence.
§ 44-909 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-910
1:1776
(3) All supporting poles must be placed on the inside of the property
where the fence is erected, and the finished side must face out
away from the property.
(4) No fence shall be constructed in any drainage or access easement.
(5) No fence shall be constructed in any utility easement except
wherein a release has been given in writing by the owner of the
property absolving the City and/or utility company from all liability
and damages resulting from the repair, inspection, maintenance,
installation, or removal of utilities. The City and/or utility shall in no
way be held liable for the replacement, repair, or re-erection of any
fence within said easement.
B. Fence materials. Except in the agricultural, manufacturing and P-3
Airport District, fences shall not be constructed of chain link, wire
mesh, barbed wire, electrically charged fence, or topped with sharp
edged materials.
C. Maximum fence height.
Table 910: Maximum Permitted Fence Height
Districts Front yard Side Yard Rear Yard
Agricultural
Districts
8 feet 8 feet 8 feet
Residential
Districts
4 feet 6 feet 6 feet
Business
Districts
4 feet 8 feet 8 feet
Manufacturing
Districts
— — —
Public Interest
Districts
4 feet 8 feet 8 feet
§ 44-910 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-910
1:1777
§ 44-911. [Ch. 44, 9-11] Performance standards.
Diagram 910
A. Applicability. The standards of this section are applicable to all
development in all zoning districts unless otherwise noted. All uses
shall also comply with all applicable Federal and state requirements
that exceed the requirements of this Code.
B. General standards. No land or building in any district shall be used or
occupied in any manner that creates any dangerous, injurious, noxious,
or otherwise objectionable fire, explosive, or other hazard, noise or
vibration, smoke, dust, odor, or other form of air pollution, heat, cold,
dampness, electrical or other substance, condition, or element in such a
manner, or in an amount, as to affect adversely the surrounding area or
adjoining premises.
C. Noise. The following standards shall apply to any zoning district,
excluding the agricultural and manufacturing districts and the P-3
Airport District.
(1) The operation of a use shall be conducted in a manner so that the
intensive sound level at the nearest property line of any occupied
use (excluding such uses in the agricultural and manufacturing
districts and the P-3 Airport District) shall not exceed the following
noise standards (decibels) for the cumulative periods:
Table 911: Maximum Sound Level at Property Line (dB)
Duration of Measurement
(cumulative period)
Noise Standard
(Maximum dB)
30 minutes in any hour 45
15 minutes in any hour 50
§ 44-910 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-911
1:1778
Table 911: Maximum Sound Level at Property Line (dB)
Duration of Measurement
(cumulative period)
Noise Standard
(Maximum dB)
5 minutes in any hour 55
1 minute in any hour 60
Anytime 65
(2) If the ambient sound level within the adjacent use exceeds the
applicable standard for the cumulative period specified above, the
applicable standard for that period shall be the ambient sound
level.
(3) Pure or impulsive noise. If the source of noise a use emits a pure or
impulsive noise, the noise standards for the applicable period shall
be reduced by five decibels.
(4) Measurement period and sound level meter. For the purposes of
enforcement of these conditions a sound level meter which satisfies
the requirement of the American National Standards Institute
(ANSI) S1 4-1971 (or the most recent revision thereof) or Type S2A
meter shall be used. The measurement period shall be anyone onehour
period during the hours of the use's operation.
D. Outdoor lighting.
(1) General. All outdoor lights used to illuminate any lot in a business,
manufacturing or public interest district that is adjacent to or
across a street from any lot in a residential district shall be so
shielded and directed as to protect such residentially zoned lots
from direct or reflected glare.
(2) Submission requirements. Installation of outdoor lighting for any
parking lot, proposed new development or similar purpose shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department of Community
Development. A qualified lighting professional must prepare all
lighting plans. The lighting supplier shall be required to submit a
certificate of compliance to the City to verify the installation of the
proper light fixtures. Lighting plans must include the following
information:
(a) A site photometric plan indicating foot-candle (fc) levels at
grade to the lot lines.
(b) Specifications for all luminaires, poles, and luminaire mounting
arms.
(c) Lighting specifications including foot-candle initial averages
and maximum-to-minimum uniformity ratio.
§ 44-911 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-911
1:1779
(d) The location, mounting height, and lamp intensity for all
exterior luminaires.
(e) An after-hours security lighting plan indicating not more than
33% of site lighting as operational.
(3) Architectural compatibility. Outdoor lighting fixtures must be
compatible with the architectural elements located throughout the
development.
(4) Prohibition against glare. Outdoor lighting shall not create a glare
that may be hazardous for motorists, bicyclists, or pedestrians.
(5) Luminaires. To prevent unreasonable light pollution, any luminaire
and all non-decorative, wall-mounted luminaires used for area light
shall use a full cutoff luminaire positioned in a way that the cutoff
effect is maximized. Tilt arms are prohibited. Decorative light
fixtures must include internal louvers to minimize glare as
determined by the Department of Community Development.
(6) Facade and fascia lighting.
(a) The exterior building facade lighting power shall not exceed
0.25W/ft2 of the illuminated area. Floodlights used for facade
lighting may be no farther from the building than 1/3 the
distance of the building height. The mounting height of such
floodlights shall not exceed the building height.
(b) Fascia lighting is limited to the street-facing side of the
building and may not exceed an area twice the size of the
building sign.
(7) Lighting context. Outdoor lighting must consider existing light
sources that impact the site and land uses that will be impacted by
the lighting.
(a) To prevent lighting redundancy, proposed new outdoor lighting
must factor in existing light affecting the site, including light
provided by public light fixtures.
(b) All outdoor lighting shall have fixtures that shield affected
residential areas and public rights-of-way from all direct light.
(8) Light levels, Luminaire Mounting Position, and Timing of Parking
Areas.
(a) Lighting levels must meet a uniformity ratio of 20:1.
(b) Average initial light levels may not exceed 1 fc in residential
zoning districts and shall not exceed 2 fc in other districts
regulated by this Code.
§ 44-911 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-911
1:1780
(c) Light levels created by proposed new outdoor lighting shall not
exceed 1 fc at the property line.
(d) Canopy lighting. All lighting under a canopy must be cutoff or
recessed, with no lens dropping below the horizontal plane of
the canopy. Light levels under the canopy shall not exceed an
average of 25 fc at grade.
(e) Display areas. Areas dedicated to the display of merchandise
may have an average light level of up to 10 fc.
(f) All exterior lighting shall be controlled by a photo sensor, time
switch, or other automated mechanism that reduces exterior
lighting when sufficient daylight is available and extinguishes
no more than one hour after the close of business, excluding
lighting for security purposes. Site security lighting shall not
exceed 33% of the luminaires. Individual luminaires may not
increase intensity for security lighting purposes.
(9) Lighting exceptions.
(a) All temporary lighting needed by the police, fire, or other
municipal departments, emergency services, as well as all
vehicular luminaires, shall be exempt from the requirements of
this article.
(b) All hazard warning luminaires required by law are exempt
from the requirements of this article.
(c) Recreational and outdoor event lighting, for events permitted
by the City of Bloomington, is exempt only during times the
lighted area is in use. Nonetheless, recreational, and outdoor
event lighting shall be installed in a way that minimizes light
emitted above the horizontal plane of the luminaires and light
spillover onto adjacent property.
(d) Lighting ordinarily associated with a holiday.
(e) Other exceptions as required by law.
§ 44-911 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-911
1:1781

ARTICLE X
Use Provisions
§ 44-1001. [Ch. 44, 10-1] Purpose and intent.
This section is established in recognition that certain uses cannot be treated
in the same manner as other uses due to their very nature and unique
characteristics which may affect public health, safety and welfare; establish
a public nuisance; conflict with the character of a neighborhood; impair
the social and economic well-being of neighboring properties; impair the
general development of an area; or operate in a manner contrary to the
intent and purpose of this Code. These uses, when properly placed and
regulated, can contribute to the economic vitality of the City. Therefore,
it is the purpose of this section to specify minimum standards that shall
be required for certain land uses, in addition to the underlying zoning
district regulations, to improve compatibility with neighboring properties
and discourage incompatible land uses.
§ 44-1002. [Ch. 44, 10-2] Applicability.
The provisions of this section apply to all Zoning Districts unless indicated
otherwise. If there is a conflict between this section and the individual
requirements of the Zoning District, the Zoning Administrator shall
determine which standards control.
§ 44-1003. [Ch. 44, 10-3] Airports and landing fields.
§ 44-1004. [Ch. 44, 10-4] Animal detention facilities, kennels with
outdoor exercise.
A. Site plan approval shall be required pursuant to § 44-1709 of this Code.
In addition to the stated site plan requirements, the site plan shall also
indicate approach zones, terminals, runways, taxi ways, aprons, and
navigational aids.
B. Maximum height. Height of structures shall be limited in accordance
with the requirements of the Federal Aviation Administration and the
Illinois Department of Aeronautics for the class of airport or landing
field being proposed.
C. The following minimum site and bulk standards shall be required for
the siting and development of any airport and landing field.
Table 1003: Airport and Landing Field Bulk Standards
Lot Standards Site Design Standards
Min. Lot
Area
Min. Lot
Width
Min. Lot
Depth Front Yard Side Yard Rear Yard
28 acres 250 feet 1,900 feet 100 feet 50 feet 100
§ 44-1001 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1004
1:1783
§ 44-1005. [Ch. 44, 10-5] Apiary, beekeeping.
No person shall maintain any colony of bees, including honey bees, combs,
honey, pollen, and brood, anywhere in the City without complying with the
following requirements.
A. Location. An animal detention facility or kennel with outdoor exercise
facilities shall not be located closer than 300 feet to a residential
district boundary line.
(1) Outdoor areas for animals (animal runs and animal exercise areas)
shall be located at least 1,000 feet away from the lot line of any lot
zoned in a Residential District, or at least 1,000 feet away from the
lot line of any lot that is the site of a dwelling.
B. Screening. In addition to the requirements of Article XIII of this Code, a
six-foot high fence shall be required to enclose outdoor animal areas.
C. Building height. The maximum permitted building height shall be 15
feet or 1 1/2 stories, whichever is lower.
D. The following minimum site standards shall be required for the siting
and development of any animal detention facility or kennel with outdoor
exercise.
Table 1004: Animal Detention, Kennels with Outdoor Exercise Bulk Standards
Lot Standards Site Design Standards
Min. Lot Area Min. Lot Width Front Yard Side Yard Rear Yard
1 acre 100 feet 20 feet 20 feet 20 feet
A. It shall be the duty of any person keeping honey bees on property in the
City to maintain each colony so as not to create a public nuisance.
B. Honey bee colonies shall, in addition, shall be maintained in the
following condition:
(1) All honey bee hives shall be registered with the State Department
of Agriculture as required by state law.
(2) Colonies shall be maintained in movable frames or similar hives
located in the side or rear yard not less than 10 feet from any
property lines.
(3) Adequate techniques, such as requeening, in handling bees, and
adequate space in the hive shall be maintained to prevent
unprovoked stinging 10 feet or more from the hive.
(4) Lots having less than one acre of land shall be permitted by right to
have not more than two hives.
§ 44-1004 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1005
1:1784
§ 44-1006. [Ch. 44, 10-6] Asphaltic concrete plants.
(5) Lots having equal to or greater than one acre of land shall be
permitted to have not more than two hives plus as a conditional use
one additional hive for every half acre of land over one acre.
C. Any other nest or colony of stinging insects, such as yellow jackets,
hornets, other varieties of bees, and wasps, including Vespidae, in
trees, buildings, underground, or in any other space, diseased colony of
honey bees, or any colony of bees not maintained in compliance this
Code, constitutes a public nuisance. The existence of a nest of wild bees
of any type, not cultivated by any person and whose honey is not
harvested by any person, shall not constitute a violation of this Code
unless such a nest is in such location as to present a threat of stinging
to any person on any public street, sidewalk, mall, park, or public space,
or to make any person in any parking lot, sidewalk, mall, park, or other
public place, or to any person in any parking lot, sidewalk, or other
place open to the public in a shopping center or other privately owned
property open to the public, or to any person on adjacent private
property.
Diagram 1005
A. Site plan approval shall be required pursuant to § 44-1709 of this Code.
In addition to the stated site plan requirements, the site plan shall also
indicate the following:
(1) Site size in acres;
(2) Existing physical features (e.g., drainage easements, streams, and
wetlands);
(3) Proposed utilities showing size, types, location, and elevations
(including water mains, valves, hydrants, sanitary sewers, and
storm sewers);
(4) Location of refuse storage areas (dumpsters must be screened in
accordance with Article XIII of this code);
(5) Outdoor lighting plan in accordance with § 44-911 of this Code;
§ 44-1005 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1006
1:1785
(6) Finished grading plan of the site at two-foot contour intervals;
(7) Drainage plan indicating direction of run-off flow, location of catch
basins and water retention and/or detention areas; land to be
dedicated for streets and drainage right-of-way and easements for
other utilities.
(8) Truck routing plan for routing truck traffic to the site of the
proposed asphaltic concrete plant.
B. Location.
(1) The closest lot line for any proposed asphalt plant shall not be
located closer than 2,000 feet from the lot line of any dwelling,
daycare center, pre-school, or school.
(2) The proposed site for the asphaltic concrete plant shall be
contiguous to a major or collector street that has been improved
(thickness and width) to accommodate the anticipated traffic in
accordance with the Bureau of Local Roads and Streets Manual,
published by the Illinois Department of Transportation.
C. Buffers and screening. In addition to the requirements of Article XIII of
this Code, the following minimum buffers and screening shall be
required.
(1) A wire mesh or chain link fence shall be installed and maintained
around the perimeter of the site. Said fence shall have a height of at
least eight feet. All gates in the fence shall be locked whenever
workers are not present.
(2) An asphaltic concrete plant shall provide a natural buffer strip at
least 100 feet wide between the working edge of any plant
operation and any property boundary. Natural buffer strip
materials may consist of earthen berm of not less than six feet in
height, hedges, rows of trees or other fast-growing foliage that will
obscure the sight of the asphalt plant's operation.
D. Paving. The facility shall have a driveway paved with an approved
concrete or asphalt/concrete surface and at least 25 feet wide wherever
any continuous truck traffic is proposed. With the exception of
equipment and material storage areas, all parking and traffic
circulation areas shall be hard surfaced.
E. Operational standards.
(1) The hours of operation for any asphaltic concrete plan shall be
limited to 6:00 a.m. to 7:30 p.m., Monday through Saturday.
Expanded hours and Sunday operations may be allowed on an
occasional basis (no more than 12 projects per year) provided such
operation is registered in advance with the City of Bloomington.
During expanded hours and Sunday operation, the City Manager
§ 44-1006 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1006
1:1786
§ 44-1007. [Ch. 44, 10-7] Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
may impose additional restrictions reasonably related to health,
safety, and welfare.
(2) The proposed asphaltic concrete plant shall comply with all
applicable regulations of the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency. Any proposed hot-mix asphaltic concrete plant shall be
equipped with a fabric filter (bag house) operating consistently
with a six to one (or less) air-to-cloth ratio or operate a wet
collector which can achieve a pressure drop of 16 inches or more or
provide an air pollution control system of at least equal quality.
(3) Any automatic batching equipment and recording equipment on a
hot-mix asphaltic concrete plant shall meet the requirements
currently set forth in the American Society for Testing Materials
(ASTM) designation 995, Paragraphs 3.6 and 3.7. Any
proportioning, sampling, and recording equipment on and at a
continuous-mix asphaltic concrete plant on the platform scales
shall meet the requirements currently set forth in the ASTM
Designation 995, Paragraphs 4.5 and 4.6.
F. Noise. In addition to the standards of § 44-911D, low frequency noise
readings from the burners at a hot-mix asphaltic concrete plant shall
not exceed the following:
(1) Ninety decibels adjacent to such asphaltic concrete plant's lot line;
(2) Eighty-five decibels at 100 feet from such lot line; and
(3) Seventy-eight decibels at 300 feet from such lot line.
G. The following minimum lot standards shall be required for the siting
and development of any asphaltic concrete plant.
Table 1006: Asphaltic Concrete Plants - Lot Standards
Min. Lot Area Min. Lot Width
10 acres 200 feet
A. Any structure devoted to a bed-and-breakfast use shall have been
constructed prior to 1950.
B. A building floor plan shall be filed as part of the application for a bedand-
breakfast establishment. The floor plan shall designate areas to be
used as a bed-and-breakfast establishment and identify all means of
egress, all required exit signs, all rest room facilities, and all food
preparation/storage areas.
C. Parking. Off-street parking spaces required pursuant to Article XII of
this Code shall be located on the same lot as the bed-and-breakfast
establishment, on an abutting lot, or on a lot not more than 500 feet
from the site of such bed-and-breakfast establishment.
§ 44-1006 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1007
1:1787
§ 44-1008. [Ch. 44, 10-8] Camps and camping establishments.
§ 44-1009. [Ch. 44, 10-9] Car washes.
D. The following minimum site and bulk standards shall be required for
the siting and development of any bed-and-breakfast establishments.
Table 1007: Bed-and-breakfast Establishment - Bulk Standards
Min. Lot Area Min. Lot Width
Max. Building
Height
7,000 square feet 60 feet 3 stories
A. Location. Camps and camping establishments shall be so located as to
have direct access from an improved major or collector roadway to
avoid routine ingress and egress through residentially developed
neighborhoods.
B. Repair work for travel trailers, recreational vehicles and similar
vehicles shall be permitted only for the maintenance and upkeep of
those vehicles housed on the property and shall be carried on only
within a completely enclosed building.
C. Permanent drinking and toilet facilities shall be provided in accordance
with applicable regulation of the McLean County Health Department.
D. Building height. The maximum permitted building height shall be 15
feet or one story, whichever is lower.
E. The following minimum site and bulk standards shall be required for
the siting and development of any camp or camping establishment.
Table 1008: Camps and Camping Establishments Bulk
Standards
Lot Standards Site Design Standards
Min. Lot
Area
Min. Lot
Width Front Yard Side Yard Rear Yard
10 acres 300 feet 20 feet 20 feet 20 feet
A. Location. The facility shall be located on a major or collector street or a
frontage road and shall not be located closer than 120 feet of a
Residential District boundary.
B. Site standards.
(1) All car washing facilities shall be within either a completely
enclosed building or a canopy structure.
(2) Curb cuts shall not be permitted within 10 feet of a side lot line.
§ 44-1007 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1009
1:1788
§ 44-1010. [Ch. 44, 10-10] Cemeteries.
(3) The sale of automobile accessories not directly related to the
cleaning of automobiles shall be prohibited.
C. Parking. All exterior lighting shall comply with § 44-911 and shall not
increase the intensity of light within 10 feet of a Residential District
boundary line by more than 1/2 footcandles.
D. Building height. The maximum permitted building height shall be 20
feet or one story, whichever is lower.
E. The following minimum site and bulk standards shall be required for
the siting and development of any car washes.
Table 1009: Car Washes Bulk Standards
Lot Standards Site Design Standards
Min. Lot Area Min. Lot Width Front Yard Side Yard Rear Yard
10,000 square
feet
70 feet 40 feet 15 feet 20 feet
A. Site standards.
(1) Water shall be available within 400 feet of all grave sites.
(2) Trash receptacles shall be located adjacent to internal roadways
and not more than 200 feet apart. No rubbish shall be allowed to
accumulate upon the site except within trash receptacles.
(3) Storage of any maintenance machinery or other equipment shall be
within completely enclosed buildings.
(4) In addition to compliance with § 44-911, any security lighting on
premises shall be no greater than a residential streetlight (4,000
lumens) and shall have fixtures that direct light away from
adjoining residential structures.
B. Roadways. All roadways shall be a minimum of 14 feet in width and
shall have a minimum surface improvement of Class A-3 or equivalent
with an eight inch crushed aggregate base.
C. Building or structure height. The maximum permitted height for any
building or structure shall be 30 feet or two stories, whichever is lower.
D. The following minimum lot standards shall be required for the siting
and development of any cemetery.
Table 1010: Cemetery Lot Standards
Min. Lot Area Min. Lot Width
2 acres 150 feet
§ 44-1009 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1011
1:1789
§ 44-1011. [Ch. 44, 10-11] Chicken-keeping.
§ 44-1012. [Ch. 44, 10-12] Clubs and lodges.
A. On lots less than or equal to one acre with a primary use of a singlefamily
or two-family dwelling, the keeping of up to four chickens may be
permitted as an accessory use and shall comply with Chapter 8 and
Chapter 22 of the Bloomington Code, 1960, as amended.
B. On lots greater than one acre with a primary use of a single-family or
two-family dwelling, the keeping of up to four chickens plus one
additional chicken per half acre in excess of one acre may be permitted
as an accessory use and shall comply with Chapter 8 and Chapter 22 of
the Bloomington Code, 1960, as amended.
C. Neither the keeping of roosters nor the keeping of chickens for
slaughter shall be permitted.
D. Chickens shall be provided with a covered enclosure and must be kept
in the covered enclosure or a fenced enclosure at all times.
E. Enclosures are not permitted in any front or side yard and shall be set
back a minimum distance of 10 feet from all property lines.
F. All feed and other items associated with the keeping of chickens that
are likely to attract or to become affected by pests shall be protected
and stored.
Diagram 1011
A. The following minimum lot standards shall be required for the siting
and development of any club or lodge.
§ 44-1011 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1012
1:1790
§ 44-1013. [Ch. 44, 10-13] Community centers, sports and fitness
establishments.
§ 44-1014. [Ch. 44, 10-14] Community reception establishments.
Table 1012: Clubs and Lodges Standards
Min. Lot Area Min. Lot Width
10,000 square feet 70 feet
A. Fencing. A forty-two inch high wire mesh or chain link fence shall
enclose children's outdoor play areas.
B. The following minimum lot standards shall be required for the siting
and development of any community center or sports and fitness
establishment.
Table 1013: Community Centers, Sports and Fitness Lot
Standards
Min. Lot Area Min. Lot Width
20,000 square feet 100 feet
A. Location. In residential areas, a community reception establishment
shall be separated from other community reception establishments by a
minimum distance (from lot line to lot line) of 600 feet.
B. Any structure devoted to a community reception establishment use
shall have been constructed prior to 1950.
C. A community reception establishment shall be occupied by the owner
and/or operator of the establishment.
D. A building floor plan shall be filed as part of the application for a
community reception establishment. The floor plan shall designate
areas to be used as a community reception establishment and identify
all means of egress, all required exit signs, all rest room facilities, and
all food preparation/storage areas.
E. Operational standards.
(1) At least 24 hours prior to any event, the owner/operator of the
reception establishment shall transmit written notice to the
Director of Community Development stating the date, hours of
operation, and expected maximum occupancy.
(2) The maximum permitted occupancy for an event is 30 persons
(exclusive of those persons staying at the bed-and-breakfast
portion of the premises), and there shall be no more than three
events per week. However, events with occupancy of up to 100
persons (exclusive of those persons staying at the bed-andbreakfast
portion of the premises) may be permitted for not more
§ 44-1012 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1014
1:1791
than two events per month subject to a limitation of 18 such events
per calendar year.
(3) Indoor social events shall not begin prior to 9:00 a.m. nor end after
10:00 p.m., prevailing time.
(4) Outdoor social events shall not begin prior to 9:00 a.m. nor end
after 9:00 p.m., prevailing time.
(5) Outdoor amplified sounds are prohibited.
F. Any articles offered for sale at community reception establishments
must be arranged in a home like manner; the volume of such sales must
be such that the sales are incidental to the principal use of the premises
as a community reception establishment.
G. Parking.
(1) Valet parking shall be required for all community reception
establishment events accommodating more than 30 people if onsite
parking is not available.
(2) A plan showing the parking lot configuration shall be filed and kept
current, regardless of whether the parking is on site or off site.
(3) Off-street parking spaces required pursuant to Article XII or this
Code shall be located on the same lot as the community reception
establishment, on an abutting lot, or on a lot not more than 500 feet
from the site of the community reception establishment.
(4) If the parking is provided off-site, the parking lot must be owned by
the owner of such community reception establishment or controlled
by a five-year lease on such lot. If the off-site parking lot is leased,
activities at the community reception establishment must be
scheduled at such times so that activities taking place on the
premises of the parking lot not interfere with the ability of the
community reception establishment to provide adequate parking as
required by this subsection.
H. The following minimum lot standards shall be required for the siting
and development of any community reception establishments.
Table 1014: Community Reception Establishment - Lot
Standards
Min. Lot Area Min. Lot Width
16,500 square feet 100 feet
I. Special use permit.
(1) The special use permit for a community reception establishment, if
approved by the City Council, shall be issued to the owner thereof,
but shall not transfer to a subsequent owner upon the sale of such
§ 44-1014 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1014
1:1792
§ 44-1015. [Ch. 44, 10-15] Commercial recreation facilities.
premises unless and until a new special use permit for such
establishment is approved by the City Council.
(2) All special use permits for community reception establishments
shall be reviewed on an annual calendar year basis by the Board of
Zoning Appeals in liaison with the Director of Community
Development and the City Fire Marshal to insure compliance with
the City Code.
A. Arcades and Amusement Centers shall meet the following standards.
(1) Location.
(a) The lot line of an arcade or amusement center shall not be
located any closer than 500 feet to the lot line of a lot occupied
by place of worship, elementary or secondary school, or any
establishment principally engaged in the business of selling or
dispensing alcoholic beverages on the premises.
(b) The lot line of an arcade or amusement center shall not be
located closer than 1,000 feet to the lot line of any other lot
that is occupied by an arcade or amusement center.
(c) The arcade or amusement center shall be located in a separate
room, separated from other uses on the premises and from
pedestrian circulation to and from such other uses.
(2) Operational standards.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to set up for operation or
allow operation of more than 60 such mechanical, electronic
and/or video type game machines in anyone location or
establishment in the B-1, B-2, and B-3 Districts and more than
140 such machines in anyone location or establishment in the
C-3 District.
(b) The establishment shall maintain a minimum of six inches of
space between each game machine.
(c) The game room shall be arranged so that there is a
management attendant within the room or such that
management attendants outside the room can easily see and
supervise the interior of the room.
(d) The hours of operation for an arcade or amusement center
shall be limited to 10:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m., Sunday through
Thursday and 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m., Fridays and Saturdays.
(3) The establishment shall be posted "No Smoking," shall not contain
cigarette vending machines, shall be supervised by an adult over 21
years of age.
§ 44-1014 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1015
1:1793
§ 44-1016. [Ch. 44, 10-16] Country clubs, golf clubs, golf courses.
(4) The establishment shall maintain a minimum level of illumination of
at least 20 footcandles.
(5) Noise. The arcade or amusement center shall be separated from
adjacent occupiable areas by a wall assembly extending from the
floor to the roof, with a sound transmission class (STC) of at least
56, per American Society of Testing and Materials (ASTM)
designations E-90 or E-336, and E-413.
(6) The following minimum site and bulk standards shall be required
for the siting and development of any arcade or amusement center.
Table 1015A: Arcade and Amusement Center Bulk
Standards
Min. Lot Area Min. Lot Width
Max. Floor Area
Ratio
10,000 square feet 80 feet 0.38
B. Race tracks and Go-Kart Tracks shall meet the following standards.
(1) Location. Race tracks and go-kart tracks shall be located adjacent
to major streets or adjacent to collector streets which are within 1/
4 mile of major streets and shall not be located within 500 feet of a
Residential District boundary.
(2) Site access. Vehicular entrances and exits must be separated by a
distance not less than 200 feet.
(3) Buffering and screening. In addition to the requirements of Article
XIII of this Code, wire mesh or chain link fence at least six feet in
height shall be installed around the perimeter of the track.
(4) The following minimum site and bulk standards shall be required
for the siting and development of any race track or go kart track.
Table 1015B: Race Track and Go Kart Track Bulk Standards
Lot Standards Site Design Standards
Min. Lot Area Min. Lot Width Front Yard Side Yard Rear Yard
10 acres 300 feet 100 feet 100 feet 100 feet
C. Shooting Galleries and Rifle Ranges shall be located within completely
enclosed buildings and have the favorable recommendation of the Chief
of Police of the City.
A. A solid wood, masonry, or wire mesh fence at least six feet in height
shall be provided at the end of all fairways if they are in line with a
dwelling or a public right-of-way.
§ 44-1015 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1016
1:1794
§ 44-1017. [Ch. 44, 10-17] Fairgrounds, agricultural exhibits.
§ 44-1018. [Ch. 44, 10-18] Food pantry.
B. Building height. The maximum permitted building height shall be 35
feet or two stories, whichever is lower.
C. The following minimum lot standards shall be required for the siting
and development of any country club, golf club or golf course.
Table 1016: Country Club, Golf Club, Golf Course Lot Standards
Min. Lot Area Min. Lot Width Min. Lot Depth
60 acres 300 feet 2,200 feet
A. Location. Access shall be located on a major or collector street or road.
B. Paving. All roadways shall have a minimum surface improvement of
Class A-3 or equivalent with an eight inch crushed aggregate base.
C. No motor vehicle racetracks shall be erected or operated.
D. Building or structure height. The maximum permitted height for any
building or structure shall be 50 feet or four stories, whichever is lower.
E. The following minimum site and bulk standards shall be required for
the siting and development of any fairground or agricultural exhibit.
Table 1017: Fairgrounds, Agricultural Exhibits Bulk Standards
Lot Standards Site Design Standards
Min. Lot
Area
Min. Lot
Width Front Yard Side Yard Rear Yard
25 acres 500 feet 150 feet 100 feet 100 feet
A. Location. No structure containing a food pantry shall be located within
300 feet of an R-1A, R-1B or R-1C district.
B. The food pantry activity shall not occupy more than 25% of the floor
space of any story of the structure containing the food pantry activity.
C. Operational standards.
(1) All deliveries of goods to the food pantry and distribution of goods
by the food pantry shall be conducted through the rear door. If no
such rear door is present or useable, an appropriate side door may
be approved.
(2) Hours of distribution shall be between 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday. Should an individual client experience an
emergency outside of those hours or on the weekend, the food
pantry may act to help that client.
§ 44-1016 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1018
1:1795
§ 44-1019. [Ch. 44, 10-19] Group living facilities, boarding and
rooming houses, homes for the aged.
D. Screening. In addition to the requirements of Article XIII of this Code,
the following screening standards shall apply.
(1) All parking, delivery (receiving) and distribution areas shall be
screened.
(2) Screening shall be placed along those lot lines, of the lot containing
the food pantry, which are contiguous to lots zoned R-2 or R-3A.
(3) All screening shall consist of a six-foot high opaque fence.
E. Parking. Off-street parking requirements will be based upon the
principal use of the structure containing the food pantry.
F. Signage. The food pantry shall erect a sign, the size and place of which
are governed by Article XIV of this Code, which clearly identifies the
structure containing the food pantry.
A. Location. Agency-Supervised Homes and Agency-Operated Group
Homes shall be separated from another facility of the same use by a
distance of at least 1,000 feet.
B. Distribution. No more than three Agency-Operated Family Homes shall
be located on a block face (both sides of a street between its
intersection with two other consecutive streets).
C. Parking.
(1) Access to off-street parking areas shall not be provided from an
alley unless the alley constructed of all-weather pavement and has
been designated by the City as one-way.
(2) Off-street parking shall be fully screened along the rear of the
property.
(3) All parking and maneuvering shall be provided on-site; said parking
shall be illuminated with lighting fixtures that comply with
§ 44-911D and that shall not increase the intensity of light within
10 feet of a Residential District boundary line by more than 1/2
footcandles.
D. The following minimum site and bulk standards shall be required for
the siting and development of any Group Living Facility, boarding, or
rooming house, or home for the aged.
§ 44-1018 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1019
1:1796
§ 44-1020. [Ch. 44, 10-20] Home occupations.
Table 1019: Group Living Facilities, Boarding and Rooming
Houses, Homes for the Aged Site and Bulk Standards
Use Min. Lot Area Min. Lot Width
Home for the
Aged
400 square feet per
occupant plus 2,000
square feet for
supervisor's dwelling
where applicable
60 feet
Group Living
Facility;
Boarding and
Rooming Houses
400 square feet per
occupant plus 2,400
square feet for
supervisor's dwelling
where applicable
60 feet
A. Home occupations. A home occupation or profession shall be permitted
as an accessory use in the A district subject to the following
restrictions:
(1) A home occupation shall be conducted entirely within a dwelling
unit or an accessory building and shall occupy no more than 25% of
the gross floor area of the building or 500 square feet, whichever is
less;
(2) The existence of the home occupation shall not be apparent beyond
the boundaries of the site;
(3) No outdoor storage shall be permitted, except in the Agricultural
District where such outdoor storage is customary and incidental to
the use of the land;
(4) No special outside entrance to the dwelling shall be required or
provided in connection with the home occupation;
(5) No sign shall be permitted for the business associated with the
home occupation;
(6) Except for activities associated with the principal permitted use of
the site or a permitted accessory roadside stand, a home
occupation shall not create pedestrian, automobile, or truck traffic
significantly in excess of the normal amount of the district;
(7) Excluding the Agricultural District, not more than one truck, with a
maximum capacity of one ton, incidental to a home occupation may
be kept on the site. The number of parking spaces available to a
dwelling unit housing a home occupation shall not be reduced to
less than the number required pursuant to Article XII, Off Street
Parking and Loading;
§ 44-1019 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1020
1:1797
§ 44-1021. [Ch. 44, 10-21] Hotel or motel.
§ 44-1022. [Ch. 44, 10-22] Junkyards.
(8) Except for activities associated with the principal permitted use of
the site or a permitted accessory roadside stand, no commodities
shall be sold, nor shall any services be rendered, that require
receipt and delivery of merchandise, goods, or equipment by other
than ordinary mail or parcel post;
(9) No person other than a resident of the dwelling unit shall be
employed on-site or report to work at the site in the conduct of the
home occupation;
(10) A barber shop, beauty shop, or other personal service business
shall occupy no more than 300 square feet or 25% of gross floor
area within a structure, whichever is less. Such home occupation
shall be limited to serving one customer at a time by appointment
only;
(11) Automobile based businesses including but not limited to towing,
taxi, and repair services shall not be permitted as a home
occupation.
(12) The provisions of this section shall not apply to home-based
daycare facilities licensed by the Illinois Department of Children
and Family Services.
A. The following minimum site and bulk standards shall be required for
the siting and development of any hotel or motel.
Table 1021: Hotel and Motel Bulk Standards
Lot Standards Site Design Standards
Min. Lot
Area
Min. Lot
Width Front Yard Side Yard Rear Yard
20,000
square feet
or 1,000
square feet
per guest
room,
whichever is
greater
100 feet 40 feet 40 feet 40 feet
A. Location. No junkyard shall be located closer than 500 feet to a
Residential District boundary line or to the property line of a day care,
school, place of worship, community center, home for the aged or
hospital.
§ 44-1020 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1022
1:1798
§ 44-1023. [Ch. 44, 10-23] Manufactured and mobile home sales.
B. Site access. The site must have direct access to a major street or
highway; vehicles shall not go through residential areas to access the
site. There shall be only one point of ingress and egress.
C. Paving. The facility shall have a driveway paved with an approved
concrete or asphalt/concrete surface and at least 25 feet wide. All
interior roads, driveways, parking lots and loading and unloading areas
not required to be paved shall be constructed of an all-weather surface
and be kept in as dust-free condition as possible, using application of
dust-inhibitors if necessary to limit the nuisance caused by wind-borne
dust.
D. Buffers and screening. In addition to the requirements of Article XIII of
this Code, the following requirements shall apply:
(1) A junkyard shall be enclosed by a solid, opaque perimeter fence,
the material of which shall be required to be approved by the
Director of Community Development, at least eight feet in height.
All gates in the fence shall be locked whenever workers are not
present. The fence shall be of uniform height, uniform texture, and
color, and shall be maintained to ensure maximum safety to the
public, obscure the junk from normal view of the public, and
preserve the general welfare of the neighborhood.
(2) In addition to the fence, an opaque vegetative screen shall be
provided around the perimeter of the site to provide year-round
buffering to a height of at least six feet tall within four years of
planting. The owner or operator of the junkyard shall maintain such
landscaping in good condition and shall replace dead or diseased
vegetation as necessary to maintain a continuous screen.
E. All junk, debris, equipment, and other materials associated with the
junkyard shall be kept within a completely enclosed building or within
the confines of the perimeter fence.
F. Scrap, junk, or other materials shall be piled or stored so that they are
not visible from outside the fenced in area and do not exceed the height
of the enclosing fence or wall within 50 feet of the inside of such fence
or wall.
G. The site shall be maintained in such a condition as to prevent the
breeding or harboring of rats, insects, or other vermin and to prevent
the collection of stagnant water.
A. Use of a manufactured home or mobile home for living or sleeping
purposes on the premises shall be prohibited unless expressly
requested by the petitioner and approved by the City Council.
§ 44-1022 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1023
1:1799
§ 44-1024. [Ch. 44, 10-24] Medical or dental office or clinic.
§ 44-1025. [Ch. 44, 10-25] Mining/quarrying.
B. No manufactured home or mobile home that has been damaged by
wind, fire, explosion, or other such calamity shall be stored on the
premises for more than 48 hours.
C. Building height. The maximum permitted building height shall be 35
feet or two stories, whichever is lower.
D. The following minimum site and bulk standards shall be required for
the siting and development of any manufactured and mobile home sales
facility.
Table 1023: Manufactured and Mobile Home Sales Bulk
Standards
Lot Standards Site Design Standards
Min. Lot
Area
Min. Lot
Width Front Yard Side Yard Rear Yard
1 acre 200 feet 20 feet 20 feet 20 feet
A. Applicability. The provisions of this section shall apply to medical or
dental offices or clinics in the R-3B, C-1 and S-1 Districts.
B. The total floor area of the clinic shall not exceed 30% of the net lot area.
C. In addition to the provisions of Article XIII of this Code, a minimum of
20% of the net lot area shall be landscaped.
D. Building height. The maximum permitted building height shall be 35
feet or two stories, whichever is lower.
E. The following minimum lot standards shall be required for the siting
and development of any medical or dental office or clinic.
Table 1024: Medical or Dental Office or Clinic Lot Standards
Min. Lot Area Min. Lot Width
20,000 square feet 100 feet
A. Site plan approval shall be required pursuant to § 44-1709 of this Code.
In addition to the stated site plan requirements, the site plan
application shall also indicate the following:
(1) Areas to be excavated;
(2) Grading plan (existing and proposed topography indicated at twofoot
intervals);
(3) Watercourses and drainage ways through the site;
§ 44-1023 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1025
1:1800
(4) Erosion and sediment control devices;
(5) Proposed location for sorting, grading, crushing and similar
operations;
(6) Locations of vehicular access and egress;
(7) Proposed exterior lighting;
(8) A reclamation plan indicating the intended method of site
restoration and reuse. Such a plan shall not encourage spot
development that would potentially conflict with surrounding land
uses.
B. Location.
(1) The closest lot line for any proposed mining or quarrying use (e.g.,
excavating, sorting, crushing, loading, hauling, storage or cutting
of stone, clay or sand) shall not be located within 2,000 feet of the
lot line of a dwelling, a daycare or school.
(2) The proposed site for the mining or quarrying use shall be
contiguous to a major or collector street that has been improved
(thickness and width) to accommodate the anticipated traffic in
accordance with the Bureau of Local Roads and Streets Manual,
published by the Illinois Department of Transportation.
C. Buffers and screening. In addition to the requirements of Article XIII of
this Code, the following minimum buffers and screening shall be
required.
(1) A natural buffer strip at least 100 feet wide must be maintained
between the working edge of any excavation or quarry and any
property boundary. Natural buffer strip materials may consist of
earthen berm of not less than six feet in height, hedges, rows of
trees or other fast-growing foliage that will obscure the sight of the
mining operation.
(2) A wire mesh or chain link fence shall be installed and maintained
around the perimeter of the mining or quarrying site. Said fence
shall have a height of at least eight feet. All gates in the fence shall
be locked whenever workers are not present.
D. Paving. The facility shall have a driveway paved with an approved
concrete or asphalt/concrete surface and at least 25 feet wide and
extending 250 feet insides the main access gate, so as to limit adjoining
lots and public roads from the nuisance caused by road debris and
wind-borne dust. All roads, driveways, parking lots and loading and
unloading areas not required to be paved shall be kept in as dust-free
condition as possible, using application of dust-inhibitors if necessary to
limit the nuisance caused by wind-borne dust.
E. Operational standards.
§ 44-1025 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1025
1:1801
§ 44-1026. [Ch. 44, 10-26] Mini warehouses.
(1) The hours of operation for a mine or quarry shall be limited to 6:00
a.m. to 7:30 p.m., Monday through Saturday. Expanded hours and
Sunday operations may be allowed on an occasional basis (no more
than 12 projects per year) provided such operation is registered in
advance with the City of Bloomington. During expanded hours and
Sunday operation, the City Manager may impose additional
restrictions reasonably related to health, safety, and welfare.
(2) The proposed mining or quarrying use shall comply with all
applicable regulations of the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency.
F. Noise. Noise shall not exceed sound levels set forth in 35 Ill. Code Part
900.101 et seq. as promulgated from time to time by the Illinois
Pollution Control Board pursuant to 415 ILCS 5/25.
G. The site shall be provided with a sustainable water supply for fire
protection by fire department pumping apparatus.
H. A surety bond or other reasonable requirement of assurance that such a
reclamation project will be completed shall be required by the City
Council in the event that the mine operator is not required to post bond
under the Surface Mined Land Conservation and Reclamation Act.
I. Potable water wells and water supplies shall be protected per the
Illinois Groundwater Protection Act.
A. Buffers and screening. In addition to the requirements of Article XIII of
this Code, the following minimum buffers and screening shall be
required.
(1) A six-foot high opaque fence shall be required around the perimeter
of the lot to be used as a mini warehouse site.
(2) A chain link or wire mesh fence interlaced or interwoven with
opaque strips may qualify as meeting the requirements for a solid
opaque fence, if approved by the Zoning Administrator.
(3) A landscaping strip, 12 feet in width, shall be provided along all
street frontages and along borders where a mini-warehouse site
abuts any Residential District.
B. Site circulation.
(1) All one-way driveways shall provide for one ten-foot wide parking
lane and one fifteen-foot wide travel lane. Traffic direction and
parking shall be designated by signing or painting.
(2) All two-way driveways shall provide for one ten-foot wide parking
lane and two twelve-foot travel lanes.
§ 44-1025 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1026
1:1802
§ 44-1027. [Ch. 44, 10-27] Mobile food and beverage vending.
§ 44-1028. [Ch. 44, 10-28] Recycling facilities, refuse disposal
services, sanitary landfills, solid waste disposal areas, waste
transfer stations.
(3) The parking lanes may be eliminated when the driveway does not
serve storage cubicles.
C. Maximum floor area. No storage cubicle shall have a gross floor area
greater than 5,000 square feet.
D. Building height. The maximum permitted building height shall be 35
feet or two stories, whichever is lower.
E. The following minimum site and bulk standards shall be required for
the siting and development of any mini-warehouse facility.
Table 1026: Mini Warehouses Site and Bulk Standards
Lot Standards Site Design Standards
Min. Lot
Area
Min. Lot
Width Front Yard Side Yard Rear Yard
2 acres 100 feet 20 feet 20 feet 20 feet
A. Operated by principal use. A mobile food and beverage vending
business operated by the principal use shall be registered with the City
of Bloomington. Said registration shall require the submission of the
following information:
(1) Description of goods to be sold;
(2) Hours of operation;
(3) Site plan showing proposed location of such business; and
(4) Name, address, and local telephone numbers of the person in
charge of the portable food and beverage vending business.
B. Operated by independent vendor. A mobile food and beverage vending
businesses operated by other than the principal use itself must be
licensed by the City of Bloomington. A single location license shall be
granted upon submission of the same information required for a
temporary sales business as required be § 44-907 of this Code. An
annual license holder shall not be required to provide site specific
information as part of their application but shall be responsible for
meeting the standards as written.
C. All mobile food and beverage vending businesses shall comply with the
requirements of § 44-907A(5) through (11) of this Code for temporary
sales.
§ 44-1026 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1028
1:1803
§ 44-1029. [Ch. 44, 10-29] Refractory lined pit burners.
A. Location.
(1) A recycling facility, refuse disposal service, sanitary landfill, solid
waste disposal area, or waste transfer station shall not be located
closer than 500 feet to the lot line of a dwelling or to a Residential
District boundary line.
(2) The site must be located so as to have direct access to a major
street or highway on which traffic will not go through residential
areas and shall have only one point of ingress and egress.
B. Paving. The facility shall have a driveway paved with an approved
concrete or asphalt/concrete surface and at least 25 feet wide. All
interior roads, driveways, parking lots and loading and unloading areas
not required to be paved shall be constructed of an all-weather surface
and be kept in as dust-free condition as possible, using application of
dust-inhibitors if necessary to limit the nuisance caused by wind-borne
dust.
C. Buffers and screening. In addition to the requirements of Article XIII of
this Code, such uses shall be enclosed by a solid, opaque perimeter
fence at least eight feet in height. All gates in the fence shall be locked
whenever workers are not present.
A. Location. A refractory lined pit burner shall not be located closer than
400 feet to the lot line of a dwelling or to a Residential District
boundary line.
B. Buffers and screening. In addition to the requirements of Article XIII of
this Code, the following minimum buffers and screening shall be
required.
(1) The site shall be enclosed by a perimeter fence at least eight feet in
height.
(2) The site shall be screened from any adjacent land by an evergreen
landscaping screen at least eight feet in height.
C. No combustible material and/or vegetation shall be located closer than
20 feet to the exterior surface of the refractory lined pit burner.
D. The refractory lined pit burner shall be considered accessory to a
required principal structure on the same lot.
E. The hours of operation for a refractory lined pit burner shall be limited
to 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.
F. Special use permit. The applicant for a special use permit shall submit
written documentation to the Board of Zoning Appeals verifying
compliance with all Illinois Environmental Protection Agency
§ 44-1028 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1029
1:1804
§ 44-1030. [Ch. 44, 10-30] Roadside markets.
§ 44-1031. [Ch. 44, 10-31] Solar energy conversion facilities.
requirements and performance standards for refractory lined pit
burners.
G. Building height. The maximum permitted building height shall be 15
feet.
H. The following minimum site and bulk standards shall be required for
the siting and development of any refractory lined pit burner.
Table 1029: Refractory Lined Pit Burners Site and Bulk
Standards
Lot Standards Site Design Standards
Min. Lot
Area
Min. Lot
Width Front Yard Side Yard Rear Yard
20,000
square feet
110 feet 50 feet 50 feet 50 feet
A. Roadside markets are a permitted only when accessory to a permitted
agricultural use in A District or commercial use in the B-1 District.
B. Sales of agricultural produce grown on the premises, or value-added
products (e.g., jams, relishes, and baked goods) derived from produce
grown on the premises, are permitted in a roadside market. The sale of
durable goods unrelated to the agricultural use (e.g., antiques,
fireworks) and products that are not derived from produce grown on
the premises is not permitted.
C. The maximum permitted area for a building, structure or outdoor sales
area devoted to retail sales is 600 square feet.
D. A roadside market shall be set back at least 15 feet from a front
property line.
A. Construction and operation of solar energy conversion facilities shall
comply with all applicable local, state, and federal requirements,
including but not limited to safety, construction, environmental,
electrical, communications and aviation requirements.
B. Effect of approval. Any authorization granted to an individual property
owner for a solar energy conversion facility shall not be construed to
bar owners or tenants of any adjacent property from ordinary or
permitted building, landscaping, or other accessory improvements,
even if such improvements may diminish the function of said solar
energy conversion facility.
C. Concealment. All wiring associated with a solar energy conversion
facility shall be underground, hardwired within the structure, or
§ 44-1029 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1031
1:1805
contained within a raceway that complements the site or building
materials of the principal structure.
D. Decommissioning. Any abandoned or non-functioning solar energy
conversion facility shall be removed by the owner within 120 days of the
day on which the system last functioned. The owner is solely
responsible for removal of the system and all costs, financial or
otherwise, of system removal.
E. Private solar energy conversion.
Diagram 1031E
(1) Building or roof-mounted systems.
(a) Location. Solar facilities may be located on any principal or
accessory structure. Systems should be flush mounted when
possible.
(b) Height. The height of roof-mounted systems is measured from
the roof surface on which the system is mounted to the highest
edge of the system. Roof-mounted systems shall comply with
the following height standards.
§ 44-1031 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1031
1:1806
[1] Maximum height. Building or roof-mounted solar energy
systems shall not exceed the maximum allowed building
height in any zoning district.
[2] Pitched roof. Systems shall not extend beyond three feet
parallel to the roof surface of a pitched roof.
[3] Flat roof. Systems shall not extend beyond four feet
parallel to the roof surface of a flat roof.
(c) For roof-mounted systems, the total square footage of the
system panels may not exceed the total area of roof surface of
the structure to which the system is attached. The collector
surface and mounting devices for roof-mounted solar energy
systems shall not extend beyond the perimeter of the building
on which the system is mounted or built; however, solar roofing
tiles and shingles may extend to the edge of the roof eaves.
(d) Solar collectors mounted on the sides of buildings and serving
as awnings are considered building-integrated systems and are
regulated as awnings.
(2) Freestanding systems.
(a) Use. Freestanding private solar energy systems shall be
accessory to the principal permitted use of the parcel, unless
such facilities are located on a parcel dedicated by recorded
easement for the conversion of energy to serve multiple users
within a development or subdivision as a community solar
energy system. Such congregate use shall be subject to site
plan approval pursuant to § 44-1709 of this Code.
(b) Location.
[1] Accessory freestanding systems are permitted in the rear
and side yards only, subject to the accessory structure
provisions of § 44-908.
[2] Freestanding systems approved pursuant to site plan
approval shall not be located within the front yard and
shall in other respects comply with the accessory structure
provisions of § 44-908.
(c) Height. The height of freestanding solar energy systems is
measured from the grade at the base of the pole to the highest
edge of the system at maximum tilt. Freestanding solar energy
systems shall comply with the following height standards.
[1] Residential districts. The maximum height is four feet.
[2] All other districts. The maximum height is 15 feet.
§ 44-1031 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1031
1:1807
(3) Historic buildings. Zoning lots within historic districts are subject
to the additional requirements of the district.
F. Commercial solar energy conversion.
Diagram 1031F
(1) Site plan. Site plan approval shall be required pursuant to
§ 44-1709 of this Code. In addition to the stated site plan
requirements, the site plan shall also indicate the following:
(a) Site size in acres;
(b) Existing physical features (e.g., drainage easements, streams,
and wetlands);
(c) Location of all proposed solar arrays, other structures, service
roads, and support equipment.
(d) Existing and finished grading plan of the site at two-foot
contour intervals;
(e) Drainage plan indicating direction of run-off flow, location of
catch basins and water retention and/or detention areas.
(2) Location. Accessory to principal permitted use in B-1, B-2 district.
(3) Landscaping and screening. In addition to the requirements of
Article XIII, the following landscaping and screening features shall
be provided.
(a) Opaque solid wood, masonry, or wire mesh fencing shall be
provided around the perimeter of the site.
§ 44-1031 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1031
1:1808
§ 44-1032. [Ch. 44, 10-32] Swimming pools, community.
(b) Native perennial vegetation, such as grasses and wildflowers,
shall be planted and maintained on site to reduce erosion,
manage stormwater run-off, and enhance soil.
(4) Power and communication lines running between banks of solar
panels and to nearby electric substations or interconnections with
buildings shall be buried underground. Exemptions may be granted
where shallow bedrock, watercourses, or other elements of the
natural landscape interfere with the ability to bury lines, or
distance makes undergrounding infeasible, at the discretion of the
zoning administrator.
(5) Glare. Commercial solar energy systems shall not direct glare to
neighboring properties or roadways. Solar energy systems that use
a reflector to enhance solar energy conversion shall minimize glare
from the reflector affecting adjacent or nearby properties.
Measures to minimize glare include selective placement of the
system, screening on the north side of the solar array, modifying
the orientation of the system, and reducing use of the reflector
system.
(6) Aviation protection. Within 500 feet of an airport or within
approach zones of an airport, the applicant must complete and
provide the results of the Solar Glare Hazard Analysis Tool
(SGHAT) consistent with the applicable guidance or requirements
of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and Central Illinois
Regional Airport Master Plan.
(7) Maximum height. Solar energy conversion facilities shall not
exceed 20 feet in height, as measured from grade at the base of the
system to the highest edge at maximum tilt.
(8) The following minimum site and bulk standards shall be required
for the siting and development of any commercial solar energy
system.
Table 1031: Commercial Solar Energy Conversion Site and Bulk Standards
Lot Standards Site Design Standards
Min. Lot Area Min. Lot Width Front Yard Side Yard Rear Yard
1 acre 200 feet 25 feet 15 feet 15 feet
A. Location. A swimming pool shall be located at least 60 feet from the lot
line of any property zoned or occupied for a single-family dwelling.
B. The perimeter of the swimming pool area shall be enclosed by a
security fence at least six feet in height.
§ 44-1031 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1032
1:1809
§ 44-1033. [Ch. 44, 10-33] Theaters, drive-in.
§ 44-1034. [Ch. 44, 10-34] Vehicle repair and service.
C. Parking. Required parking pursuant to Article XII of this Code may be
provided in a surface parking lot and/or parallel on-street parking,
provided that the following conditions are met:
(1) The street shall have a minimum street pavement width of 30 feet;
(2) On-street parking shall only be provided directly in front of the
proposed facility;
(3) On-street parking stalls shall have a minimum stall length of 22
feet;
(4) On-street parking stalls shall not be within 20 feet of a crosswalk at
an intersection.
D. The following minimum lot standards shall be required for the siting
and development of any swimming pool.
Table 1032: Community Swimming Pool - Lot Standards
Min. Lot Area Min. Lot Width
Equivalent to zoning district
standard or 6,600 square feet,
whichever is greater
Equivalent to zoning district
standard or 50 feet, whichever is
greater.
A. Accessory uses permitted may include a playground, refreshment
stands and public toilets, and souvenir stands or booths.
B. In addition to the standards of § 44-911, all exterior lighting fixtures
shall be directed away from a Residential District and shall not increase
the intensity of light within 10 feet of a Residential District boundary
line by more than 1/2 footcandle.
C. No theater screen shall be visible from a Residential District or public
right-of-way.
D. Building or structure height. The maximum permitted height for any
building or structure shall be 50 feet.
E. The following minimum site and bulk standards shall be required for
the siting and development of any drive-in theater.
Table 1033: Theaters, Drive in Site and Bulk Standards
Lot Standards Site Design Standards
Min. Lot
Area
Min. Lot
Width Front Yard Side Yard Rear Yard
20 acres 200 feet 200 feet 200 feet 200 feet
§ 44-1032 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1034
1:1810
§ 44-1035. [Ch. 44, 10-35] Veterinary office or clinic.
A. Location. Not more than two automobile service stations shall be
permitted on the quadrants of an intersection and shall not be located
closer than 120 feet of a Residential District boundary.
B. Site standards.
(1) No curb cuts shall be permitted within 10 feet of a side lot line or
20 feet of a street intersection.
(2) Any area where inoperative vehicles are intended to be stored for a
period of more than 10 days shall be fully screened in accordance
with Article XIII of this Code to prevent such vehicles from being
viewed from a public street or area.
(3) All service equipment (lubrication equipment, hydraulic lifts, etc.)
and repair and maintenance work shall be inside the principal
building.
C. The following activities are expressly prohibited in conjunction with, or
accessory to, an automobile service station: aviation sales, automobile
sales, boat sales, farm implement sales, house-car trailer sales, mobile
home sales, recreation vehicle sales or auto body work, straightening of
auto body parts, painting, welding, storage of automobiles not in
operating condition, or other work involving noise, glare, fumes, smoke,
or other characteristics to an extent greater than otherwise typical of
automobile service stations.
D. Outdoor lighting. In addition to the standards of § 44-911, all exterior
lighting fixtures shall be directed away from a Residential District and
shall not increase the intensity of light within 10 feet of a Residential
District boundary line by more than 1/2 footcandle.
E. Building height. The maximum permitted building height shall be 20
feet or one story, whichever is lower.
F. The following minimum site and bulk standards shall be required for
the siting and development of any automobile service station.
Table 1034: Automobile Service Station Site and Bulk
Standards
Lot Standards Site Design Standards
Min. Lot
Area
Min. Lot
Width
Min. Lot
Depth
Front
Yard Side Yard Rear Yard
10,000
square
feet
70 feet n/a 40 feet 15 feet 20 feet
A. Location. A Veterinary Office or Clinic shall not be located closer than
300 feet to a Residential District boundary line.
§ 44-1034 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1035
1:1811
§ 44-1036. [Ch. 44, 10-36] Wind energy conversion facilities.
B. Fencing. A six-foot high wire mesh fence shall be required to enclose
outdoor animal areas.
C. Lot width. The width of a lot containing a veterinary office or clinic shall
not be less than 200 feet.
A. Construction and operation of wind energy conversion facilities shall
comply with all applicable local, state, and federal requirements,
including but not limited to safety, construction, environmental,
electrical, communications and aviation requirements.
B. Effect of approval. Any authorization granted to an individual property
owner for a wind energy conversion facility shall not be construed to
bar owners or tenants of any adjacent property from ordinary or
permitted building, landscaping, or other accessory improvements,
even if such improvements may diminish the function of said wind
energy conversion facility.
C. Standards for All Wind Energy Conversion Facilities.
(1) Illumination. Illumination shall be prohibited, except to
accommodate co-installation of parking lot lighting luminaires in
accordance with the provisions of § 44-911, Performance
Standards, of this chapter or as required by the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) or other state or Federal agency of competent
jurisdiction.
(2) Concealment. All wiring associated with a wind energy conversion
facility shall be underground or otherwise concealed to blend or
harmonize with the site.
(3) Appearance. The facility shall maintain a galvanized neutral finish
or be painted to conform the system color to the surrounding
environment to minimize adverse visual effects.
(4) Signage. No commercial signage or attention-getting device is
permitted on any wind energy conversion facility. A sign, not
exceeding four square feet in size with a plain white background
and black lettering, shall be provided on each wind energy
conversion facility which indicates the emergency contact
information of the property owner or operator.
(5) Noise. Except during short-term events such as utility outage or a
severe windstorm, a wind energy conversion facility shall not
exceed 55 dBA as measured at the boundary line of a Residential
District and shall in all other respect conform to the noise
standards of § 44-911.
§ 44-1035 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1036
1:1812
(6) Safety. Every wind energy conversion facility shall have an internal
automatic braking device to prevent uncontrolled rotation or over
speeding.
(7) Decommissioning. Any abandoned or non-functioning wind energy
conversion facility shall be removed by the owner within 120 days
of the day on which the system last functioned. The owner is solely
responsible for removal of the system and all costs, financial or
otherwise, of system removal.
D. Private wind energy conversion. Private wind energy conversion
facilities shall be accessory to the principal permitted use of the site,
subject to the following conditions:
(1) Roof-mounted systems.
(a) Location. Roof-mounted systems shall be affixed to the roof
deck of a flat roof or to the ridge or slope of a pitched roof and
shall not be affixed to the parapet or chimney of any structure.
(b) Height. The height of a roof-mounted system is measured from
the roof surface on which the system is mounted to the highest
edge of the system. The total height of a roof-mounted private
wind energy system shall not exceed 10 feet above the roof
height or 10 feet above the maximum permitted height of the
zoning district, whichever is less.
(c) Quantity. One turbine is allowed for every 750 square feet of
the combined roof area of all structures on a zoning lot. For a
pitched roof, each surface of the roof shall be included in the
roof area calculation.
(2) Freestanding systems.
(a) Location. A freestanding system shall not be located within the
required front yard or corner side yard or in any utility
easement and shall be set back a distance equal to 1.1 times
the system height from the base to all property lines, third
party transmission lines, overhead electric distribution
systems, public sidewalks and public rights-of-way.
(b) Height. The height of a freestanding wind energy conversion
facility shall not exceed 100 feet in a Manufacturing District, or
60 feet in an Agricultural, Business or Public Interest District,
as measured from grade at the base of the pole to the highest
edge of the system.
(c) Clearance. The minimum clearance between the lowest tip of
the rotor or blade and the ground shall be 15 feet.
(d) Access. Climbing access (rungs or foot pegs) shall be located
no closer than 12 feet from the ground at the base of the tower.
§ 44-1036 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1036
1:1813
Diagram 1036D(2)
E. Commercial wind energy conversion.
(1) Site plan. Site plan approval shall be required pursuant to
§ 44-1709 of this Code. In addition to the stated site plan
requirements, the site plan shall also indicate the following:
(a) Site size in acres;
(b) Existing physical features (e.g., drainage easements, streams,
and wetlands);
(c) Location of all proposed towers, other structures, service
roads, and support equipment;
(d) Existing and finished grading plan of the site at two-foot
contour intervals;
(e) Location of all areas to be disturbed by the construction of the
proposed project including access routes, trenches, grading,
and staging areas;
(f) Drainage plan indicating direction of run-off flow, location of
catch basins and water retention and/or detention areas;
(g) A post-installation erosion control, revegetation, and
landscaping plan;
(h) Elevations of the components of the proposed facility;
(i) Visual simulations. Visual simulations taken from off-site views,
including from adjacent properties, as determined by the
Director of Community Development, shall be submitted which
illustrate the site location after installation of the proposed
towers.
§ 44-1036 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1036
1:1814
(j) Acoustical analysis. The Director of Community Development
may require a project-specific acoustical analysis, which shall
be prepared by a qualified professional at the expense of the
applicant. The study shall simulate the proposed wind energy
conversion installation to assure acceptable noise levels and, if
necessary, provide measures to comply with applicable noise
standards.
(k) Wind measurement study. The Community Development
Director may require a wind resource assessment study, which
shall be prepared by a qualified professional at the expense of
the applicant. The study shall be performed for a minimum sixmonth
period at the proposed site during prime wind season.
The study may require the installation of a meteorological
tower, erected primarily to measure wind speed and directions
plus other data relevant to appropriate siting.
(2) Location. A commercial wind energy conversion facility shall be set
back a distance equal to two times the system height from the base
of the tower to all property lines, third party transmission lines,
overhead electric distribution systems, public sidewalks and public
rights-of-way.
(3) Minimum lot size. The minimum required lot size for any
commercial wind energy conversion facility shall be five acres.
(4) Height. The height of the facility shall not exceed 200 feet as
measured from the base of the tower to the highest edge of the
system.
(5) Clearance. The minimum clearance between the lowest tip of the
rotor or blade and the ground shall be 30 feet.
(6) Access. If a climbing apparatus is present on a tower, access
control shall be provided by one of the following means:
(a) Tower-climbing apparatus located no closer than 12 feet from
the ground at the base of the tower;
(b) A locked anti-climb device installed on the tower; or
(c) A locked, protective fence at least six feet in height that
encloses the tower.
§ 44-1036 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1036
1:1815
§ 44-1037. [Ch. 44, 10-37] Wireless communication facilities.
Diagram 1036E
A. Applicability. Every wireless communication facility located within the
City of Bloomington is subject to the standards of this section, except
that the following facilities are exempt:
(1) Amateur Radio Station Operator/Receive-Only Antenna, if owned
and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator
or used exclusively for a receive-only antenna, except that on
Protected Residential Property such antennas shall be subject to
the provisions of § 44-1037C.
(2) Satellite earth stations, dishes and/or antennas used for private
television reception not exceeding one meter in diameter, except
that on Protected Residential Property such antennas shall be
subject to the provisions of § 44-1037C.
(3) Emergency services. Wireless communication facilities used
exclusively for emergency services including police and fire, when
not located on a new tower; and
(4) Distributed Antenna Systems (DAS) and small cells that are
concealed within a building or are installed on an existing structure
or utility facility, comply with the height limit of the zoning district,
and do not require installation of a new tower, utility support
§ 44-1036 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1037
1:1816
structure or building. Where such facilities are to be placed in
the public right-of-way, approval by the Director of Public Works is
required.
(5) A temporary, commercial wireless communication facility installed
for providing coverage of a special event such as news coverage or
sporting event, subject to applicable permitting requirements by
the City, for a period of up to one week before and one week
following the special event.
B. Application. An application for a Wireless Communication Facility shall
be submitted on a form prepared by the City of Bloomington and shall
include the following:
(1) Name and address of applicant and property owner as well as
primary and secondary contact information for the applicant.
(2) Summary and scope of work to be completed on the site, including
the nature of any changes to the site or any existing facility. The
applicant additionally shall state whether he or she believes that
the request is eligible for the sixty-day review period of Section
6409(a) of the Spectrum Act, as provided in § 44-1037D of this
Code.
(3) Description of proposed equipment, including the equipment type,
specification, installation status, mount type and a manufacturer's
certification by a licensed structural engineer regarding the
structural integrity of the antenna facility and evidence of
compliance with Federal Communication Commission's radio
frequency emission standards.
(4) A site plan indicating the property boundaries, setbacks,
elevations, and dimensions of the proposed facility.
(5) Lighting plans for any new exterior lighting to be installed on the
site.
(6) For new towers and substantial changes, the following additional
information shall be submitted:
(a) A site plan indicating the location of the proposed wireless
communication facility, supporting equipment and accessory
utility buildings, and all existing structures on the property and
within 200 feet of the facility.
(b) A written description or map of the proposed service area for
desired coverage or capacity and documentation that the
proposed facility would provide such coverage or capacity.
(c) An inventory of the existing wireless communication facilities,
including existing transmission equipment land such
equipment located on silos, water tanks, buildings, etc.
§ 44-1037 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1037
1:1817
(d) Photo-simulation or other graphic illustration of the proposed
wireless communication facility, including the location of
existing and new facilities, proposed concealment elements
and paint color specifications.
(7) Maintenance plan. A description of anticipated maintenance needs,
including frequency of service personnel needs, equipment needs,
and traffic, noise, and safety impacts of such maintenance.
(8) Evidence of compliance with Federal Aviation Administration
standards and/or "Airport Hazard Zoning Regulations for
Bloomington-Normal Airport."
C. Permitted facilities on protected residential property. Wireless
communication facilities shall be permitted only as an accessory
structure on Protected Residential Property and shall conform to the
following requirements:
(1) Satellite dish antennas exceeding one meter in diameter shall
comply with the following standards:
(a) Such antenna shall be permitted as an accessory structure only
on a roof or in a rear yard.
(b) The antenna shall be located no closer than three feet from a
side or rear lot line and outside of any easements of record.
(c) The permitted height of the satellite dish antenna shall not
exceed 15 feet from the ground level at the base of the antenna
to the highest point of the antenna for ground-mounted
satellite dish antennas; and 15 feet from the roof line to the
highest point of the antenna for roof-mounted satellite dish
antennas.
(2) Satellite dish antennas one meter or less in diameter, television
broadcast antennas, multi-channel multi-point distribution
antennas, and radio broadcast antennas (including amateur radio
antennas) and other similar antennas shall comply with the
following standards.
(a) Such antenna(s) shall be permitted as an accessory structure
only on a roof, in a rear yard, or a side yards behind the front
yard building setback line and shall be located outside any
easement of record.
(b) The permitted height of the antenna shall not exceed 70 feet
from ground level at the base of the antenna to the highest
point of the antenna for ground mounted antenna facilities,
and 35 feet in height from the roof line to the highest point of
the antenna for roof mounted antenna facilities.
(c) Exterior surfaces must be painted a non-contrasting color
consistent with the surrounding area such as blue, grey,
§ 44-1037 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1037
1:1818
brown, or silver, or have a galvanized finish to reduce visual
impact. Metal surfaces shall be constructed of, or coated with,
corrosion-resistant material.
(3) Wireless communication facilities that comply with all other
applicable regulations are allowed as accessory structures
mounted on the roof of high-rise multiple-family dwellings, water
towers, church steeples or bell towers, or other similar existing
structures located on Protected Residential Property.
(4) No new wireless towers will be permitted on Protected Residential
Property.
(5) Wireless communication facilities that are proposed as a principal
use on Protected Residential Property or that require construction
of a new utility support structure or building shall require approval
of a special use pursuant to the procedures and standards of
§ 44-1037D and Article XVII of this Code.
(6) Evidence of compliance with Federal Aviation Administration
standards and/or "Airport Hazard Zoning Regulations for
Bloomington-Normal Airport, a.k.a. "Central Illinois Regional
Airport," shall be filed with the Director of Community
Development.
D. Review Procedures for Non-Substantial Changes ("Eligible Facilities
Request").
(1) The following procedures are established pursuant to Part 45
U.S.C. § 332(c)(7) of the Federal Communications Act of 1934, as
amended, as interpreted by the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) in its Report and Order No. 14153 (commonly
referred to as Section 6409(a) of the Spectrum Act).
(2) An application for co-location of new transmission equipment,
removal of equipment or replacement of equipment that does not
substantially change the physical dimensions of a wireless
communication facility shall be approved.
(a) A substantial change to a tower, excluding any tower in the
public right-of-way, is a change that would result in any of the
following.
[1] Height. The change would increase the height of a tower,
as it lawfully existed on March 1, 2012, by more than 10%
or by the height of one additional antenna array with
separation from the nearest antenna not to exceed 20 feet,
whichever is greater.
[2] Width. The change would involve the addition of an
appurtenance to the body of the tower that would protrude
more than 20 feet from the tower or would exceed the
§ 44-1037 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1037
1:1819
width of the tower structure at the level of the
appurtenance, whichever is greater.
[3] Equipment cabinets. The change would involve installation
of more than the standard number of new equipment
cabinets for the technology involved, not to exceed four
cabinets.
[4] Excavation or deployment. The change would involve
excavation or deployment of equipment outside the
current boundaries of the leased or owned property
surrounding the tower and any access or utility easements
currently related to the site.
[5] Concealment. The change would defeat the concealment
elements of the wireless communication facility.
[6] Conditions of prior approval. Any change, other than those
described as non-substantial changes herein, that would
not comply with conditions of prior approval for the
facility.
(b) A substantial change to any other tower or base station is one
that would result in any of the following:
[1] Height. The change would increase the height of the tower
or base station, as it lawfully existed on March 1, 2012, by
more than 10% or by more than 10 feet whichever is
greater.
[2] Width. The change would involve the addition of an
appurtenance to the body of the structure that would
protrude from the edge of the structure by more than six
feet.
[3] Equipment cabinets. The change would involve installation
of any new equipment cabinets on the ground if there are
no preexisting ground cabinets associated with the facility
or involve installation of ground cabinets that are more
than 10% larger in height or overall volume than any other
ground cabinets associated with the structure.
[4] Excavation or development. The change would involve
excavation or deployment of equipment outside the
current boundaries of the leased or owned property
surrounding the tower and any access or utility easements
currently related to the site, or outside the area in
proximity to the structure or other transmission
equipment already deployed on the ground.
[5] Concealment. The change would defeat the concealment
elements of the wireless communication facility.
§ 44-1037 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1037
1:1820
[6] Conditions of prior approval. Any change, other than those
described as non-substantial changes herein, that would
not comply with conditions of prior approval for the
facility.
(3) The City shall approve or deny an application for an Eligible
Facilities Request within 60 days of submission, as provided below.
(a) The City shall notify the applicant of an incomplete application
within 30 days of submission. Such notification shall include a
specific list of materials missing from the application and shall
provide the basis in Code or other applicable law for requiring
submission of such material. Transmission of this notification
shall toll (pause) the sixty-day review period until
supplemental materials are received by the City. No
information shall be requested that exceeds the submittal
requirements outlined in this § 44-1037.
(b) Upon receipt of supplemental materials, the City shall review
such materials and, if the application remains incomplete,
provide written notification to the applicant within 10 days.
Transmission of this notification shall toll the sixty-day review
period until supplemental materials are received by the City.
No new information shall be requested beyond what was
previously described in the submittal requirements and initial
incomplete letter.
(c) Failure to approve or deny the application within 60 days shall
result in a deemed approval of the application.
(d) The review period may be extended by mutual written
agreement between the City and the applicant.
(4) The City shall notify the applicant, in writing, of any decision to
approve or deny an Eligible Facilities Request. Any decision to deny
shall describe the reasons for such denial, which shall be consistent
with the Bloomington City Code and supported by substantial
evidence.
E. New wireless towers and substantial changes to existing towers and
base stations.
(1) Location.
(a) New wireless towers may be permitted as a special use only in
the A Agriculture District; B-1 General Commercial District;
B-2 Local Commercial District; P-2 Public Lands and
Institutions District; and the Manufacturing Districts.
(b) A substantial change to an existing tower or base station shall
require approval of, or modification to, a special se in any
Agricultural, Residential, Business or Special Public Interest
§ 44-1037 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1037
1:1821
District. In Manufacturing Districts, a substantial change shall
require approval by the Director of Community Development.
(c) Non-exempt Distributed Antenna Systems (DAS) and small
cells that are not subject to § 44-1037D shall require approval
of a special use in any Residential District, the D-1 Central
Business District, D-2 Downtown Transitional District or D-3
Warehouse District. In all other districts, DAS and small cells
shall require approval by the Director of Community
Development.
(2) Applicants for new wireless towers shall demonstrate that all
possible avenues for co-location of antennas on existing towers or
base stations have been investigated.
(3) Bulk standards.
(a) Lot size. The minimum lot size for any wireless tower shall be
equal to the minimum required lot size for the zoning district in
which the facility is to be located.
(b) Setback. The minimum setback shall be maintained for the
zoning district where the proposed antenna facility site is
located; additionally, a setback of 200% of the antenna facility
height shall be maintained from buildings used for dwellings,
day-care centers, elementary or secondary schools or
playgrounds in order to minimize the adverse effects of falling
ice or damage due to antenna facility collapse.
(c) Equipment cabinets and supporting equipment. All equipment
cabinets and structures accessory to a wireless communication
facility shall meet the minimum setback requirements of the
zoning district in which the wireless communication facility is
located. Such structures shall be screened from view in
accordance with § 44-908 of this Code.
(d) To encourage co-location of commercial antennas, all new
wireless towers exceeding 70 feet in height shall not be located
within one quarter mile (1,320 feet) of any other wireless tower
that exceeds 70 feet in height.
(4) Capacity. A new tower shall be designed to accommodate the
applicant's planned transmission equipment and capacity for at
least one additional comparable user.
(5) Concealment. The applicant shall demonstrate that reasonable
efforts have been made to reduce the visual impact of new towers.
The City may impose conditions of approval on a special use for any
new wireless communication facility or substantial change to a
wireless communication facility requiring one more forms of
concealment which include but are not limited to: screening,
blending into architectural elements, placement of facilities in
§ 44-1037 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1037
1:1822
locations where topography, vegetation or other physical features
reduce their view, and designing wireless towers to appear as other
structures such as light poles or flag poles.
(6) Review period. The City shall approve or deny a complete
application for a co-location or substantial modification within 90
days of submission and shall approve or deny a complete
application for a new wireless tower within 150 days of submission.
(7) Review findings. A decision to approve or deny an application shall
be made in writing based upon substantial evidence. Conditions of
approval may be imposed as provided in this subsection and Article
XVII.
(a) The City shall not impose new conditions relating to, or deny
an application on the basis of, radio frequency emissions. All
facilities shall comply with the FCC standards for radio
frequency emissions, which are deemed adequate to protect
public health and welfare.
(b) Findings of fact related to property values of nearby land shall
be documented by expert testimony and the written analysis of
a qualified professional, such as an appraiser or mortgage
broker, based on a study for that specific location.
(c) The Planning Commission shall find that a proposed new
wireless tower cannot be accommodated on an existing tower
or building within the coverage or capacity area of the
proposed tower due to one or more of the following reasons:
[1] The planned antenna or transmission equipment would
exceed the structural capacity of all existing or approved
towers or buildings, as documented by a qualified and
licensed professional engineer, and all of the existing or
approved towers cannot be reinforced, modified, or
replaced to accommodate the planned or equivalent
antennas or transmission equipment at a reasonable cost.
[2] The planned antenna would cause interference materially
impacting the usability of other existing or planned
antenna at a tower or building as documented by a
qualified and licensed engineer and such interference
cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.
[3] Existing or approved towers and buildings within such the
coverage or capacity area cannot accommodate the
planned antenna or transmission equipment at a height
necessary to function according to the documented
coverage or capacity needs as determined by a qualified
and licensed professional engineer; and
§ 44-1037 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1037
1:1823
[4] Other unforeseen reasons that make it unfeasible to locate
the planned antenna or transmission equipment upon an
existing or approved tower or building.
F. Other codes. The installation and construction of wireless
communication facilities shall comply with Bloomington City Code
Chapter 10, as adopted.
G. Signage. Wireless communication facilities shall not contain any form of
signage other than warning or equipment information signs.
H. Abandonment. Wireless communication facilities that remain unused
for more than one year shall be removed at their owner's cost. In the
event that such abandoned wireless communication facilities are not
removed within one year of the cessation of operations at the site, the
tower, base station, or transmission equipment may be removed by the
City and the costs of such removal assessed against the owner of such
facility or the property owner.
§ 44-1037 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1037
1:1824
ARTICLE XI
Nonconforming Buildings and Uses
§ 44-1101. [Ch. 44, 11-1] Purpose and intent.
§ 44-1102. [Ch. 44, 11-2] Nonconforming buildings and structures.
A. Existing lots, buildings, structures and uses of land that were lawfully
established and have subsequently been prohibited, regulated, or
restricted under the adoption or amendment of this Code, shall be
considered nonconforming.
B. Nonconforming uses are declared by this Code to be incompatible with
permitted uses in the districts in which they are located. A
nonconforming use of a structure, a nonconforming use of land, or a
nonconforming lot, building, structure, or use shall not be extended or
enlarged after passage of this Code by attachment on a building or by
the addition of other uses of a nature which would be prohibited
generally in the district involved.
(1) Authority to continue. It is the intent of this article to permit
nonconforming lots, buildings, structures, and uses to continue,
within the parameters established in this article, until they are
removed, but not to encourage their continued use or survival.
(2) No expansion. It is the intent of this article that nonconforming
lots, buildings, structures, and uses shall not be enlarged upon,
expanded, or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other
buildings, structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the district,
except as may be provided for in this article.
(3) Construction prior to effective date of this chapter. Nothing in this
Code shall be deemed to require a change in the plans,
construction or designated use of any building on which actual
construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this Code and upon which actual
building construction has been carried on diligently. Actual
construction is hereby defined to include the placing of
construction material in permanent position and fastened in a
permanent manner. Where excavation or demolition or removal of
an existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to
rebuilding, such excavation, demolition or removal shall be deemed
to be actual construction provided that work shall be carried on
diligently.
(4) Acquisition of nonconformities. The City may acquire, through
purchase or condemnation, private nonconforming lots, buildings,
structures, and uses. The City Council may take action in the
manner provided for by law.
§ 44-1101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1102
1:1825
§ 44-1103. [Ch. 44, 11-3] Nonconforming uses of land.
§ 44-1104. [Ch. 44, 11-4] Nonconforming lots.
Any lot of record at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this
section may be used for any principal permitted use in that district, even
though such lot does not conform to the area or width requirements of the
district in which it is located. Any new structure erected on such a lot shall
conform to the yard dimensions and other requirements of the district in
which it is located.
A. Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this Code that does not conform to the terms of this Code
by reason of restrictions on the area, lot coverage, height, yards, its
location on the lot, or other zoning requirements concerning the
structure, such structure may be continued, regardless of any change in
tenancy, ownership, or management, so long as it remains otherwise
lawful, subject to the following provisions:
(1) A nonconforming building or structure shall not be enlarged,
extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally
altered except in a manner that conforms to the requirements of
this Code;
(2) A nonconforming building, structure or portion thereof may be
altered to decrease its nonconformity;
A. A nonconforming use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise
lawful, provided:
(1) No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor
extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this Code;
(2) Nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a
building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use
at the time of adoption or amendment of this Code, but no such use
shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building.
(3) No such nonconforming use shall be moved, in whole or in part, to
any portion of the lot or parcel other than that occupied by such use
at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Code;
(4) A special use permit may be granted authorizing the change of a
nonconforming use to another nonconforming use, provided that
the City Council, after a public hearing by the Bloomington Board
of Zoning Appeals, shall find that the proposed use more
compatible to the district than the existing nonconforming use. In
permitting such change, the City Council may require appropriate
conditions and safeguards in accord with the provisions of this
Code.
§ 44-1102 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1105
1:1826
§ 44-1105. [Ch. 44, 11-5] Discontinuance of use.
§ 44-1106. [Ch. 44, 11-6] Damage and destruction.
§ 44-1107. [Ch. 44, 11-7] Repairs and alterations.
A. Whenever any building, structure or land occupied by a nonconforming
use is changed to or replaced by a use conforming to the provisions of
the Code, such premises shall not thereafter be used or occupied by a
nonconforming use.
B. When a nonconforming use of a structure-is discontinued for any reason
for a continuous period of one year, such use shall not be re-established,
and the use of the premises shall thereafter conform to the
requirements of this Code.
C. Where no enclosed building is involved, discontinuance of a
nonconforming use for a continuous period of six months shall
constitute abandonment, and the use of the premises shall thereafter
conform to the requirements of this Code.
D. When a structure containing a nonconforming use is damaged to an
extent exceeding 50% of its gross floor area or replacement value the
nonconforming use shall not be re-established, and the premises shall
thereafter conform to the requirements of this Code.
A. When a nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of a
structure is destroyed by any means to an extent exceeding 50% of its
gross floor area or replacement cost at the time of destruction, it shall
not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this
Code;
B. This section shall not be applicable under the following two sets of
circumstances:
(1) When government action impedes access to the premises;
(2) When the conversion of a structure originally designed as a singlefamily
dwelling unit is restored to such a dwelling unit pursuant to
§ 44-902D.
A. The ordinary repairs and maintenance of a nonconforming building or
structure or a building containing a nonconforming use is permitted,
including necessary non-structural repairs and incidental alterations
that do not extend or intensify the nonconformity.
B. No structural alteration shall be made to a nonconforming building or
structure, or in a building containing a nonconforming use, except in
the following situations:
(1) When the alteration is required by law;
(2) When the alteration will result in elimination of the nonconformity;
§ 44-1105 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1107
1:1827
(3) When a building in a residential district will be altered in a way to
improve life safety or livability, provided that the structural
alteration will not increase the number of dwelling units nor
enlarge or expand the building.
§ 44-1107 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1107
1:1828
ARTICLE XII
Off-Street Parking and Loading
§ 44-1201. [Ch. 44, 12-1] Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this section is to establish standards for off-street parking,
loading, and site circulation in order to increase safety and reduce
congestion in the streets, ensure adequate vehicle parking and circulation
areas associated with the development of land, eliminate the on-street
storage of motor vehicles, accommodate all surface transportation users,
and avoid negative environmental and urban design impacts that can result
from parking lots and other vehicular use areas.
§ 44-1202. [Ch. 44, 12-2] Applicability.
The off-street parking and loading standards of this section shall apply to
any use or building hereafter established, erected, or substantially altered
or enlarged; or any parking lot hereafter installed in the City of
Bloomington.
A. Existing structures and facilities.
(1) All uses established after the effective date of this Ordinance shall
provide off-street parking and loading space in accordance with the
standards set forth in this section.
(2) No existing use shall be deemed nonconforming solely due to the
lack of off-street parking, loading or site circulation facilities
required by this section; provided, that facilities being used for offstreet
parking, loading and site circulation as of the date of
adoption of the ordinance codified in this title shall not be reduced
in number to less than that required by this section and shall be
provided in compliance with this section as required herein.
B. Damage or destruction. When any building, structure, or use is
damaged or destroyed by fire, collapse, explosion, or other cause, and is
reconstructed, re-established or repaired in like kind to its previous use
and extent, off-street parking or loading facilities equivalent to those
maintained at the time of such damage or destruction shall be provided.
However, in no case shall it be necessary to restore or maintain offstreet
parking or loading facilities in excess of those required by this
Code.
C. Enlargement, expansion or change in use.
(1) Whenever the existing use of a building or structure erected prior
to the effective date of this Code is changed to a new use, or the
building or structure is enlarged or expanded, additional off-street
parking or loading facilities conforming to the standards of this
article shall be required. Enlargement or expansion shall be
interpreted to include any of the following:
§ 44-1201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1202
1:1829
§ 44-1203. [Ch. 44, 12-3] General provisions.
(a) The addition of new floor area;
(b) Increased occupancy loads as determined by the Fire Marshal;
(c) Increase in the number of dwelling units.
(2) Minor expansion. When the floor area of a structure is expanded by
less than 20%, additional parking, loading and bicycle facilities for
the new or expanded portion of the structure is required.
(3) Major expansion. When the floor area of a structure is expanded by
20% or more, the total structure shall require conformance with all
provisions of this article.
(4) Any area designated as required off-street parking or loading shall
not be changed to any other use unless and until equal facilities
that meet the standards of this article are provided elsewhere, or
the parking requirements of the site have changed as determined
by the Director of Community Development.
D. Temporary encroachments. Temporary encroachments into required
parking spaces for a seasonal sales display area may be authorized by
the Community Development Director for up to 90 days during a
calendar year, if the Director determines that adequate parking is
available to meet the demand during the period of encroachment.
E. Permissive parking and loading facilities.
(1) The voluntary establishment of off-street parking and loading
facilities is permitted, provided that there is adherence to all
regulations herein governing the location, design, and operation of
such facilities and provided that such parking or loading facilities
do not exceed the requirements of this section by more than 25%.
(2) The voluntary provision of off-street parking or loading that
exceeds 25% of the requirements of this section may be approved
through Site Plan Review procedures, if a determination is made
that such facilities are needed based upon a parking demand study
provided by the applicant.
A. Use of off-street parking, stacking, and loading areas. Required offstreet
parking, stacking, and loading spaces shall be designated solely
for the purposes specified herein. Each required off-street parking
space shall be kept available at all times for parking of one motor
vehicle.
B. Parking and loading area plan. No application for a building permit for a
new, enlarged, or altered structure or improvement shall be issued,
unless there is included with the application a plan showing the
location, layout, and critical dimensions of all off-street parking, loading
and pedestrian facilities, including bicycle racks where required. Such
§ 44-1202 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1203
1:1830
plan shall be drawn to scale and show vehicular access and circulation
patterns.
C. Construction. Except as otherwise provided in this article, required offstreet
parking, and loading facilities shall be completed prior to the
issuance of the certificate of occupancy for the use they serve.
(1) A required parking lot shall be fully constructed within six months
of receipt of a building permit and prior to the issuance of a
Building Certificate of Occupancy for the use or uses it serves. The
Director of Community Development may grant one extension for
up to an additional six months in the event of adverse weather
conditions or unusual delays beyond the control of the property
owner or responsible person.
(2) In the case of phased development, off-street parking, stacking, and
loading areas shall only be provided for the portions of the
development for which a site plan has been approved or upon
receipt of a temporary use permit for a surface parking lot.
D. Lighting. All off-street parking areas regulated by this Code shall have
operational lighting fixtures directed away from residences in such a
way as not to create a nuisance and in compliance with § 44-911 of this
Code.
E. Storage of camping and recreational equipment. Any owner of camping
and recreational equipment or domestic utility trailer may park or store
such camping and recreational equipment or utility trailer in a
Residential District subject to the following conditions:
(1) At no time shall such parked or stored camping and recreational
equipment be occupied or used for dining, sleeping or
housekeeping purposes while parked or stored in a residence
district except for a period of not to exceed 14 days in one calendar
year, provided, however, that such mobile home, travel trailer,
pickup coach, motor-home or camping trailer may be used for only
for sleeping purposes during such fourteen-day period;
(2) During the period from September 15th through April 15th, if the
recreational equipment is parked or stored outside of a garage, it
shall be parked or stored to the rear of the front building line of the
principal structure on the lot;
(3) However, such camping and recreational equipment may be parked
anywhere on the premises for loading or unloading purposes for a
period not to exceed 24 hours per episode.
(4) Recreational equipment or domestic utility trailer must be parked a
minimum of three feet from a side or rear yard lot line.
(5) If parked from April 16th through September 14th to the front of
the front building line of the principal structure on the property,
§ 44-1203 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1203
1:1831
§ 44-1204. [Ch. 44, 12-4] Shared parking facilities.
recreational equipment must be on a hard surface as defined in
§ 44-1609 of this Code.
(6) If the recreational equipment is a self-propelled vehicle that is not
stored on a trailer (such as a motor-home), it must be parked on a
hard-surface whether it is parked to the front or rear of the front
line of the principal structure on the property. Camping trailers,
domestic utility trailers, boats on trailers, and other items of
recreational equipment stored on trailers need to be a compacted
surface, as defined by Article XVI of this Code, if such recreational
equipment is stored or parked to the rear of the front building line
of the principal structure on the property.
F. Maintenance.
(1) All parking, loading and circulation areas shall be maintained free
of dust, trash, weeds, and debris. Surfacing, curbs, walkways, light
fixtures, signs, and related appurtenances shall be maintained in
good repair and safe condition at all times.
(2) The visibility of pavement markings delineating parking spaces and
directional control shall be maintained.
(3) All off-street parking, stacking, and loading areas required by this
article shall be maintained free of accumulated snow or standing
water that prevents full use and occupancy of the areas, except for
temporary periods of heavy rainfall or snowfall not to exceed five
days.
A. Shared parking.
(1) Purpose. Shared parking is encouraged as a means of conserving
land resources, reducing stormwater runoff, reducing the heat
island effect caused by large paved areas and improving
community appearance.
(2) Authorization. Shared parking facilities for off-street parking of two
or more buildings or uses may be approved by the Community
Development Director subject to compliance with this section.
(3) Location.
(a) Shared parking facilities for residential uses shall be located
within 300 linear feet of the primary entrance of the main
building.
(b) Shared parking facilities for all other uses shall be located
within 500 linear feet of the primary entrance of the main
building.
§ 44-1203 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1204
1:1832
(c) A shared parking facility shall only be authorized in a
Residential District if it serves one or more residential uses
exclusively.
(4) General requirements.
(a) The number of parking spaces provided shall not be less than
the sum of the separate requirements for each such building or
use. Where a mix of two or more land uses creates staggered
peak periods of parking demand due to different hours of
operation, shared parking agreements that have the effect of
reducing the total amount of required parking may be
approved.
(b) Accessible parking spaces for persons with disabilities may not
be shared and shall be located on-site.
(c) Adjacent lots that are subject to a shared parking agreement
shall be interconnected by provision of cross-access for
vehicular passage.
(5) Shared parking for uses with different hours of operation.
(a) For purposes of this section, the following uses are considered
daytime uses:
[1] Customer service, professional and administrative offices;
[2] Retail sales uses, except eating and drinking
establishments, hotels and motels, and entertainmentrelated
uses;
[3] Warehousing, wholesaling, and freight movement uses;
[4] Manufacturing, production, and industrial service uses;
and
[5] Other similar primarily daytime uses, as determined by the
Community Development Director.
(b) For purposes of this section, the following uses are considered
evening or Weekend uses:
[1] Auditoriums accessory to public or private schools;
[2] Places of worship;
[3] Entertainment-related uses, such as theaters, bowling
alleys, and dance halls; and
[4] Other similar primarily nighttime or Sunday uses, as
determined by the Community Development Director.
(c) The applicant(s) shall demonstrate, through a shared parking
analysis, that there is no substantial conflict in the principal
§ 44-1204 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1204
1:1833
operating hours or peak periods of parking demand of the uses
for which shared parking is proposed.
(6) Shared parking study. The applicant(s) shall submit a shared
parking analysis that demonstrates the feasibility of shared
parking. The study shall include, at minimum, the size and type of
the proposed development, the composition of tenants, the
anticipated rate of parking turnover and the anticipated peak
parking and traffic loads for all uses that will be sharing parking
spaces. If existing land uses are to be included in the shared
parking agreement, the study shall also include parking counts that
document parking occupancy during weekday, weekend, daytime
and evening periods of peak and off-peak parking demand.
(7) Agreement. The applicant(s) shall provide a copy of the executed
shared parking lease or agreement prior to the City's authorization
of a shared parking facility.
(a) Shared parking leases or agreements shall have a term of not
less than five years, including any renewals at the option of the
lessee.
(b) Authorization of the shared parking facility will continue in
effect only as long as the agreement, binding on all parties,
remains in force. Should the agreement cease to be in force,
parking must be provided as otherwise required by this
section.
B. On-street and public parking.
(1) In a Business or Public Interest District, the use of adjacent onstreet
parking or publicly-owned parking facilities to meet a
portion of the minimum off-street parking requirements shall be
permitted, provided the following conditions are met:
(a) On-street spaces are located adjacent to the property or public
parking facilities (i.e., public lots or parking structures) are
located within 500 linear feet of the primary entrance of the
main building;
(b) No more than 50% of the off-street parking requirement
provided through on-street spaces, public lots, or parking
structures;
(c) The intensity of the use and its parking requirements will not
have a substantial adverse impact to surrounding uses; and
(d) There is no negative impact to existing or planned traffic
circulation.
(2) A parking demand study may be required to demonstrate that
adequate available spaces exist on street or in a public parking
facilities.
§ 44-1204 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1205
1:1834
§ 44-1205. [Ch. 44, 12-5] Location and yard requirements.
§ 44-1206. [Ch. 44, 12-6] Parking design standards.
A. Parking spaces required for all nonresidential and multifamily uses
shall be located on the same lot or an adjoining lot, provided however,
that where 10 or more parking spaces are required, such parking
spaces may be provided in a shared parking facility subject to
requirements of § 44-1204.
B. Off-street parking spaces uses shall be located on a lot as follows:
(1) No off-street parking spaces shall be permitted in the required
front yard or required front transitional area, unless otherwise
provided in this Code.
(2) All new and approved off-street parking spaces and driveways shall
be located at least three feet from any side lot line.
(3) Where 10 or more parking spaces are required, off-street parking
areas shall be located a minimum distance of six feet from the
property line to accommodate a landscaped perimeter as provided
in Article XIII.
(4) Legal nonconforming driveways may be reconstructed, but not
expanded, at their existing location.
(5) Residential driveways shall comply with standards contained in
§ 44-404C of this Code.
Diagram 1205B
A. Access.
§ 44-1205 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1206
1:1835
(1) All off-street parking, stacking, and loading areas shall be arranged
for convenient access and safety of pedestrians, bicyclists, and
vehicles.
(2) Each required parking space shall open directly upon an aisle, or
driveway of such width and design as to provide safe and efficient
means of vehicular access and egress. Except for driveways serving
single-family and two-family dwelling units, access to a parking
space shall not require backing across a street property line or reentering
a public right-of-way.
(3) Off-street parking areas with three or more required spaces shall
be configured so that a vehicle may enter and leave a parking space
without moving another vehicle. Tandem parking may be approved
for valet parking and similar purposes pursuant to Site Plan Review
procedures.
(4) Access to an off-street parking area that serves a nonresidential use
shall not be permitted across lots that are residential in use or
located in a Residential District.
(5) Where the parking area of a corner lot abuts an alley or a corner
side street, access to the parking area shall be obtained from the
alley or corner side street. Alternate access from a primary street
may be approved through Site Plan Review procedures if a
determination is made that it is infeasible to fulfill this standard.
(6) On any parcel, curb cuts for access to the right-of-way shall be
approved by the City Engineer. In residential areas, only one
driveway opening will be allowed if the lot width is less than 100
feet.
B. Large parking lots (200 or more parking spaces).
(1) Primary drive aisles shall be located across from streets or
driveways to avoid conflicting traffic movements and facilitate the
safe flow of traffic.
(2) Large off-street parking lots shall be designed to simulate a grid
pattern through the placement of landscape islands, buildings, and
drive aisles.
(3) Block lengths within the grid should not exceed 600 linear feet
between the center lines of intersecting streets or primary drive
aisles. In cases where a block length exceeds 600 feet due to
topography, natural features or other physical constraints,
sidewalks shall be provided mid-block to connect parallel streets or
drive aisles.
C. Curbs and vehicle stops.
(1) All off-street parking lots, access drives and aisles, and other
vehicle maneuvering areas shall provide perimeter curbs.
§ 44-1206 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1206
1:1836
(2) Off-street parking stalls shall provide curbs, vehicle stops or similar
devices to prevent vehicles from overhanging on or into public
right-of-way or adjacent property, structures, fences, or screens.
(3) Vehicle stops shall be located 2.5 feet from a fence or wall.
(4) When a parking space abuts a landscaped area, the front two feet
of the parking space may overhang a landscaped area.
(5) A parking space may overhang a walkway by up to two feet,
provided that curbs or vehicle stops are installed to ensure that a
minimum five-foot walkway clearance is maintained.
D. Defined areas. Off-street parking areas of three or more spaces and offstreet
loading areas shall include painted lines, curbs, vehicle stops or
other similar identifiers to delineate parking and loading areas.
E. Accessible parking. Parking lots shall provide accessible parking spaces
and accessible access routes for persons with disabilities in compliance
with the State Building Code and the Americans with Disabilities Act
(ADA), as applicable. The provision of accessible parking shall count
toward fulfillment of off-street parking requirements.
F. Surfacing requirements.
(1) Parking lots. All off-street parking, stacking, and loading areas shall
be surfaced with asphalt, concrete, brick, stone, pavers, or an
equivalent material as approved by the City Engineer. Surfaces
such as pervious asphalt, pervious concrete, or turf blocks are
permitted; subject to the requirements of this chapter and other
City policies pertaining to stormwater management.
(2) Driveways.
(a) Driveways leading to parking lots of 10 parking spaces or more
shall conform to the requirements of § 44-1206B(1) of this
Code.
(b) Aprons on all driveways shall conform to the following
standards:
[1] A 1 1/2 inch bituminous concrete surface on a four-inch
base of bituminous aggregate mix; or
[2] A two-inch bituminous concrete surface on an eight-inch
base of crushed gravel or crushed stone; or
[3] A six-inch Portland cement concrete or five-inch reinforced
with wire mesh or structural equivalent of any of the
foregoing as determined by the Community Development
Director.
G. Drainage.
§ 44-1206 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1206
1:1837
(1) All parking lots shall be sloped and/or drained to prevent surface
water from such lots from running onto adjoining property in
unreasonable volumes.
(2) All ramped parking lots and un-ramped parking lots containing 10
or more parking spaces shall provide flood routes to direct excess
water in a way that results in the least amount of harm to adjoining
properties and shall dispose of surface water in one of the following
methods when approved by the City Engineer:
(a) Surface drainage across sidewalks, if any, onto adjacent public
right-of-way, unless such drainage would either:
[1] Cause flooding of the adjacent public right-of-way; or
[2] Flow longitudinally along any sidewalk adjacent to such lot
or otherwise impair pedestrian use of such sidewalk;
(b) Use of inlets and storm sewer facilities capable of draining the
lot from a storm of five year magnitude or greater;
(c) Retention of water on the premises;
(d) Underground drainage across other private property to an
approved outlet;
(e) And permeable pavers as approved by the City Engineer.
H. Dimensional standards.
(1) Off-street parking spaces shall be designed in accordance with
Table 1206I: Dimensional Standards for Parking Spaces and Aisles.
(2) All parking spaces shall have a minimum vertical clearance of
seven feet.
(3) Compact spaces. Up to 30% of all provided parking spaces may be
compact vehicle parking spaces. Dimensions for compact spaces
are shown in Table 1206I.
(4) All parking spaces and aisles shall comply with the following
minimum requirements.
Table 1206I: Dimensional Standards for Parking Spaces and Aisles
0°
(Parallel) 45° 60° 90°
Typical Compact Typical Compact Typical Compact Typical Compact
A - Width of
Aisle: One-Way
11 feet 11 feet 12 feet 12 feet 16 feet 16 feet 20 feet 20 feet
B - Width of
Aisle: Two-Way
12 feet 12 feet 20 feet 19 feet 20 feet 19 feet 24 feet 23 feet
§ 44-1206 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1206
1:1838
Table 1206I: Dimensional Standards for Parking Spaces and Aisles
0°
(Parallel) 45° 60° 90°
Typical Compact Typical Compact Typical Compact Typical Compact
C - Width of
Space
8.5 feet 8 feet 8.5 feet 8 feet 8.5 feet 8 feet 8.5 feet 8 feet
D - Depth of
Space
20 feet 19 feet 19 feet 18 feet 20 feet 19 feet 18 feet 17 feet
§ 44-1206 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1206
1:1839
§ 44-1207. [Ch. 44, 12-7] Drive-through facilities.
Diagram 1206
A. Purpose. Stands for drive-through facilities are provided to ensure safe
site circulation and adequate vehicle queuing at drive through facilities.
These standards are applied in addition to all other applicable
standards of this Code.
B. Location.
(1) Drive-through facilities shall not be located closer than 120 feet of
a Residential District boundary.
§ 44-1206 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1207
1:1840
(2) Drive-through facilities, inclusive of stacking lanes, shall be located
to the side or rear of a principal structure and shall not extend
beyond the front building wall. Alternate placement of the drivethrough
facility may be approved through Site Plan Review
procedures if a determination is made that it is infeasible to fulfill
this requirement.
C. Access.
(1) Drive-through stacking lanes shall be separated from driveways
and drive aisles.
(2) Access to queuing lanes shall in no way inhibit ingress or egress to
the building or any off-street parking area, inhibit the flow of traffic
throughout and within the off-street parking area, or encroach
upon any public rights-of-way.
(3) The stacking lane shall be designed to accommodate at least the
minimum number of stacking spaces required for each use.
(4) Stacking lanes and egress for drive-through facilities shall not
cross or pass through pedestrian walkways, without providing
appropriate crosswalk safety measures, pavement markings and
signs as approved by the Community Development Director.
(5) A bypass lane shall be provided.
D. Dimensional standards.
(1) Stacking lanes for drive-through facilities shall have the following
minimum lane widths:
(a) One lane: 12 feet.
(b) Two or more lanes: 10 feet per lane.
(c) Bypass lane: 10 feet.
(2) The minimum depth of each space in the stacking lane shall be 20
feet.
E. Management. A property owner shall not allow vehicle stacking to
overflow into primary drive aisles or any public street. As needed to
contain drive-through activity on site, management of drive-through
facilities may require additional attendants, designation of vehicle
waiting and pick up areas, or other measures to ensure safe vehicle and
pedestrian circulation.
F. Stacking standards.
(1) For any drive-through facility, a minimum of two queuing spaces
shall be provided per bay, unless otherwise required by Table
1207C.
§ 44-1207 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1207
1:1841
§ 44-1208. [Ch. 44, 12-8] Off-street parking requirements.
(2) Unless otherwise indicated, minimum vehicle queuing is required
per lane or bay.
(3) Spaces located adjacent to a point of service, such as a window or
car wash bay, shall not count toward compliance with queuing
requirements.
Table 1207C: Drive-Through Queuing Requirements
Use Type Minimum Vehicle Queuing
Financial Services 6 total; may be reduced to 3 per
lane if more than 1 window or
bay is provided
Car Wash 7
Specialty Food - Coffee Shops 10
Restaurant 8
Pharmacy 3
G. Site plan review. Modifications to drive through requirements may be
approved through Site Plan Review if a determination is made that such
modification would be appropriate due to site constraints or queuing
demand experienced by a particular use, based upon an independent
study that analyzes peak and off-peak vehicle queuing, vehicle turnover,
and data (queuing counts) collected from the same or comparable use
in terms of density, scale, bulk, area, type of activity and location.
Diagram 1207D
A. Minimum requirements. Except as otherwise expressly provided
herein, off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with
the parking ratio requirements of Table 1208E.
§ 44-1207 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1208
1:1842
B. Parking demand study. For the purposes of determining required
parking for an unlisted use or in consideration of application for shared
or reduced parking, the Community Development Director may require
the submittal of an independent parking demand study that analyzes
parking demand based on the parking generation standards of the
Institute of Traffic Engineers (ITE) or Urban Land Institute (ULI), and
includes relevant data collected from uses or combinations of uses that
are the same or comparable to the proposed use in terms of density,
scale, bulk, area, type of activity and location.
C. Exemptions.
(1) When the application of the off-street parking regulations specified
hereinafter results in a requirement of not more than three parking
spaces for any nonresidential use, such parking spaces need not be
provided. However, where two or more uses are located on a single
lot, only one of these uses shall be eligible for the above exemption.
In no instances shall this exemption apply to dwelling units.
(2) The minimum number of off-street parking spaces required by
Table 1208E of this Code shall be waived for nonresidential uses in
the D-1 Central Business District established by § 44-501 of this
Code.
D. Computation. The following rules apply when calculating the required
number of parking spaces:
(1) Multiple uses. Unless otherwise expressly stated, lots containing
more than one use must provide parking in an amount equal to the
total of the requirements for all use categories.
(2) Fractions. When computation of the required number of off-street
parking spaces results in a requirement of a fractional space, a
fraction of less than 1/2 shall be disregarded and a fraction of 1/2 or
more shall counted as one space.
(3) Occupancy or capacity-based standards. When computation of the
required number of off-street parking spaces is based upon
employees, students, residents or occupants, calculations must be
based on the largest number of persons working on any single shift,
the maximum enrollment, or the maximum fire-rated capacity,
whichever is applicable and whichever results in the greater
number of spaces.
(4) Floor area. Where floor area is the unit of measurement to
determine the required number of off-street parking and loading
spaces, Gross Floor Area (GFA) shall be used. For the purposes of
calculating required parking, designated outdoor dining, seating
and sales areas shall be applied toward the floor area.
§ 44-1208 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1208
1:1843
(5) Bench seating. In calculating bench seating for places of assembly,
each continuous four-foot segment of benches, pews or other
similar seating shall be counted as one seat.
(6) Unlisted uses. Upon receiving a development application for a use
not specifically listed in Table 1208E, the Community Development
Director is authorized to apply the parking ratio specified for the
listed use that is deemed most similar to the proposed or establish
a different minimum parking requirement on the basis of a Parking
Demand Study.
(7) Stalls. Where vehicle stalls are used as a measurement, all
calculations shall be based on the number of service bays, garage
door openings or booths.
E. The minimum number of motor vehicle parking spaces shall be
provided in accordance with Table 1208E, Motor Vehicle Parking Space
Requirements, below.
Table 1208E: Off-Street Parking Requirements
Use Category Specific Use General Requirement
AGRICULTURAL
Agriculture Aquaculture, aquaponics, hydroponics;
horticultural services; medical
marijuana cultivation; animal breeding
services; fish hatcheries; poultry
hatcheries
1 space per 600 GFA
All other agricultural None
Forestry All forestry None
RESIDENTIAL
Household Living Dwelling Unit, single-family 1 spaces per dwelling unit
Dwelling Unit, single-family attached;
two-family; multiple-family; live/work
1.5 spaces per efficiency or onebedroom
dwelling unit; 2 spaces
per 2 or more-bedroom dwelling
units
Mobile homes 2 spaces per unit
Dwelling Unit, accessory 1 space per unit
Group Living Agency-operated family homes 2 spaces per home
All other group living uses 1 space per 2 beds
INSTITUTIONAL
Education Preschools 1 space per 250 GFA
High schools 1 space per 4 seats in main
assembly area, but not less than 5
per classroom
§ 44-1208 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1208
1:1844
Table 1208E: Off-Street Parking Requirements
Use Category Specific Use General Requirement
Boarding schools Determined by Community
Development Director
All other public and private schools 1 space per 4 seats in main
assembly area, but not less than 1
per classroom
Business and trade schools, college/
university satellite classrooms
The greater of 1 space per 200
feet or 1 space per 4 seats
Government Animal detention facilities 1 space per 400 GFA
Government services and facilities 1 space per 200 GFA
Military bases, depots, communications
facilities
1 per 300 GFA
Health Ambulatory surgical treatment center 1 space per 250 GFA
Hospital or medical center 1 space per 2 beds
Religious Place of worship The greater of 1 space per 200
GFA or 1 space per 3 seats in the
main assembly area
Columbarium 1 space per 10 storage cubicles
Residential-Type
Institutional
Adult and juvenile detention facilities 1 per 1,500 GFA
Domestic violence shelter 1 space per 2 beds
Home for the aged (assisted living,
independent living, memory care, etc.)
1 space per 2 occupants
Nursing home 1 space per 3 beds
Other Institutional and
Cultural Uses
Clubs and lodges 1 space per 200 GFA
Food pantry Off-street parking requirements
will be based upon the principal
use of the structure containing
the food pantry
Libraries, museums, and cultural
institutions
1 space per 250 GFA
RECREATIONAL
Recreational Facilities Country, golf, and swimming clubs 1 space per 200 GFA
Golf courses 75 spaces for 9 hole course; 150
spaces for 18 hole course
Community center The greater of 1 space per 200
GFA or one per 4 occupants at
maximum capacity
§ 44-1208 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1208
1:1845
Table 1208E: Off-Street Parking Requirements
Use Category Specific Use General Requirement
Fairgrounds, agricultural exhibits Spaces equivalent to 30% of peak
daily attendance, as adduced from
testimony before the Board of
Zoning Appeals
Riding stables, riding schools The greater of 1 space per 200
GFA or 1 per 4 occupants at
maximum capacity
Swimming pools, community 1 per 4 occupants at maximum
capacity
COMMERCIAL
Aircraft and Automotive Aircraft, farm machinery, vehicle sales
and service
1 space per 250 GFA
Car wash, truck wash 1 space per 200 GFA sales, office,
or waiting area
Towing services, vehicle salvage and
wrecking, vehicle storage
The greater of 1 space per 2,400
GFA or 2 spaces
Truck stops, truck plazas, vehicle fueling
stations
1 space per 250 GFA
Vehicle repair and service 3 spaces per service bay
Vehicle rental service 1 space per 500 GFA
Amusement Parks Go-kart and race-kart tracks The greater of 1 space per 4 seats
in the grandstand or viewing area,
or 1 per 4 occupants at maximum
occupancy
All other amusement parks 1 space per 100 GFA activity area
Commercial Recreation Archery, rifle and shooting ranges The greater of 2 spaces per target
area or 1 space per 200 GFA
Arcades, game centers 1 space per 2 amusement game
machines
Bowling establishments 3 spaces per lane
Driving ranges 1 space per tee box
Miniature golf courses 1 space per hole
All other commercial recreation 1 space per 300 GFA
Entertainment and
Hospitality
Community reception establishments 1.2 spaces per 100 GFA
designated for the use
Entertainment and exhibition venues The greater of 1 space per 4 seats
or 1 space per 200 GFA
§ 44-1208 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1208
1:1846
Table 1208E: Off-Street Parking Requirements
Use Category Specific Use General Requirement
Sexually oriented entertainment
businesses
1 space per 160 GFA
Sports and fitness establishments 1 space per 200 GFA
Theaters and auditoriums 1 space per 4 seats
Lodging Bed-and-breakfast establishments 2 spaces for the operator; plus 1
space for each bedroom
Boarding and rooming houses 1 space per 400 GFA
Camps and camping establishments 2 spaces for managers office
Hotel or motel 1 space per room, plus 1 space
per 200 GFA conference or
restaurant area
Offices Financial services 1 space per 300 GFA
General offices, business or professional 1 space per 200 GFA area for the
first 2,000 square feet (minimum
of 3 spaces); plus, 1 space per 300
GFA for floor area exceeding
2,000 square feet
Medical or dental office or clinic 1 space per 250 GFA
Medical or research I laboratory 1 space per 300 GFA
Printing, copying and mailing services 1 space per 250 GFA
Recording and broadcast studios 1 space per 160 GFA
Personal Services Clothing Care: tailor, dry cleaning, coin
laundry, shoe repair, etc.
1 space per 250 GFA
Day-care center 1 space per employee
Funeral parlor, mortuary 1 space per 100 GFA
Instructional studios 1 space per 160 GFA
Kennels 1 space per 400 GFA
Personal care: barber shop, beauty
salon, day spa, etc.
1 space per 250 GFA
Veterinary office or clinic; pet care
(grooming, day care, training)
1 space per 250 GFA
Retail and Service Artisanal/craft production and retail 1 space per 250 GFA
Bars, taverns, and nightclubs 1 space per 50 GFA
Building materials and supplies 1 space per 300 GFA
Catering services 1 space per 1,000 GFA
Mobile food and beverage vendor 1 space per 100 GFA
§ 44-1208 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1208
1:1847
Table 1208E: Off-Street Parking Requirements
Use Category Specific Use General Requirement
Furniture sales 1 space per 600 GFA
Restaurants, cafeterias 1 space per 100 GFA
Restaurant, carry-out only 1 space per 250 GFA
Restaurant with drive-through 1 space per 50 GFA
Retail sales 1 space per 250 GFA
Sexually oriented business 1 space per 160 GFA
Grocery stores, Supermarkets 1 space per 250 GFA
Specialty food shops 1 space per 500 GFA
Vehicle service, general or limited 3 spaces per service bay
Vehicle sales and rental 1 space per 500 GFA
INDUSTRIAL
Manufacturing and
Production, Light
Commercial cleaning and repair services 1 space per 250 GFA
Commercial community kitchen 1 space per 1,000 GFA
Crematories 1 space per 400 GFA
Trade and construction services 1 space per 250 GFA
Wholesaling and distribution 1 space per 1,000 GFA
All other light manufacturing and
production uses
1 space per 600 GFA
Manufacturing and
Production, Heavy
All heavy manufacturing and production
uses
1 space per 1,000 GFA
All other waste services 1 space per 1,000 GFA
Storage and Equipment
Yards
Aircraft, marine craft, petroleum
products, and other similar storage.
1 space per 2,400 GFA
Marinas 1 space per 2 boat slips; plus 1
space per 200 GFA
Mini Warehouses 1 space per 25 storage lockers
plus 2 spaces for manager's office
Storage facilities, multi-tenant 1 space per 1,200 GFA
Storage facilities, single tenant 1 space per 2,400 GFA
Transportation Airports, heliports, and landing fields 1 space per 200 GFA
Passenger terminals 1 space per 400 GFA passenger
terminal area
§ 44-1208 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1208
1:1848
§ 44-1209. [Ch. 44, 12-9] Adjustments to required parking.
Notwithstanding Table 1208E, the following adjustments to required
parking are permitted upon approval of the Director of Community
Development.
Table 1209: Adjustment to Required Parking
Adjustment
Type Criteria Adjustment Amount
Transit Resident or nonresident use
(other than an after-hours
establishment) is located within
900 feet of a public transit
route.
10% reduction
Pedestrian
Access
Nonresidential use is located
where residents of all
residential and mixed-use areas
within 1,320 feet of the subject
property can walk to and from
the nonresidential use on a
continuous sidewalk system
(ignoring intervening streets).
10% reduction
Public
Parking Lots
Nonresidential use is located
within 900 feet of a parking lot
that is available for use by the
public without charge (either
directly or through a validation
program in which the subject
use participates).
10% reduction
Table 1208E: Off-Street Parking Requirements
Use Category Specific Use General Requirement
Public or private utility facility, minor For manned facilities, the greater
of 1 space per 1,200 GFA or 2
spaces
Wireless Communication Facilities 1 space per equipment cabinet for
towers
§ 44-1208 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1209
1:1849
Table 1209: Adjustment to Required Parking
Adjustment
Type Criteria Adjustment Amount
On-Street
Parking
Single-family or duplex
residential is located along one
or more public street frontages
where public parking is
permitted.
One legal on-street
parking space (to a
maximum of 2 parking
spaces) can be
substituted for every
required off-street
parking space provided
the on-street space is
located on a public rightof-
way immediately
abutting the property or
tenant space seeking the
parking adjustment.
Where a partial space
straddles an extension of
a side property line, the
space may be counted by
the abutting property
owner in front of whose
property 50% or more of
the space is located.
Multifamily residential or
nonresidential use located
along one or more public street
frontages where public parking
is permitted.
One legal on-street
parking space can be
substituted for 0.5 of
every required off-street
parking space provided
the on-street space is
located on a public rightof-
way immediately
abutting the property or
tenant space seeking the
parking adjustment
§ 44-1210. [Ch. 44, 12-10] Other parking uses.
A. Carpool or vanpool vehicles. Parking spaces reserved, signed, and
enforced for carpooling or vanpooling services may count as two
regular parking spaces.
B. Car sharing services. Parking spaces reserved, signed, and enforced for
car-sharing services may count as four regular parking spaces.
C. Electric vehicle charging. Any parking space may be equipped with a
power outlet or similar apparatus for electric vehicle charging. Electric
vehicle charging stations for public use may provide non-illuminated
§ 44-1209 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1210
1:1850
§ 44-1211. [Ch. 44, 12-11] Loading design standards.
directional signage, subject to approval by the Community
Development Director, to identify the location of charging stations.
A. Purpose. In all Districts, every building occupied by one or more uses
that require the receipt or distribution of materials or merchandise by
vehicles shall provide and maintain off-street loading spaces as
required by this section.
B. Location.
(1) All required loading berths shall be off-street and shall be located
on the same lot as the building to be served.
(2) No permitted or required loading berth shall be located within 25
feet of the nearest point of intersection of any two street right-ofway
lines.
(3) Loading/unloading areas and docks shall be prohibited in the front
yard or on any building side facing and directly visible from a
street.
(4) Adjacent to a Residential District, a loading space shall not be
located closer than 30 feet to the Residential District line unless it
is contained within a completely enclosed building or enclosed on
all sides by a wall or solid fence not less than six feet in height.
(5) Loading and unloading activity shall not be permitted in any public
right-of-way, except in the D-1 Central Business District, D-2
Downtown Transitional District or D-3 Downtown Warehouse and
Arts District as authorized by the Director of Public Works.
C. Access. Each required loading berth shall be served by appropriate
means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner which will
least interfere with traffic movements as determined by the Director
Public Works. Loading/unloading operations shall not interfere with the
normal movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic in public rights-ofway,
off-street parking areas or internal drives and sidewalks.
D. Parking and loading area plan. The vehicular path and turning radii to
the loading area must be shown on the Parking and Loading Area Plan
that is required pursuant to § 44-1203B to verify truck maneuverability
for the largest truck intended to serve the use.
E. Surfacing. All open loading berths shall be constructed on a stabilized
subgrade with a pavement design meeting one of the following
requirements:
(1) Hot Mix Asphalt (HMA) or Warm Mix Asphalt (WMA) pavement at
least eight inches thick constructed in not less than two lifts with
the final surface course being not greater than a two-inch lift.
§ 44-1210 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1211
1:1851
§ 44-1212. [Ch. 44, 12-12] Off-street loading requirements.
Bituminous Aggregate Mixture (BAM) may be included as part of
the overall asphalt structural thickness.
(2) Portland Cement Concrete (PCC) pavement at least six inches thick
with steel or fiber reinforcement.
(3) Portland Cement Concrete (PCC) pavement at least eight inches
non-reinforced.
(4) Other pavement designs may be approved by the Director of Public
Works based on a formal submittal of the pavement design
calculations prepared by a licensed engineer.
F. Repair and service. No storage of any kind, nor motor vehicle repair
work or service of any kind, shall be permitted within any required
loading berth.
G. Space allocated. Space allocated to be required loading berth shall not
be used to satisfy any requirement of this Code for off-street parking
spaces.
H. Site plan review. Modifications to loading space and location
requirements may be approved through Site Plan Review if a
determination is made that such modification would be appropriate due
to site constraints, or the number of deliveries experienced by a
particular use.
A. Dimensional standard. A required loading berth shall be at least 10 feet
in width by at least 25 feet in length, exclusive of aisle and maneuvering
space, and shall have vertical clearance of at least 14 feet.
B. The minimum number of loading spaces shall be provided in
accordance with Table 1212B, Loading Space Requirements, below.
Table 1212B: Loading Space Requirements
Use Type Size Loading Space(s)
Residential 0 — 24 dwelling units 0-4 None
> 25 dwelling units 1
Nonresidential Less than 20,000 GFA None
20,000-74,999 GFA 2
75,000-99,999 GFA 3
> 100,000 GFA 4 5
GFA = Gross Floor Area
C. If a single loading space is required, an alley may be used in lieu of the
required loading space.
§ 44-1211 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1213
1:1852
§ 44-1213. [Ch. 44, 12-13] Bicycle parking requirements.
A. Purpose. This section is established to ensure provision of bicycle
parking facilities in furtherance a safe, complete, and efficient network
of streets, bicycle-pedestrian facilities and other infrastructure to serve
users in any surface transportation mode.
B. Location.
(1) Required bicycle parking shall be provided on the same lot as the
use for which it is intended to serve.
(2) Bicycle racks shall be located such that they are highly visible, with
adequate lighting, from the street and/or building entrance(s) from
where bicyclists approach.
(3) The location of bicycle parking shall not conflict with pedestrian
and/or motor vehicle circulation.
(4) Bicycle parking shall be sited within 50 feet of a building's main
entrance. If provided indoors, bicycle parking shall be located
within a common area designated for secure bicycle storage.
(5) Bicycle parking adjacent to a pedestrian walkway shall be sited to
ensure that a minimum five-foot walkway clearance is maintained.
C. Design criteria.
(1) Bicycle facilities shall be of high quality and reflect the architecture
of the primary structure.
(2) Bicycle racks shall be installed on a hard surface parking area. The
hard surface surrounding each bicycle rack shall measure at least
six feet by six feet in size.
(3) Each bicycle rack shall provide parking for at least two bicycles.
(4) Racks shall allow for the bicycle frame and at least one wheel to be
locked to the racks.
(5) The bicycle rack shall allow for the use of a cable as well as a Ushaped
lock.
(6) Installation of bicycle parking facilities shall conform to the
manufacturer requirements.
D. Dimensional standards.
(1) Each bicycle parking space shall be a minimum six feet in length.
(2) Bicycle racks shall be located at least three feet in all directions
from any obstruction, including but not limited to other bicycle
racks, walls, doors, posts, columns, or landscaping.
§ 44-1213 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1213
1:1853
(3) A minimum vertical clearance of seven feet shall be maintained
above all bicycle parking facilities.
E. Required bicycle parking.
(1) Exemption. The bicycle parking requirements of this section shall
apply to all uses other than the following uses:
(a) Any use in the D-1 Central Business District;
(b) Any Industrial Use (includes light and heavy manufacturing,
storage and equipment yards, transportation, utilities).
(c) Country Clubs, Golf Clubs, Golf Courses;
(d) Fairgrounds, Agricultural Exhibits;
(e) Hotel/motel;
(f) Mobile food vending;
(g) Residential Single-Family, Single-Family Attached, Two-Family,
Mobile Homes;
(h) Riding Stables, Riding Schools;
(i) Roadside Markets;
(j) Truck Stops, Truck Plazas; Truck Washes.
(k) Vehicle Salvage and Wrecking Operations;
(l) Vehicle storage;
(m) Any similar use to the uses listed herein, or any use exclusively
oriented to motor vehicles, as determined by the Community
Development Director.
(2) When the required amount of bicycle parking is two spaces or less,
the use shall provide a minimum of two spaces in a bicycle parking
facility.
(3) Unless otherwise specified herein, bicycle parking shall be
provided at the ratio specified in Table 1212E.
Table 1212E: Bicycle Parking Requirements
Use Type Bicycle Parking
Residential 0-5 dwelling units — none
> 5 dwelling units — 25% of
required vehicle parking
Nonresidential 5% of required vehicle parking
(up to 20 bicycle spaces)
§ 44-1213 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1213
1:1854
§ 44-1214. [Ch. 44, 12-14] Mobility and circulation.
Table 1212E: Bicycle Parking Requirements
Use Type Bicycle Parking
2.5% of required vehicle
parking (> 21 bicycle spaces)
F. Motor vehicle parking reduction. Parking requirements may be reduced
by one off-street parking space for every four bicycle parking spaces;
provided, however, that the total number of required motor vehicle
parking spaces shall not be reduced by more than 10%.
G. The provisions of this section may be waived or modified through Site
Plan Review procedures if a determination is made that it is infeasible
to fulfill bicycle parking requirements due to site constraints, proximity
to existing bicycle parking, and the nature of the proposed building or
use.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish mobility and
circulation standards that allow reasonable access to properties; create
a continuous network of non-motorized pathways within and between
developments; maintain the capacity of existing public infrastructure as
land development occurs; ensure safe access to and from streets by
emergency vehicles; and reduce interference with through traffic by
other vehicles, bicycles, and pedestrians.
B. Street and site connectivity.
(1) Internal circulation drives shall be arranged to promote the
alignment and continuation of existing or proposed streets and
drives into adjacent lots, developed or undeveloped.
(2) Cross access. In any Business, Manufacturing or Public Interest
District, vehicular cross-access shall be provided to allow
circulation between sites without the need to reenter the public
right-of-way.
(a) A stub for future cross access shall be provided from the
vehicular use area to adjacent lots.
(b) A cross-access easement shall be recorded prior to the
issuance of a Building Certificate of Occupancy for the
development.
(c) The requirement for vehicular cross-access may be waived
through Site Plan Review procedures where the provision of
such access is infeasible and appropriate pedestrian and
bicycle access is dedicated to adjacent uses.
§ 44-1213 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1214
1:1855
C. Pedestrian circulation. All single-family attached and multiple-family
residential, nonresidential, and mixed-use developments shall comply
with the following standards:
(1) Continuous internal pedestrian walkways shall be provided to
connect off-street surface parking areas with the primary entrances
of main buildings.
(2) Conflict between pedestrians and traffic shall be minimized at all
points of pedestrian access to on-site parking and building
entrances, and between buildings.
(3) At least one pedestrian walkway with a minimum width of five feet
shall be provided from the internal pedestrian walkway network to
the public sidewalk system. In the case of corner lots, connections
shall be made to the sidewalks of both streets.
(4) All internal pedestrian walkways shall be distinguished from
driving surfaces through the use of durable, low-maintenance
surface materials such as pavers, bricks, or scored/stamped
concrete or asphalt.
§ 44-1214 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1214
1:1856
ARTICLE XIII
Landscaping and Screening
§ 44-1301. [Ch. 44, 13-1] Purpose and intent.
§ 44-1302. [Ch. 44, 13-2] Applicability.
A. The regulations of this article establish minimum requirements for
landscaping and screening. The regulations are intended to advance
the general purposes of this Code and specifically to:
(1) Provide buffering between single-family dwelling units and
multiple-family dwelling units, and office, commercial, and
industrial land uses;
(2) Safeguard and enhance property values and to protect public and
private investment;
(3) Create transitions;
(4) Enhance the quality and appearance new development and
redevelopment projects;
(5) Promote the preservation, expansion, protection and proper
maintenance of existing trees and landscaping;
(6) Promote sustainable landscape practices including the use of noninvasive
native and regionally adaptable plants;
(7) Conserve energy and reduce soil erosion and sedimentation; and
(8) Protect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
A. The landscaping and screening regulations of this article apply as set
forth in the individual sections of these regulations.
(1) General.
(a) Unless otherwise specified, the landscaping, the screening and
buffering provisions of this section shall apply to all new
multifamily and nonresidential development, including
principal and accessory structures.
(b) Buildings and structures lawfully existing as of the effective
date of this Code may be repaired and maintained without
providing or modifying landscaping, screening, and buffering
in conformance with this article; provided, however, that
screening requirements required in accordance with Article X
shall be required as applicable to any new use hereafter
established.
(c) Where a building or structure existed as of the effective date of
this Code and is expanded or enlarged by 20% or more, either
§ 44-1301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1302
1:1857
§ 44-1303. [Ch. 44, 13-3] Landscape plan submittal requirements.
in gross floor area or impervious area on the site, compliance
with the provisions of this article shall be required.
B. Exceptions.
(1) The parking lot landscaping standards of § 44-1307 shall apply to
surface parking lots in the D-1 district; development in the D-1
district shall be exempt from all other requirements of this article.
A. Landscape plan Submittals. Landscaping plans shall be prepared and
stamped by a professional landscape architect or designer and must be
provided for each phase of the development review and building permit
processes. The landscape plan shall include the following information
provided on one or more sheets:
(1) The street address and parcel number of the property;
(2) The applicant's name, address and interest in the property;
(3) The owner's name and address, if different from the applicant, and
the owner's signed consent to the filing of the plan;
(4) Title, scale, north marker, and date;
(5) Zoning of site and the use(s) of all adjoining property(s);
(6) All lot lines, easements and rights-of-way;
(7) All surrounding roads with street names labeled;
(8) Delineation of wetlands, streams and other water bodies;
(9) Identification of existing trees and other landscape elements to be
removed or preserved;
(10) Existing and proposed site contours on the project site and 100 feet
beyond the site lot lines, at intervals not to exceed two feet;
(11) All existing and proposed drainage and detention areas;
(12) The total square foot of the site area dedicated for vehicle use,
including parking, loading, circulation, drop-off/pick-up, etc.;
(13) Location, size, spacing, and species of proposed plant material,
including plant lists showing the required and proposed quantities;
(14) A plant list keyed to the landscape plan that identifies landscape
materials by scientific name and common name, planting size and
planting details;
(15) Methods and details for protecting existing vegetation during
construction;
§ 44-1302 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1303
1:1858
§ 44-1304. [Ch. 44, 13-4] General landscaping requirements.
(16) Size and location of berms, fences and other screening or
screening devices;
(17) Calculations verifying the minimum landscaping required for the
site under this article and calculations verifying the minimum
percentage of required landscape area(s);
(18) Description of irrigation methods for landscape areas;
(19) Designation of area(s) to be used for snow storage;
(20) Description of landscape maintenance program, including
statement that all diseased, damaged or dead materials shall be
replaced in accordance with the requirements of this article; and
(21) Where fences, retaining walls or screen walls are proposed: an
inset detail or specification sheet that indicates materials, height,
and construction details for the structure;
(22) Where berms are proposed: typical cross section, including slope,
height, and width, of berms and the type of ground cover to be
placed on them;
(23) Other information or documentation as the Director of Community
Development may deem necessary to allow a full and proper
consideration and disposition of the particular plan, including but
not limited to special features, sign locations, lighting, decks,
paving, gazebos, etc.
B. Minor changes to approved landscape plans.
(1) Minor changes to the approved landscape plan that do not affect
compliance with the requirements of this article and do not reduce
the net amount of plant material as specified on the landscape plan
may be approved by the Community Development Director.
(2) Changes that do not comply with the requirements of this article
and/or changes to the size and amount of plant materials of an
approved landscape plan shall be considered a major change.
Major changes are subject to review and approval by the body
granting approval of the landscape plan initially.
A. Previously approved plans. Any site plan or landscaping plan approved
by the Community Development Director prior to the effective date of
the Code codified in this article shall remain enforceable and in force.
B. Required vegetation. All areas not covered by buildings, parking areas,
driveways, walkways, pedestrian plazas or other pedestrian-oriented
impervious surfaces or water surfaces shall be planted with living
vegetation, including trees, shrubs, grasses, and groundcovers.
§ 44-1303 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1304
1:1859
C. Timing of planting. All required plant material shall be installed prior to
issuing a Certificate of Occupancy. Where compliance with this
requirement is not possible because of the season of the year, the
Director of Community Development may grant an appropriate delay or
postponement of this requirement. In all such cases of postponement,
the owner or developer shall deposit in an escrow account in a manner
approved by the Corporation Counsel an amount equal to the 110% of
the estimated cost of installing such required landscaping or planting
screen. However, in no instance shall this delay exceed eight months.
D. Completion of improvements. Tree stakes, guy wires and tree wrap
shall be removed after completion of the initial growing season.
E. Maintenance.
(1) General.
(a) The property owner shall be responsible for the maintenance
of all landscape areas, including ground cover vegetation in
the public right-of-way, but shall not be responsible for the
maintenance or removal of trees in the public right-of-way.
(b) All landscape areas and plant materials shall be maintained in
good condition, shall present a healthy, neat, and orderly
appearance, and shall be kept free of refuse and debris in
accordance with the approved site plan.
(c) Pruning, trimming, or other suitable methods shall control
plants so that they do not interfere with public utilities, restrict
pedestrian or vehicular access, or constitute a traffic hazard.
(d) Unhealthy, withered, severely pruned, diseased, or dead plants
shall be replaced within one year or the next appropriate
planting period, whichever comes first.
(e) Fences, steps, retaining walls and similar landscaping
elements shall be maintained in good repair. The owner of the
premises shall be responsible for the maintenance, repair, and
replacement of all landscape materials, fences, steps, retaining
walls and similar landscaping elements, and refuse disposal
areas.
(f) Irrigation systems, when provided, shall be maintained in good
operating condition to promote the health of the plant material
and the conservation of water.
(2) Sight distance. Landscaping shall not hinder the vision of motorists
and pedestrians necessary for safe movement into, out of, and
within the parking lot and shall be in compliance with § 44-405E, of
this Code and the following visibility triangle standard:
(a) At the intersection of a public or private street with a public or
private driveway or alley no landscaping shall be placed,
§ 44-1304 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1304
1:1860
§ 44-1305. [Ch. 44, 13-5] Plant material requirements.
planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as to impede
visibility between a height of 2 1/2 and 10 feet above the curb
top elevation of the street within the visibility triangle area
formed by the street curbline intersection with the driveway
pavement line, and with the hypotenuse (third side of the
triangle) connecting said curbline and said pavement line at
distances from their intersection equal to 20 feet along the
driveway line and 30 feet along the street curbline.
(3) Hazardous trees.
(a) Any plant material on private property that overhangs a public
way in such a manner as to impede or interfere with traffic or
travel on said public way, or that obstructs the view of
motorists at the intersection of streets, shall be trimmed by the
owner of the property so that the interference or obstruction is
removed.
(b) Any tree or limb of a tree that has become dead, decayed, or
broken and is likely to fall on or across a public way shall be
removed by the owner of the property.
(c) Any trimming or removal shall be completed within 30 days
after written notice requiring said trimming or removal. Said
notice shall be served upon the owner of the property and will
be delivered by personal delivery or regular mail. It shall be
the duty of the owner of such property to trim or remove the
tree, shrub, bush, or plant under the direction of the Building
Commissioner.
(4) Enforcement.
(a) Failure to comply with these maintenance requirements
(b) Any property owner notified of a violation by the Community
Development Director shall be given a reasonable time within
which to restore or replace said landscaping. If such action is
not taken within a period of 30 days or a reasonable period of
time as determined by the Community Development Director,
the City may replace required landscaping or screening
materials in a manner and at a time to be specified in a written
notice at the expense of the City. The City shall recover the cost
of replacement where the owner or person responsible fails to
do so by bringing suit in the name of the City against the owner
or person neglecting to maintain or replace the
aforementioned landscaping materials and/or screening.
A. Scale and nature of landscape material. The scale and nature of
landscape materials shall be appropriate to the size of the site and
related structures.
§ 44-1304 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1305
1:1861
B. Plant material selection.
(1) All plant materials used shall be of good quality, be capable to
withstand the seasonal temperature variations of central Illinois,
be free of disease and insects, and meet the American Standard for
Nursery Stock of the American Nurserymen standards for
minimum acceptable form, quality and size for species selected.
(2) The use of species native to Illinois shall be encouraged. Where
appropriate, the use of drought and salt tolerant plant material is
preferred.
(3) Size and density of plant material, both at the time of planting and
at maturity, are additional criteria that shall be considered when
selecting plant material.
(4) Materials used in fulfilling landscaping requirements shall conform
to the standards and requirements of all applicable Chapters of the
Bloomington City Code, 1960, as amended, including but not
limited to Chapter 19 of said Bloomington City Code, 1960, as
amended.
(5) The City Forester shall approve the species of any landscape and/or
trees to be located beneath power lines.
C. Shade trees. All deciduous shade trees shall have a minimum trunk size
of 2.5 inches in caliper at planting, unless otherwise specified.
D. Evergreen trees. Evergreens trees shall have a minimum height of five
feet at planting and shall be incorporated into the landscape treatment
of a site, particularly in those areas where year-round screening and
buffering is required.
E. Ornamental trees. Single stem ornamental trees shall have a minimum
trunk size of two inches in caliper at planting, unless otherwise
specified. Multiple stem ornamental trees shall have a minimum height
of eight feet at planting, unless otherwise specified.
F. Shrubs.
(1) Unless otherwise specified, all large deciduous and evergreen
shrubs shall have minimum height of three feet at installation, and
all small deciduous and evergreen shrubs shall have a minimum
height of 18 inches at installation.
(2) Large shrubs are those shrubs that reach five or more feet in height
at maturity. Small shrubs are those shrubs that can grow up to five
feet in height if left unmaintained but are generally kept at heights
of 18 inches to 30 inches.
G. Turf and/or Lawn Grasses. Lawn grasses shall be planted in species
normally grown as permanent lawns in the Bloomington area.
§ 44-1305 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1305
1:1862
(1) Grasses may be plugged, sprigged, seeded, or sodded. When
complete sodding or seeding is not used, nursery grass seed shall
be sown and mulched for immediate protection until permanent
coverage is achieved. Grass sod and seed shall be free of weeds and
noxious pests or disease.
(2) In swales and other areas susceptible to erosion, hydroseed, hydro
mulch, rolled sod, erosion reducing net or suitable mulch shall be
used, and shall be staked where necessary for stabilization.
H. Minimum sizes and spacing. The minimum plant sizes and spacing shall
be provided in accordance with Table 1305H, Minimum Sizes and
Spacing.
Table 1305H: Minimum Sizes and Spacing
Type of Plant
Material Minimum Plant Sizes Spacing Requirements
Canopy/Shade
Trees
2 1/2 inch caliper 25 feet on-center
Ornamental/
Understory
Trees
2-inch caliper
5 feet height (clump
form)
15 feet on-center
Evergreen
Trees
5 feet height 20 feet on-center
Shrubs 2 feet height or spread 3 feet to 4 feet on-center
I. Topsoil. Topsoil shall be installed with a minimum depth of four inches
for lawn areas, and eight inches to 12 inches within planting beds.
J. Stabilization. All landscape planting areas shall be stabilized and
maintained with hydroseed, hydro mulch, seed, sod, ground covers,
mulches, or other approved materials to prevent soil erosion and allow
rainwater infiltration.
K. Planting beds.
(1) All required shrubs and trees shall be mulched and maintained with
shredded hardwood bark or cypress mulch. Bark used as mulch
shall be maintained at a minimum depth of two inches.
(2) All mulch proposed to be placed within or directly adjacent to a
parking lot shall be shredded hardwood bark or cypress mulch.
(3) Plant groups shall be mulched in a continuous bed in which the
edge of the mulching bed does not extend any more than four feet
beyond the edge of the plantings.
§ 44-1305 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1305
1:1863
(4) When required trees are planted individually and away from nearby
plants, they shall be encircled in a mulched area with a diameter of
no more than five feet.
(5) Evergreen trees are allowed a mulched circle with a diameter large
enough to accommodate the spread of the tree and up to four
additional feet of mulch beyond the edge of the tree.
(6) Neither gravel mulch nor lava stone are permitted within or
directly adjacent to parking lots, but decorative landscaping stone
may be used as a mulch. Ground cover (grass, sod, flowers, etc.)
shall be planted and maintained in curbed parking islands outside
of mulched areas. Minimum diameter of any landscaping stone is
one inch. No pea gravel or pebble mulch is allowed.
L. Irrigation. Landscape design pursuant to the requirements of this
chapter shall recognize the need for irrigation and water conservation.
The need for sprinkler irrigation systems shall be determined by the
type of plant material and the condition/growing medium that they are
installed in. All irrigation systems shall be designed to minimize the use
of water.
M. Berming. Earthen berms may be incorporated into the landscaping of a
site where there is sufficient space and when berms and existing
topographic features can be combined with plant material to facilitate
effective screening. Minimum berm slopes shall not exceed a four to
one slope ratio to prevent erosion and be properly and safely
maintained.
N. Credit for existing vegetation. Existing healthy, well-formed trees and
shrubs may be credited toward the requirements of this article
provided that the tree(s) exceeds 10 feet in height and the vegetation is
identified on the landscape plan, protected against damage during
construction, located in an appropriate place, and maintained in a
healthy growing condition. A landscape architect, arborist, or other
similarly qualified professional shall determine the condition of trees
and shrubs.
O. Plant species diversity. Diversity among required plant material is
required not only for visual interest, but to reduce the risk of losing a
large population of plants due to disease. Table 1305O, Plant Species
Diversity, indicates the percentage of diversity required based on the
total quantity of species being used. At least 50% of new plantings shall
be species native to Illinois. All plantings shall be hardy to USDA
Climate Zone 5.
§ 44-1305 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1305
1:1864
Table 1305O: Plant Species Diversity
Total Number
of Plants Per
Plant Type
Maximum of
Any Species
Minimum of
Any Species
Minimum
Number of
Species
1-4 100% Not Applicable 1
5-10 60% 40% 2
11-15 45% 20% 3
16-75 40% 10% 5
76-500 25% 5% 8
500-1,000 30% 5% 10
1,000+ 15% 4% 15
P. Screen materials.
(1) All planting materials used in required screens shall be evergreen
varieties. Other plant materials may be used upon approval by the
Community Development Director.
(2) A berm at least four feet in height and 30 feet in width may be
installed as an alternative to a solid opaque fence. Such berm shall
be landscaped with a variety of planting materials in such a manner
so as to be consistent with the intent of required screenings.
(3) In lieu of a required planting screen, a solid opaque fence not less
than six feet in height may be installed. Chain link or wire mesh
fences interlaced or interwoven with opaque strips may qualify as
meeting the requirement for a solid opaque fence if approved by
the Community Development Director.
Q. Unaccredited trees. Table 1305Q: Unaccredited Trees, lists species that
are permitted but shall not be credited toward required landscaping
because of their brittleness, susceptibility to disease and insects, overly
expansive root structure, excessive litter, and or other undesirable
characteristics. The planting of these species is not encouraged.
Table 1305Q: Unaccredited Trees
Botanical Name Common Name
Malus Spp. Apple
Fraxinus Ash
Robinia Spp. Black Locust
Juglans Nigra Black Walnut
Acer Negundo Box Elder
Catalpa Speciosa Catalpa
Prunus Spp. Cherry and Plum
§ 44-1305 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1305
1:1865
Table 1305Q: Unaccredited Trees
Botanical Name Common Name
Populus Spp. Cottonwood, Poplar, Aspen
Gingko Biloba (female) Female Gingko
Morus Spp. Mulberry
Maclura Pomifera Osage Orange
Pyrus Spp. Pear
Quercus Palustris Pin Oak
Elaeagnus Angustifolia Russian Olive
Ulmus Pumila Siberian Elm
Acer Saccharinum Silver Maple
Ulmus Rubra Slippery Elm
Platanous Occidentalis Sycamore
Ailanthus Altissima Tree of Heaven
Salix Spp. Willow
R. Prohibited materials.
(1) Planting the species as listed in Table 1305R is prohibited in the
City due to their invasive nature.
Table 1305R: Prohibited (Invasive) Species
Botanical Name Common Name
Butomus umbellatus Flowering Rush
Alliaria petiolata Garlic Mustard
Populus nigra var. italica Lombardy Poplar
Rosa Multiflora Multiflora Rose
Phragmites australis Common Reed
Lythrum salicaria Purple Loosestrife
Centaurea Biebersteinii Spotted Knapweed
(2) The following materials are deemed inappropriate for the purposes
of this section and shall not be used in fulfilling these landscaping
requirements:
(a) Permanent pavement surfacing materials such as concrete and
bituminous surfaces;
(b) Artificial trees;
(c) Artificial shrubs;
§ 44-1305 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1305
1:1866
§ 44-1306. [Ch. 44, 13-6] Landscaping areas.
The graphic below illustrates the location of the landscape and screening
requirements discussed in §§ 44-1306 and 44-1307 of this article.
Diagram 1306
(d) Artificial grass;
(e) Artificial flora;
(f) Crushed limestone; or
(g) Comparable materials.
A. Building foundation landscaping.
(1) If a multifamily residential, nonresidential, or mixed-use
development maintains a front and corner side yard of 10 feet or
more, building foundation landscaping is required.
(2) Foundation plantings shall be designed to supplement buffer yard
plantings to frame important views, while visually softening long
expanses of walls. Foundation plantings shall respond to the
windows and materials of the building.
(3) Foundation plantings shall be installed across 60% of the length of
the facade of the building, except where walkways and driveways
are located.
§ 44-1305 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1306
1:1867
(4) A minimum four-foot wide hedge row shall be planted with one
shrub every three feet on center, spaced linearly. Such shrubs shall
measure a minimum of 24 inches at planting and shall be a
minimum of 36 inches to a maximum of 48 inches in height at
maturity. Foundation plantings may also include trees, additional
shrubs, grasses, perennials, and groundcover.
Diagram 1306A
B. Transition yards.
(1) Applicability. The transitional yard landscaping requirements shall
be applied to multifamily and nonresidential uses in addition to any
buffer yard or screening requirement specified in the District
Regulations and Use Provisions.
(2) Transition yard types.
(a) Four transition yard types are established in recognition of the
different contexts that may exist. They are as follows:
Table 1306B(2)(a): Transition Yards
Specifications TY-1 TY-2 TY-3 TY-4
Min. Yard
Depth
5 feet 8 feet 10 feet 15 feet
Min. Fence/
Wall Height
6 feet
(masonry
wall, solid
wood, or
board on
board
required)
Not
Required
Not
Required
Not
Required
Min. Trees (per 100 feet)
§ 44-1306 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1306
1:1868
Table 1306B(2)(a): Transition Yards
Specifications TY-1 TY-2 TY-3 TY-4
Deciduous
Tree
Not
Required
Not
Required
4 Not
Required
Evergreen
Tree
2 4 Not
Required
3
Flowering
Tree
2 2 2 2
Min. Shrubs (per 100 feet)
Deciduous
Shrub
Not
Required
Not
Required
15 Sufficient
Amount
Evergreen
Shrub
Not
Required
10 Not
Required
Sufficient
Amount
Large
Shrub
5 Not
Required
Not
Required
Not
Required
[1] Yard widths calculated on the basis of average per 100
feet, provided that the yard width at any point may not
be less than 50% of the minimums stated in the table.
Required zoning district setbacks may be counted toward
satisfying transition yard widths.
(b) Transition yards may include a combination of elements
including setback distances for separation, tree and shrubs,
solid fencing, and/or berming. Existing topography and
vegetation should be included in the design of the transition
yard as approved by the Community Development Director.
Preservation of existing matures trees is strongly encouraged.
(c) All treatments in the transition yard shall comply with the
design standards of this article. The minimum size and
improvement of the transition yard types identified above may
be used in combination to meet the intent of this article.
[1] TY-1: Structural transition yard. Solid six-foot high wall or
fence with two evergreen variety trees, two flowering
variety trees, and five large shrubs per 100 feet of linear
distance.
[2] TY-2: Natural transition yard - evergreen. Four evergreen
variety trees, two flowering variety trees and 10 evergreen
shrubs per 100 feet of linear distance.
[3] TY-3: Natural transition yard - deciduous. Four deciduous
variety trees, two flowering variety trees, and 15 large
deciduous shrubs per 100 feet of linear distance planted in
a staggered double row).
§ 44-1306 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1306
1:1869
[4] TY-4: Earthen berm transition yard. Minimum fifteen-foot
transition yard with berming not to exceed a one to three
slope, three large evergreen trees, two flowering variety
trees per 100 feet of linear distance, and sufficient
evergreen shrubs with a combined height (berm and
mature shrub) of five feet to form a continuous screen
within three years of planting and/or sufficient deciduous
shrubs with a combined height of five feet to form a
continuous screening within three years of planting.
[5] Areas not planted with trees or shrubs must be maintained
as live groundcover.
(d) When an alley exists between two lots that would typically
require a transition yard, the width of the alley can be used
toward the required transition yard, provided that all required
landscaping is provided for at least the first five feet of the
yard, or the remainder of the required transition yard,
whichever is greater.
(e) Application of transition yard types. Transition yards shall be
provided based on Table 1306B(2)(a) Transition Yard Type
Requirements, except where adjacent uses are of a similar
nature, scale, and intensity. As per the table, the type of
required transition yard is dependent upon the land use type of
the subject lot and the land use type of the adjacent lot(s).
When the approved use of a lot would typically require a
transition area of a certain type based on the table below, the
Director of Community Development may grant an
Administrative Departure when a use is deemed not of a
similar nature, scale, or intensity, but as a use with nominal
impact on the character of uses in the adjacent zoning district.
In this instance, the departure may be granted for one less
intense type of area.
Table 1306B(2)(a): Transition Yard Type Requirements
Adjacent Lot Land Use
Subject Lot
Land Use
Open Space/
Agriculture
Detached
Single-
Family
Attached
Single-
Family Multifamily Business Industrial
Open Space/
Agriculture
None
Detached
Single-Family
TY-1 None
Attached
Single-Family
TY-1 TY-1 None
Multifamily TY-2 TY-2 TY-1 None
§ 44-1306 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1306
1:1870
Table 1306B(2)(a): Transition Yard Type Requirements
Adjacent Lot Land Use
Subject Lot
Land Use
Open Space/
Agriculture
Detached
Single-
Family
Attached
Single-
Family Multifamily Business Industrial
Business TY-3 TY-3 TY-2 TY-2 None
Industrial TY-4 TY-4 TY-3 TY-3 TY-2 None
(f) Site plan review. When the approved use of a zoning lot would
typically require a transition yard of a certain type based on
the table above, but the use would impose a nominal impact on
the character of uses in the adjoining district, a less intense
type of transition yard may be approved through site plan
review procedures.
Diagram 1306B(2)(a)
§ 44-1306 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1306
1:1871
§ 44-1307. [Ch. 44, 13-7] Parking lot landscape requirements.
A. Parking lot landscape requirements. All parking lots shall include
landscaping and trees located within the parking area as required by
this section. Trees required by this section shall be in addition to trees
and landscaping required under other sections of this Code.
B. Parking lot perimeter landscaping.
(1) Requirements. All parking lots shall comply with the following
standards for perimeter landscaping.
(a) Location and dimensions. Perimeter landscaping shall be
established along the edge of the parking lot with a minimum
depth of six feet for interior areas and 12 feet adjoining a rightof-
way. The landscape treatment shall run the full length of the
parking lot and shall be located between the property line and
the edge of the parking lot. Landscaping materials shall be
§ 44-1306 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1307
1:1872
selected and placed in such a manner that they do not interfere
with or damage existing utilities.
(b) Design. Perimeter parking lot screening areas shall be
protected with raised concrete curbs, unless the Community
Development Director approves an alternate design to
accommodate best management practices for stormwater
management. Landscaped areas outside of shrub and tree
masses shall be planted in turf or other live groundcover.
(c) Landscape material. One shrub shall be planted for every three
feet of landscaped area length, spaced linearly to adequately
screen headlights and vehicle bumpers. Plants with thorns,
berries, and other harmful characteristics shall be carefully
placed to avoid potential harm to people or property on or off
site.
(d) Alternative screening. A wood fence or low masonry wall, up to
a maximum height of three feet, may be installed to screen
headlights and vehicle bumpers. Installation of plant materials
is encouraged between the sidewalk and the wall to provide a
softening effect on the fence or wall.
(2) Exemptions. Parking lot perimeter landscaping is not required
when the parking lot or vehicular use area is not visible from
adjacent street right-of-way or as permitted by the Community
Development Director.
Diagram 1307B
C. Parking lot interior landscaping.
(1) Requirements. For parking lots consisting of 10 or more spaces,
interior parking lot landscaping shall be required.
(a) Quantity. One parking lot island shall be provided between
every 10 parking spaces. As part of the landscape plan
approval, the location of parking lot islands may be varied
based on specific site requirements or design scheme;
§ 44-1307 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1307
1:1873
however, a parking lot island or landscaped area shall
terminate all parking rows.
(b) Dimensions. The minimum dimension of a parking lot island
shall be the same as the adjoining parking stall, but not less
than 200 square feet.
(c) Design. Parking lot islands or landscaped areas shall be
elevated at least six inches above the surface of the parking lot
and protected with concrete curbing, except where designed
specifically for the absorption of stormwater. A minimum of
one shade tree shall be provided for every parking lot island or
landscaped area. If the island extends the width of a double
row, then two shade trees shall be provided. Such islands and
landscaped areas shall be properly drained and irrigated as
appropriate to the site conditions to ensure plant survival.
(d) Landscape material. Shade trees shall be the primary plant
materials used in parking lot islands and landscaped areas.
Branches shall be trimmed to a minimum height of seven feet.
Ornamental trees, shrubs, hedges, and other plant materials
may be used to supplement the shade tree plantings but shall
not create visibility impediments for automobiles and
pedestrians.
(e) Groundcover. A minimum of 75% of every parking lot island
shall be planted in Class 2s salt tolerant seed turf or other live
groundcover, perennials, or ornamental grasses.
§ 44-1307 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1307
1:1874
§ 44-1308. [Ch. 44, 13-8] Additional screening requirements.
Diagram 1307C
A. Areas of low visual interest or visually intrusive site elements, such as
trash collection, mechanical equipment, open storage, service areas,
loading docks and blank walls, shall be screened from off-site view.
Screening shall be established on all sides of such elements except
where an opening is required for access. If access is possible only on a
side that is visible from a public street, a removable or operable screen
shall be required. Screening techniques may include, but are not
limited to, hedgerows, fencing, wing walls, parapets, and building
insets.
B. Outdoor storage areas.
§ 44-1307 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1308
1:1875
(1) Outdoor storage areas, work areas and service yards shall be
completely screened by an opaque masonry wall (stone, stucco, or
brick) or a commercial grade solid wood screen fence at least six
feet in height, and not exceeding the height limitations contained in
§ 44-907 of this Code. Where feasible, plant materials should be
installed along that portion of a fence or wall that is highly visible
from the right-of-way to provide a softening effect.
(2) If storage materials exceed the allowable maximum fence height,
then a combination of berming, fencing and landscaping shall be
used to accomplish appropriate screening.
(3) Growing areas for nursery stock located in the front or corner side
yard are considered to meet screening requirements.
C. Mechanical units.
(1) Ground mounted mechanical units. Ground-mounted mechanical
units, including but not limited to: air-conditioning condensers,
heat pumps, ventilation units, computer cooling equipment, etc.,
and any related utility structures and equipment, that are visible
from an adjacent right-of-way shall be screened from public view.
The screen shall be designed and established so that the area or
element being screened is no more than 20% visible through the
screen.
(2) Roof mounted mechanical units. All roof-mounted mechanical units
shall be screened to their full height by an opaque screening
material that is compatible with the architecture of the building or
through integrated building architecture, such as a parapet wall.
D. Loading docks and service areas. Loading docks and service areas shall
be screened from view from public rights-of-way and adjacent lots.
Screening shall consist of the following, individually or in combination:
(1) A screening wall, attached to the principal structure, that is
compatible in appearance and constructed of the same material
main structure.
(2) Opaque masonry or commercial grade wood fence having a
minimum height of six feet.
(3) Multi-stemmed ornamental trees, evergreen trees, large shrubs, or
some combination thereof, planted at a minimum ratio of 50 plant
units for each 100 linear feet of perimeter to be screened. If large
shrubs are used, they shall be a minimum of six feet in height at the
time of installation.
E. Refuse disposal areas. Trash and recycling receptacles shall be
screened in accordance with the following requirements:
(1) Siting. Refuse disposal areas shall be sited to minimize visibility
from the public rights-of-way. Trash enclosures shall not be located
§ 44-1308 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1308
1:1876
within a required street front or street side setbacks or occupy
area used for required parking spaces. Where feasible, refuse
enclosures shall be located to the rear of a main building or at the
rear of the parking lot.
(2) Height. Refuse disposal areas shall be screened on all sides to a
minimum height of six feet.
(3) Materials and appearance.
(a) Refuse enclosures shall be constructed of durable materials
that complement the architecture of the principal structure.
Masonry walls and commercial grade wood fences are
preferred materials. In Manufacturing Districts, enclosures
constructed of chain link or wire mesh interlaced with opaque
strips may be approved by the Community Development
Director.
(b) Enclosures that are attached to buildings shall be compatible
in appearance and shall be constructed of the same material
main structure.
(c) Enclosure openings directly visible from a public right-of-way
and/or adjoining residential areas shall have a solid material
gate. For larger enclosure areas, a separate gate access is
encouraged.
(4) Additional design criteria.
(a) Enclosures shall be of an adequate size to accommodate
expected containers. At no time shall refuse be allowed to
accumulate outside of the enclosure.
(b) Enclosure structures shall be designed to protect the walls
from damage by containers. Such protection may be provided
by use of barrier curbing, reinforced masonry walls, or other
similar means.
(c) The Community Development Director may approve landscape
screening in lieu of a masonry or wood structure, if such
screening provides full coverage of the disposal area and is a
minimum height of six feet at time of planting.
§ 44-1308 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1308
1:1877
Diagram 1308E
F. Drive-through facility. Drive aisles of drive-through facilities must be
effectively screened from view along the public right-of-way and at the
edges of sites adjacent to a residential use to minimize the impact of
exterior site lighting, headlight glare and menu displays. Such
screening shall consist of a masonry wall, commercial grade wood fence
or dense evergreen hedge no less than six feet in height. Plant materials
must be installed along the fence or wall to provide a softening effect.
Diagram 1308F
§ 44-1308 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1308
1:1878
ARTICLE XIV
(Reserved)
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1308
1:1879

ARTICLE XV
Planned Unit Developments
§ 44-1501. [Ch. 44, 15-1] Purpose and intent.
A. The purpose of the Planned Unit Development Regulations is to
encourage and allow more efficient, creative, and imaginative design
for land development than is possible under otherwise applicable
zoning regulations. Preservation of natural site qualities, better urban
amenities, more open spaces, and a higher quality project design are
also intended results of the planned unit development process. The
following objectives may be attained through the use of the planned
unit development process:
(1) A maximum choice in the types of environment available to the
public by allowing a development that would not be possible under
the strict application of the other sections of this Code.
(2) Permanent preservation of common open space and recreation
areas and facilities.
(3) A pattern of development to preserve natural vegetation,
topographic and geologic features.
(4) The prevention and/or control of soil erosion and surface flooding.
(5) A creative approach to the use of land and related physical facilities
that results in better development and design and the construction
of aesthetic amenities.
(6) An efficient use of the land resulting in more economic networks of
utilities, streets, schools, public grounds and buildings and other
facilities.
(7) A land use which promotes the public health, safety, comfort,
morals and welfare.
(8) A combination and coordination of architectural styles, building
forms, and building relationships with a possible mixing of different
urban uses in an innovative overall design.
(9) Innovations in residential development so that growing demands of
the population may be met by greater variety in type, design, and
layout of buildings and by the conservation and more efficient use
of open space ancillary to said buildings.
(10) The use of public input and participation in the design and
development of innovative and creative land use proposals.
B. The planned unit development is intended to provide for projects
incorporating a single type of a variety of related uses which are
planned, developed, and maintained as a unit. The planned unit
development should provide amenities not otherwise required by law
§ 44-1501 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1501
1:1881
§ 44-1502. [Ch. 44, 15-2] Applicability.
§ 44-1503. [Ch. 44, 15-3] Design standards and criteria.
and often establishes facilities and open space greater than the
minimum required by code. Such development may consist of
subdivided lots, provided that the platted lots are maintained in unified
control with unsubdivided property maintained in separate ownership
but unified control.
C. The unique and substantially different character of planned unit
developments requires that they be processed under a special plan
review procedure. Planned unit developments are of a different
character than conventional subdivisions requiring the establishment
herein of specific and additional procedures, standards, and exceptions
to govern the recommendations of the Planning Commission and the
action by the City Council.
D. A person, by choosing to develop property as a planned unit
development, elects to submit a contemplated development proposal to
a legislative and discretionary review by the Planning Commission and
Council. All planned unit developments shall be designed in such a
manner as to conform to the provisions of the City of Bloomington major
street plans, trunk sewer extension plans, water distribution system
plans, and storm drainage plans.
A. A Planned Unit Development may be proposed for development of
multiple principal structures on a single zoning lot or multiple zoning
lots within a Residential District.
B. No residential planned unit development shall contain fewer than five
dwelling units.
A. The uses permitted within the planned unit development shall be the
same as those authorized in the zoning district in which it is located.
B. A planned unit development shall be laid out and developed as a unit in
accordance with an integrated overall design. This design shall provide
for safe, efficient, convenient, and harmonious grouping of structures,
uses and facilities, and for appropriate relation of space inside and
outside buildings to intended uses and structural features.
C. Beneficial common open space. Any common open space in the planned
unit development shall be integrated into the overall design of the site.
Such spaces shall have a direct functional or visual relationship to the
main building(s) and not be of isolated or leftover character. Desirable
open space amenities include, but are not limited to plazas, gardens,
playgrounds, and playing fields. The following would not be considered
usable common open space:
(1) Areas reserved for the exclusive use or benefit of an individual
tenant or owner.
§ 44-1501 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1503
1:1882
(2) Dedicated streets, alleys, and other public rights-of-way.
(3) Vehicular drives, parking, loading and storage area.
(4) Dry detention basins.
(5) Irregular or unusable narrow strips of land less than 15 feet wide.
D. Energy efficient design. A planned unit development shall be designed
with consideration given to various methods of site design and building
location, architectural design of individual structures, and landscaping
design capable of reducing energy consumption within the Planned
Unit Development and to the extent feasible, the applicant will be
encouraged to integrate renewable energy technologies or obtain
Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) certification
level standards for the project.
E. Relationship to adjoining land. A planned unit development shall be
developed with connections to adjoining land. Designs should
emphasize accessibility, open views, and connections with the larger
community and discourage development that divides neighborhoods or
restricts access to adjacent property. The design of lots, streets,
sidewalks, and paths within a planned unit development shall make
provisions for the continuation of such existing or proposed features to
adjoining areas.
F. Transfer of density. The planned unit development may permit the
transfer of dwelling units from one portion of the tract to another and
will permit the clustering of dwelling units in one or more locations
upon the tract.
G. Exterior monotony. Residential units within planned unit developments
shall be designed to avoid the appearance of exterior monotony through
incorporation of varying rooflines, building materials, colors, or
architectural enhancements.
H. Density, floor area and common recreation space shall be provided for a
residential planned unit development in accordance with the following
Table 1503.
Table 1503: Residential Planned Unit Development Standards
Max. Floor Area
(percent of land
area)
Min. Open Space
(% of land area)
Min. Common
Recreation Space
(% of land area)
R-1A 10.0 80.0 2.5
R-1B 20.0 76.0 3.6
R-1C 34.8 73.0 4.9
R1-H 34.8 73.0 4.9
R-2 40 72.0 5.2
§ 44-1503 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1503
1:1883
§ 44-1504. [Ch. 44, 15-4] Submittal standards.
Table 1503: Residential Planned Unit Development Standards
Max. Floor Area
(percent of land
area)
Min. Open Space
(% of land area)
Min. Common
Recreation Space
(% of land area)
R-3A 52.8 71.0 6.2
R-3B 80.0 68.0 8.0
R-4 34.0 73.0 4.9
A. An application for a planned unit development shall be submitted on the
form provided by the Office of the City Clerk.
B. Applications shall conform to the minimum requirements of § 44-1703.
The information requested on the application is deemed to be a
minimum, and the applicant may be required to supply additional
information prior to the public hearing on their requests.
C. Preliminary planned unit development plan. The following information
shall be submitted together with the preliminary planned unit
development Plan on full-size, legible sheets.
(1) Description of intent. The application shall include an explanation
of the character of the planned unit development, the reasons why
it needs the flexibility of the planned unit development regulations,
how the Comprehensive Plan affects the property, and how it
accomplishes the purposes of the planned unit development
regulations.
(2) Site plan. A site plan shall be submitted with the preliminary
planned unit development plan that includes the following
minimum information:
(a) Location by Section, Town and Range or other legal
description;
(b) Names and addresses of the persons having proprietary
interest over the property;
(c) Graphic (engineering) scale;
(d) North-points;
(e) Date of preparation;
(f) The boundary lines of the property in question;
(g) Location of all survey monuments and their descriptions;
§ 44-1503 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1504
1:1884
(h) Existing conditions, including buildings and land uses,
contiguous land uses, natural topographic features, zoning
districts, public thoroughfares, transportation, and utilities;
(i) Arrangement of proposed buildings and structures and
existing buildings and structures;
(j) Proposed location, width, and type of surface material of all
proposed sidewalks, pedestrian ways, driveways, parking
areas, service areas, and recreation areas;
(k) Size and location of proposed parking areas with arrangement
of bays and aisles and curb cuts, and with indication of the
total number of spaces;
(l) A site drainage plan for the proposed project if required;
(m) A photometric/lighting plan if the planned unit development
would result in new exterior lighting.
(3) Design schedule. The design schedule may be included on the site
plan or submitted on a separate sheet that indicates:
(a) Total and footprint square footage for nonresidential principal
structures;
(b) Total and footprint square footage for accessory structures;
(c) The proportion of site area (expressed as a percentage)
dedicated to floor area, landscaped open space and common
recreation area;
(d) Number of parking spaces;
(e) Proposed use of each building, structure, or parcel of land;
(f) If the development is to be constructed in phases, the design
schedule shall include a designation of the phase components;
(g) If different from the underlying Code requirements, a listing of
the area, lot width, yard, height, and bulk requirements
including density applicable to the planned unit development.
(4) Landscape plan. That landscape plan shall include the following
information:
(a) The size, location, and general characteristics of plant
materials in compliance with Article XIII of this Code;
(b) Size, location, and composition of all proposed fencing, refuse
enclosures, and landscaped screening material.
(5) Building elevations. Building elevations and architectural
renderings shall be required with submission of the preliminary
development plan and shall indicate the following:
§ 44-1504 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1504
1:1885
(a) The appearance of buildings on all sides of a structure;
(b) Proposed building type, colors, and specifications for exterior
building materials;
(c) Where multiple buildings will be built in phases or where
specific users will affect the specific building design,
prototypical building elevations and design criteria for the
planned unit development may be submitted in lieu of building
elevations;
(d) The Director of Community Development may require that the
applicant submit color building elevations and/or perspective
renderings if such information is required for a full analysis of
the proposed development.
(6) Signage. For mixed use planned unit developments, a site signage
package shall be submitted, and any variances requested from the
requirements of Article XIV of this Code.
(7) Engineering. For a preliminary planned unit development plan,
engineering plans shall be submitted which provide in sufficient
detail to convey the general basis of design of the sanitary sewer,
water, stormwater control, flood control, and street facilities.
(8) Subdivision. When a subdivision of land is proposed in connection
with a planned unit development, the applicant shall file an
application for approval of a preliminary plat of the proposed
subdivision simultaneously with the application for preliminary
planned unit development approval.
(9) Special studies. Impact studies, parking studies, geological,
topographic or soil analysis and other information and data as the
City may require for the full and complete consideration of the
planned unit development.
D. Final planned unit development plan. The final plan or plans of the
planned unit development shall conform substantially to the approved
preliminary planned unit development. While the preliminary planned
unit development plan shall generally specify uses of land and locations
of buildings, the final plan shall designate with particularity the uses of
land and the location of buildings. The following information shall be
submitted together with the final planned unit development plan on fullsize,
legible sheets:
(1) An accurate legal description of the entire parcel upon which the
planned development is to be located, and a legal description of
each separate subdivided parcel, including any areas to be
conveyed, dedicated, or reserved for public or quasi-public uses;
§ 44-1504 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1504
1:1886
(2) Final designation of the location, ground area, height, bulk and
exact dimensions of all existing and proposed buildings and
structures within the planned development;
(3) A detailed tabulation of each separate land use area, including land
and building areas, and where applicable, the total number of
residential dwelling units, the number of bedrooms in each unit,
and the residential density;
(4) The use or uses to be made of such existing and proposed buildings
or structures;
(5) The final location and dimensions of all pedestrian walkways,
driveways, streets, parking and loading facilities, including the
number of parking spaces serving each building or land use type
and all parking related screening and landscaping;
(6) Final building elevations, architectural renderings, and/or
prototypical elevations;
(7) A final landscape plan indicating the specific location and character
of all landscaping, including the size and species of all trees,
shrubs, hedges and other groundcover, the location, size and type
of all refuse enclosures, screening, and fencing;
(8) Final photometric plan;
(9) A detailed utilities and drainage plan based on final architectural
decisions indicating the size and location of all water distribution
lines, sanitary sewers and storm drainage facilities required to
serve the planned development and the manner in which surface
drainage will be controlled and managed consistent with all
applicable City regulations;
(10) The exact location and dimensions of any areas to be conveyed,
dedicated, or reserved for parks, parkways, playgrounds, places of
worship, school sites, public buildings, or for any other public or
quasi-public use;
(11) All covenants, easements, agreements, and other provisions
required to govern the use, maintenance, and continued protection
of the planned development, along with an agreement assuring that
the applicant, any subsequent owner or, where applicable, a
homeowners' association shall be responsible for all street, utility
and common open space maintenance within said development and
for snow plowing and refuse disposal;
(12) All plats, certificates, seals, and signatures required for the
dedication or vacation of land and/or the recording of the final site
plan;
§ 44-1504 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1504
1:1887
§ 44-1505. [Ch. 44, 15-5] Planned unit development procedures.
(13) A final phasing plan indicating the time frame for construction of
the initial phase and subsequent phases and a map indicating the
development area for each phase of the development.
A. Procedure. Before developing a tract of land within the corporate limits
of the City as a planned unit development, the owner or developer shall
comply with the following Planned Unit Development Review Process
consisting of the Pre-Application Conference, the Preliminary
Development Plan, and the Final Development Plan.
B. Pre-application conference.
(1) Prior to the submission of a preliminary plan, the owner or
developer of a proposed planned unit development shall prepare a
concept plan of such proposed planned unit development and
consult with the Director of Community Development for the
purpose of reviewing such concept plan.
(2) The Director of Community Development may invite other
individuals or entities as he or she deems appropriate.
(3) The purpose of such pre-application conference is to review such
concept plan which is a preliminary concept, and which may, after
such pre-application conference, be then refined by the owner or
developer into a preliminary planned unit development plan.
(4) Said concept plan shall be drawn to engineering scale and shall
show the conceptual layout of the proposed planned unit
development including the general layout of streets, drainage,
sewerage, and land uses and the present location of major natural
features such as wetlands, streams, and lakes.
(5) The Director of Community Development, Director of Engineering,
and other City staff as appropriate, shall advise the owner or
developer at the pre-application conference whether the concept
plan is consistent with the Manual of Practice for the Design of
Public Improvements of the City of Bloomington and with the
Official Comprehensive Plan, Zoning Code, this Code and other
applicable Codes of the City in order to assist the owner or
developer prior to the preparation of the preliminary plan.
C. Preliminary planned unit development procedure.
(1) Initiation of application. An application for a planned unit
development may only be filed by an applicant who has an
ownership interest, or the agents thereof; or any contract
purchaser or anyone holding an option to purchase the parcel of
land on which the use or combination of uses is to be located. The
application shall conform to the requirements of § 44-1703.
§ 44-1504 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1505
1:1888
(2) Application processing. The application for preliminary planned
unit development shall be processed in accordance with the
procedures of § 44-1704.
(3) The planned unit development review procedure shall be
conducted so that it is concurrent with the subdivision review
procedure under Chapter 24 of the Bloomington City Code, 1960,
as amended, and encompasses any site plan review, special use
permit or variation procedure necessary for approval of the project.
(4) Action by Planning Commission. The Director of Community
Development shall transmit a complete application for a
preliminary planned unit development to the Planning Commission
for a legislative public hearing. The public hearing procedure and
notice shall comply with § 44-1705.
(a) The Planning Commission shall determine the extent to which
the plan conforms or fails to conform with the standards of this
Code and shall no later than 30 days after the adjournment of
the legislative public hearing, transmit its recommendation on
the plan to the City Council.
(b) The Planning Commission may recommend approval of a
preliminary plan with an approval recommendation
conditioned upon the making of one or more changes in the
proposal, which such changes shall be enumerated in the
Commission's transmittal to the City Council or may transmit
the plan to the Council without recommendation.
(c) If the Commission recommends disapproval of the preliminary
development plan, it shall furnish the City Council and the
applicant a written statement setting forth the reason for said
recommendation and specifying with particularity the aspects
in which said preliminary plan fails to comply with the
requirements of this Code or does not comply with the official
Comprehensive Plan.
(d) Should the Planning Commission fail to act within the 30 days
from the adjournment of the public hearing or fail to adjourn
the public hearing within 120 days of its commencement, the
plan shall be submitted to the Council without a
recommendation.
(5) Action by City Council.
(a) Within 60 days after receipt of the Planning Commission
recommendation and without further public hearing the City
Council shall approve, approve with conditions, or reject the
proposed preliminary planned unit development plan.
(b) Failure of the Council to act within the prescribed time period
shall constitute denial of the preliminary plan.
§ 44-1505 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1505
1:1889
(c) If the preliminary planned unit development plan is denied, the
City Council shall state in writing the reasons for the denial.
Such statement shall be filed with the Director of Community
Development and a copy shall be sent to the applicant.
(d) If the preliminary planned unit development plan is approved,
the applicant shall submit a final planned unit development
plan.
(6) Extension of time periods by mutual consent. Time periods for
review by the Planning Commission or Council may be extended by
mutual consent of the owner or developer and the Planning
Commission or Council. Any such extension shall stay the running
of all subsequent time periods.
(7) Conditions and guarantees. Prior to the granting of any preliminary
planned unit development, the Planning Commission may
recommend, and the Council may require, such conditions and
restrictions upon the establishment, location, construction,
maintenance and operation of the planned unit development as
deemed necessary for the protection of the public interest and to
secure compliance with the standards and requirements specified
herein. The Council may require such evidence and guarantees as
it may deem necessary as proof of compliance with the conditions
of approval.
(8) Impact fees. The planned unit development may be approved
subject to such impact donations as may be determined by the City
Council in reasonable proportion to the impact of the planned unit
development on public facilities and infrastructure.
(9) Effect of approval. Buildings and uses or combinations of uses
within a planned unit development shall be limited to those
approved as part of the Code granting a planned unit development
permit by the City Council. Unless specifically approved by the
Code granting or amending the planned unit development, the
requirements of the underlying district shall apply.
D. Final planned unit development procedures.
(1) Final plan submission. Once a preliminary planned unit
development has been approved by the City Council, the applicant
shall submit a final plan, which shall be filed with the Director of
Community Development in such form and accompanied by such
information, with sufficient copies, as shall be established from
time to time by the City of Bloomington. The application shall
conform to the requirements of § 44-1703.
(2) The application for a final planned unit development plat shall be
processed in accordance with the procedures of § 44-1704.
(3) Administrative review.
§ 44-1505 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1505
1:1890
(a) Within 30 days from the submission of a final development plan
and supporting materials, the Director of Community
Development shall review the complete application for a final
development plan to determine the extent to which it conforms
with the approved preliminary development plan and approved
public improvement plans and specifications and shall further
review the supporting material to determine its conformance
with the requirements of this Code.
(b) If the final development plan substantially conforms with the
approved preliminary development plan and public
improvement plans and specifications and if the supporting
material meets all Code requirements, then the Director of
Community Development shall promptly issue approval of the
final development plan.
(c) If the final development plan does not substantially conform
with the approved preliminary development plan or if the
supporting material does not conform with all Code
requirements, then the Director of Community Development
may approve the final plan subject to conditions or refer the
final plan to the Planning Commission for a legislative public
hearing.
(4) Action by Planning Commission.
(a) The public hearing procedure and notice shall comply with
§ 44-1705.
(b) During the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall
determine the extent to which the final development plan
conforms or fails to conform with the standards of this Code.
(c) The Planning Commission shall, not later than 30 days after the
adjournment of the legislative public hearing, transmit its
recommendation on the final development plan to the City
Council.
(5) Action by City Council. Within 60 days from the receipt of the
Planning Commission's recommendation with respect to the final
development plan, the City Council shall, by ordinance, approve or
disapprove the plan.
(6) Pre-requisites for recording. The final planned unit development
plan shall not be recorded until the following pre-requisites are
fulfilled:
(a) Payment of any and all applicable fees.
(b) Posting of any required final plat public improvement payment,
performance, and workmanship bond; filing and establishment
of any required adjacent street substandard roadway
§ 44-1505 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1505
1:1891
§ 44-1506. [Ch. 44, 15-6] Criteria for approval.
improvement guarantees and security; making of any required
public land dedications or cash contribution in lieu thereof and
obtaining and filing with the City of any off-site easements or
right-of-way for public improvements serving the site.
E. Changes to an approved planned unit development. A planned unit
development shall be constructed in accordance with the approved final
plat of planned unit development and all supporting data. Changes to
the planned unit development shall be considered to be either a minor
change or a major change.
(1) Minor changes in the location, siting, height or character of the
buildings and structures may be authorized by the Director of
Community Development, if such minor changes are required by
engineering or other circumstances not foreseen at the time of
adoption of the ordinance approving the final development plan. A
minor change authorized by this subsection shall not cause any of
the following:
(a) A change in the use or character of the development;
(b) An increase in the intensity of use of over 10%;
(c) An increase in any dimension of a building or structure by
more than 5% in any direction.
(d) A reduction in approved open space of 5% or more.
(e) A reduction in off-street parking and loading space of 5% or
more provided minimum code requirements are met.
(f) A reduction in required pavement widths of 5% or more
provided minimum code requirements are met.
(2) Minor changes that are not approved by the Director of Community
Development may be appealed by the applicant or property owner
pursuant to the procedures in § 44-1712.
(3) Any other change to an approved planned unit development shall
be considered a major change. Major changes shall require a
legislative public hearing pursuant to the procedures of
§ 44-1505D(4).
A. In reviewing an application for a planned unit development, the
Planning Commission and City Council shall find that the planned unit
development supports the purposes of this article based substantial
consistency with the following standards.
(1) Comprehensive Plan. The planned unit development conforms with
the general planning policies of the City of Bloomington as set forth
in the Comprehensive Plan.
§ 44-1505 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1506
1:1892
§ 44-1507. [Ch. 44, 15-7] Effective period of planned unit
development.
(2) Impact on other property. The planned unit development will not be
injurious to the use or enjoyment of other property in the
neighborhood for the purposes permitted in the district and does
not impede the normal and orderly development and improvement
of surrounding properties for uses permitted in the zoning district.
Further, the planned unit development is compatible with the
character of the neighborhood and does not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood.
(3) Impact on public facilities and resources. The planned unit
development conforms to the provisions of the City's-major street
plans, trunk sewer extension plans, water distribution system
plans, and storm drainage plans.
(4) Archaeological, historical or cultural impact. The Planned Unit
Development does not substantially adversely affect a known
archaeological, historical, or cultural resource located on or off of
the parcel proposed for development.
(5) Quality of design. The design of the planned unit development
incorporates high quality building, site, and landscaping features,
and presents an innovative and creative approach to the
development of land and living environments.
B. The City Council may but shall not be required to make written findings
of fact based on the criteria for approval on an application for approval
of a planned unit development or a change to a planned unit
development.
A. Preliminary planned unit development plan.
(1) Approved preliminary planned unit development plans or portions
thereof on which no final plan has been submitted for review and
approval shall expire and be of no force or effect three years after
this approval, except:
(a) The filing of a final planned unit development plan and
necessary supporting document shall extend the life of a
preliminary plan for three years; or
(b) If the approval of the preliminary planned unit development is
extended by action of the City Council.
B. Final planned unit development plan.
(1) The City Council may consider an approved final planned unit
development plan subject to revocation if construction falls more
than two years behind the schedule filed with the final development
plan or if development exceeds five years.
§ 44-1506 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1507
1:1893
(2) The owner of property in a planned unit development plan or the
owner of any portion thereof may petition for revocation of such
planned unit development plan in whole or in part.
(3) Revocation of a planned unit development, in whole or in part, may
be initiated by the City Council or the owner of property.
(4) The City Council shall refer an application for revocation of the
planned unit development to the Planning Commission for a
legislative public hearing and recommendation. The public hearing
and notice shall conform to the provisions of § 44-1705. In addition,
notice shall be mailed or delivered to all persons having an
ownership interest in such planned unit development based on
ownership recorded with the Recorder of Deeds of McLean County,
at least five days prior to the public hearing on revocation.
(5) The Planning Commission shall transmit its recommendation to the
City Council no later than 30 days after the adjournment of the
legislative public hearing.
(6) Upon receipt of the Planning Commission recommendation, the
City Council shall take up and consider the petition to revoke, in
whole or in part, the subject planned unit development. The City
Council may approve or deny revocation of the subject planned unit
development. The City Council may impose reasonable conditions
on such revocation in order to advance the health, safety, and
welfare of the citizens.
(7) In the event the City Council revokes an approved planned unit
development plan, in whole or in part, then the City Clerk shall file
a notice of such revocation with the McLean County Recorder of
Deeds.
(8) Revocation of an approved planned unit development plan shall
preclude any additional construction pursuant to such revoked
plan, except construction determined necessary by the City to wind
up the development and put the same in a safe and sanitary
condition. Any security posted to guarantee installation of required
public improvements shall continue in effect until all approved
public improvements are completed, all wind-up construction is
completed, and all claims against such security are resolved.
(9) Upon revocation of an approved planned unit development plan,
the property for which such plan is revoked shall retain its zoning
district classification absent such plan.
§ 44-1507 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1507
1:1894
ARTICLE XVI
Definitions
§ 44-1601. [Ch. 44, 16-1] Rules of construction.
The language set forth in the text of this Code shall be interpreted in
accordance with the following Rules of Construction, unless the context
clearly requires a different construction:
§ 44-1602. [Ch. 44, 16-2] Definitions "A."
The following words and terms wherever they occur in this Code shall be
interpreted as herein defined:
ABROGATE — Abolish, annul, nullify, do away with.
ABUTTING (ADJACENT, ADJOINING, CONTIGUOUS) — Meeting or
touching at some point or line; having a common border.
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE OR USE — An accessory building,
structure or use is one which:
A. The singular includes the plural and the plural the singular;
B. The present tense includes the past and the future tenses, and the
future tense includes the present;
C. When used in connection with an action of an owner or developer, the
word "shall" is mandatory, while the word "may" is permissive;
D. Terms connoting a particular gender shall include each and every
gender;
E. Whenever a word or term defined hereinafter appears in the text of this
Code, its meaning shall be construed as set forth in the definition
thereof, and any word appearing in parenthesis between a word and its
definition shall be construed in the same sense as that word;
F. All measured distances shall be to the nearest integral foot; if a fraction
is 1/2 foot or more, the integral foot next above shall be taken;
G. All words and terms not defined herein shall be construed in their
generally accepted meanings; and
H. All provisions of this Code imposing duties upon the City, its officers or
agents are directory, unless the context clearly requires the provision
be construed as mandatory.
Is subordinate to and clearly and customarily incidental to the principal
building or principal use; and
A.
Is subordinate in area, extent, and purpose to the principal building or
principal use served; and
B.
§ 44-1601 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1602
1:1895
ADDITION — An extension or increase in floor area or height of a building
or structure.
ADULT CABARET — A building or portion of a building featuring dancing or
other live entertainment if the dancing or other live entertainment involves
the exhibiting of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as
defined in this Code, for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT DETENTION FACILITY — A facility for the detention, confinement,
treatment or rehabilitation of adult persons arrested or convicted for the
violation of civil or criminal law.
ADULT HOTEL/MOTEL — A hotel or motel or similar business
establishment offering public accommodations for any form of consideration
which provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films,
computer generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or
other photographic reproductions 30% or more of the number of which are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exhibiting of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined in this Code; and
rents, leases, or lets any single room for less than a six-hour period, or rents,
leases, or lets any single room more than twice in a twenty-four-hour period.
ADULT LINGERIE MODELING STUDIO — An establishment or business
that provides for any form of compensation, monetary or other
consideration, the services of live models modeling lingerie to individuals,
couples, or small groups and where "specified anatomical areas" of the
models are displayed for the purpose of sexual stimulation of the patrons
and further provided such modeling takes place in a room smaller than 600
square feet in area.[Ord. No. 2006-137]
ADULT MEDIA — Magazines, books, videotapes, movies, slides, cd-roms
or other devices used to record computer images, or other media that
Contributes to the comfort, convenience, or necessity of occupants to
the principal building or principal use served; and
C.
Is located on the same lot as the principal building or principal use
served, with the single exception of such accessory off-street parking
facilities as are permitted to locate elsewhere than on the same lot with
the building or use served; and
D.
Structures or buildings that are accessory to manufactured homes or
mobile homes are not to be considered permanent and shall not have
permanent foundations (foundations 40 inches or more below grade);
and
E.
Structures or buildings that are accessory to manufactured homes or
mobile homes shall be constructed to be free standing and not apply
any additional loading situations to the manufactured home or mobile
home it is associated with; and
F.
The structural integrity of such accessory buildings or structures shall
be in compliance with the International Residential Code, as adopted
by the City Council in Bloomington City Code, Chapter 10.
G.
§ 44-1602 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1602
1:1896
are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting,
describing, or relating to hard-core material.
ADULT MEDIA STORE — An establishment that rents and/or sells media,
and that media meets any of the following tests:
ADULT MODELING STUDIO — A business which provides, for any form
of compensation, monetary or other consideration, hire or reward, figure
models who, for the purposes of sexual stimulation of patrons, display
"specified anatomical areas," as defined herein, to be observed, sketched,
photographed, painted, sculpted or otherwise depicted by persons paying
such consideration. "Adult Modeling Studio" does not include schools
maintained pursuant to standards set by the State of Illinois.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER — An establishment emphasizing
or predominantly showing sexually oriented movies distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating
to "hard-core material," "specified anatomical areas" and/or "specified
sexual activities" (as defined in this Code) for observation by patrons
therein.[Ord. No. 2006-137]
ADULT SEX BUSINESS — Any sexually oriented entertainment business,
including any business establishment that regularly features live
entertainment distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the
exposure of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities, as
defined herein, or any business establishment whose primary purpose is the
sale or display of any explicit sexual material which, pursuant to state law
or other regulatory authority, can be offered only to persons over the age
of 18 years. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years
to be within any building that is the site of an "Adult Sex Business." "Adult
Sex Business" may include an adult cabaret, adult hotel/motel, adult media
store, adult modeling studio, adult motion-picture theater, adult video
arcade, adult lingerie modeling studio, adult video arcade, or a sex shop.
ADULT VIDEO ARCADE — Any place in an adult media store to which the
public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or
electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture,
or video machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are
maintained to show images distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on matters depicting, describing, or relating to "hard-core material,"
"specified anatomical areas" and/or "specified sexual activities" (as defined
in this Code) in video-viewing booths or arcade booths for observation by
10% or more of the gross public floor area is devoted to adult media as
defined in this Code.
A.
10% or more of the stock-in-trade consists of adult media as defined in
this Code.
B.
It advertises or holds itself out in any forum as "XXX," "adult," "sex," or
otherwise as a sexually oriented business other than an adult cabaret,
adult hotel/motel, adult lingerie modeling studio, adult modeling studio,
or adult motion-picture theater as defined in this Code.
C.
§ 44-1602 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1602
1:1897
patrons therein. Adult video arcades are prohibited except when located
within an adult media store.[Ord. No. 2006-137]
AGENCY-OPERATED FAMILY HOME — A child care facility which provides
care for no more than four children placed by and under the supervision of
a licensed child welfare agency with these homes being owned or rented,
staffed, maintained and otherwise operated by the agency. The term
"agency-operated home" shall also be deemed to mean an agency staffed
home which provides resident services to not more than four individuals
who are handicapped, aged, developmentally disabled or mentally ill.
Twenty-four-hour adult supervision shall be mandatory in an agencyoperated
family home and adult supervision and consultation shall be
available to the residents thereof. A Special Use Permit issued on or after
April 9, 1990, pursuant to Article X of this Code shall not authorize the
operation of an agency-operated family home for persons for whom such
facilities serve as an alternative to incarceration for a criminal offense, or
persons whose primary reason for placement is substance or alcohol abuse,
unless the Special Use Permit specifically so provides. Agency-operated
family homes shall be separated from one another by a distance of at least
1,000 feet.[Ord. No. 2006-137]
AGENCY-OPERATED GROUP HOME — A child care facility which provides
care for more than four but not more than 10 children placed by and
under the supervision of a licensed child welfare agency with these homes
being owned or rented, staffed, maintained, and otherwise operated by the
agency. The term "agency-operated group home" shall also be deemed to
mean an agency staffed home which provides resident services to more
than four but not more than 10 individuals who are handicapped, aged,
developmentally disabled, or mentally ill. Twenty-four-hour adult
supervision shall be mandatory in an agency-operated group home and
adult consultation shall be available to the residents thereof. A Special Use
Permit issued on or after April 9, 1990, pursuant to Article X of this Code,
shall not authorize the operation of an agency-operated group home for
persons for whom, such facilities serve as an alternative to incarceration
for a criminal offense, or persons whose primary reason for placement is
substance or alcohol abuse, unless the Special Use Permit specifically so
provides.[Ord. No. 2006-137]
AGENCY-SUPERVISED HOME — A child care facility under the direct and
regular supervision of a licensed child welfare agency (including an agency
which receives or arranges for the care or placement of children who have
behavioral problems involving violations of criminal law), of the Illinois
Department of Children and Family Services, of a circuit court, or of any
other state agency which has authority to place children in child care
facilities, and which receives no more than eight children, unless of common
parentage, who are placed and are regularly supervised by one of the
specified agencies.
AGRICULTURAL (AGRICULTURAL USES) — The growing, harvesting and
storing of crops including legumes, hay, grain, fruit and truck or vegetable
crops, floriculture, horticulture, viticulture, mushroom growing, orchards
§ 44-1602 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1602
1:1898
and forestry; farm buildings for storing and protecting farm machinery
and equipment from the elements; and farm dwelling units occupied by
farm owners, operators, tenants or seasonable or year round hired farm
workers. This definition of Agriculture and agricultural uses includes all
types of agricultural operations, but excludes therefrom animal husbandry
and industrial operations such as grain elevator, canning or slaughterhouse,
wherein agricultural products produced primarily by others are stored or
processed.[Ord. No. 2006-137]
AGRICULTURAL EXHIBIT — See "fairground."
AIR CURTAIN INCINERATOR — An incinerator that operates by forcefully
projecting a curtain of air across an open chamber or pit in which burning
occurs.
AIRCRAFT — Any contrivance now known or hereafter invented for use in
or designed for navigation or flight in the air.[Ord. No. 2006-137]
AIRCRAFT SALES AND SERVICE — A building for the retail sale, storage,
care, or repair of private or commercial aircraft.
AIRCRAFT STORAGE — See "airplane hangar, private" and "airplane
hangar, public."
AIRPLANE HANGAR, PRIVATE — A hangar for the storage of four or less
aircraft with a seating capacity of less than six persons and in which no
volatile or flammable oil is handled, stored or kept other than that contained
in the fuel storage tank of the aircraft.
AIRPLANE HANGAR, PUBLIC — A building for the storage, care or repair
of private or commercial aircraft not included in the term "private hangar."
AIRPORT AND LANDING FIELDS — Any area of land or water which is
used or intended for use for the landing and taking off of aircraft, and any
appurtenant areas which are used or intended for use for airport buildings
or other airport facilities or rights-of-way, including all necessary taxi-ways,
aircraft storage and tie-down areas, hangars, and other necessary buildings
and open spaces.[Ord. No. 2006-137]
AIRPORT PASSENGER TERMINAL — A building at an airport where
passengers transfer between ground transportation and the facilities that
allow them to board and disembark aircraft.
ALLEY — A public right-of-way which is less than 30 feet wide and affords a
secondary means of access to abutting property. Frontage on an alley shall
not be construed as satisfying the requirements related to a frontage on a
public street.[Ord. No. 2006-137]
ALTERATION — As applied to a building or structure, alteration shall mean
any change in size, shape, or character of a building or structure or change
in the use thereof. As applied to a building or structure in the S-4 Historic
Preservation District alteration also means any act or process that changes
one or more of the exterior architectural features of a building or structure,
including, but not limited to, the erection, construction, reconstruction, or
removal of any building or structure.[Ord. No. 2006-137]
§ 44-1602 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1602
1:1899
AMBULATORY SURGICAL TREATMENT CENTER OR SURGI-CENTER —
Any institution, place or building devoted primarily to the maintenance and
operation of facilities for the performance of surgical procedures or any
facility in which a medical or surgical procedure is utilized to terminate
a pregnancy, irrespective of whether the facility is devoted primarily to
this purpose. Such facility shall not provide beds or other accommodations
for the overnight stay of patients; however, facilities devoted exclusively to
the treatment of children may provide accommodations and beds for their
patients for up to 23 hours following admission. Individual patients shall
be discharged in an ambulatory condition without danger to the continued
wellbeing of the patients or shall be transferred to a hospital. The term
'ambulatory surgical treatment center' or 'surgi-center' does not include
any of the following:
AMUSEMENT CENTER — An establishment, the principal use of which is
the operation of mechanical, electronic and/or video type game machines.
AMUSEMENT PARK — An outdoor facility, which may include structures
and buildings, where there are various devices for entertainment, including
rides, booths for the conduct of games or sale of items, and buildings for
shows and entertainment.
ANIMAL BREEDING SERVICES — An establishment that is primarily
engaged in the breeding of dogs, cats, pets, fowl, horses, or other domestic
animals for profit, but excluding animals used for agricultural purposes.
ANIMAL DETENTION FACILITY, WITH OUTDOOR EXERCISE AREAS — A
facility used to house or contain stray, homeless, abandoned, or unwanted
animals and that is owned, operated, or maintained by a public body,
an established humane society, animal welfare society, society for the
prevention of cruelty to animals, or other nonprofit organization devoted to
the welfare, protection, and humane treatment of animals, with an outdoor
exercise area.
Any institution, place, building, or agency required to be licensed
pursuant to the "Hospital Licensing Act" approved July 1, 1953, as
amended.
A.
Any person or institution required to be licensed pursuant to the
'Nursing Home Care Act', approved August 23, 1979, as amended.
B.
Hospitals or ambulatory surgical treatment centers maintained by the
State or any department or agency thereof, where such department
or agency has authority under law to establish and enforce standards
for the hospitals or ambulatory surgical treatment centers under its
management and control.
C.
Hospitals and ambulatory surgical treatment centers maintained by the
Federal Government or agencies thereof.
D.
Any place, agency, clinic, or practice, public or private, whether
organized for profit or not, devoted exclusively to the performance of
dental or oral surgical procedures.
E.
§ 44-1602 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1602
1:1900
ANIMAL DETENTION FACILITY, WITHOUT OUTDOOR EXERCISE AREAS
— A facility used to house or contain stray, homeless, abandoned, or
unwanted animals and that is owned, operated, or maintained by a public
body, an established humane society, animal welfare society, society for the
prevention of cruelty to animals, or other nonprofit organization devoted
to the welfare, protection, and humane treatment of animals, without an
outdoor exercise area.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL — Any building, or portion thereof, designed or used
for the care, observations, treatment of domestic animals.[Ord. No.
2006-137]
ANIMAL RUN — An enclosed outdoor area intended for the exercising and/
or containment of dogs and similar animals in the context of kennels as a
special use.[Ord. No. 2006-137]
ANTENNA — A device designed and used to transmit and/or receive radio
or electromagnetic waves. Examples include radio and television
transmitters, panel antennas, directional antennas, and microwave dishes.
APIARY — A location where beehives of honey bees are kept. May refer to
hives meant for commercial, personal, or educational use.
APPLICANT — The owner of the property or the authorized representative
of the owner applying for development approval.
APRON — That portion of a driveway located between the curb and the
property line or in the absence of a curb between the street pavement and
the property line.
AQUACULTURE — The cultivation of freshwater or saltwater populations
under controlled conditions including fish, crustaceans, mollusks, aquatic
plants, algae, and other similar organisms.
AQUAPONICS — A system that combines conventional aquaculture with
hydroponics in a symbiotic environment.
ARTISINAL/CRAFT PRODUCTION AND RETAIL — An establishment for
the preparation, display, and sale of individually crafted artwork, jewelry,
furniture, sculpture, pottery, leathercraft, hand-woven articles, and related
items.
AUCTION HOUSE — A building, area or areas within a building used for
the public sale of goods, wares, merchandise, or equipment to the highest
bidder. This definition excludes therefrom an auction, the principal purpose
of which is the sale of livestock or motor vehicles.
AUDITORIUM — See "theater."
AUTOMOBILE SALVAGE YARD (MOTOR VEHICLE SALVAGE YARD) — See
"junkyard (salvage yard)."
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION —
Buildings and premises where gasoline, oil, grease, batteries, tires, and
automobile accessories may be supplied and dispensed at retail, and
A.
§ 44-1602 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1602
1:1901
AWNING — A roof-like cover which projects from the wall of a building and
overhangs into a yard or public or private street.
§ 44-1603. [Ch. 44, 16-3] Definitions "B."
The following words and terms wherever they occur in this Code shall be
interpreted as herein defined:
BALCONY — An elevated platform that is connected to an exterior building
wall and surrounded by a low wall or railing.
BARRACKS — A building used especially for the lodging of soldiers in
garrison.
BARS — An establishment whose primary activity is the sale of alcoholic
beverages to be consumed on the premises. Bars include taverns, night
where in addition any of the following services may be rendered or
sales made:
Sale and servicing of spark plugs, batteries, and distributors and
distributor parts;
(1)
(2) Tire servicing and repair, but not recapping or regrooving;
Replacement of mufflers and tail pipes, water hose, fan belts, brake
fluid, light bulbs, fuses, floor mats, seat covers, windshield wipers
and wiper blades, grease retainers, wheel bearings, mirrors and
the like;
(3)
(4) Radiator cleaning and flushing;
Washing and polishing, and sale of automotive washing and
polishing materials;
(5)
(6) Greasing and lubrication;
(7) Providing and repairing fuel pumps, oil pumps, and lines;
(8) Servicing and repair of carburetors;
(9) Emergency wiring repairs;
(10)Adjusting and repairing brakes;
Minor motor adjustments not involving the removal of the head or
crankcase or racing the motor.
(11)
Activities permissible at an automobile service station do not include
aviation sales, automobile sales, boat sales, farm implement sales,
house-car trailer sales, mobile home sales, recreation vehicle sales or
auto body work, straightening of auto body parts, painting, welding,
storage of automobiles not in operating condition, or other work
involving noise, glare, fumes, smoke, or other characteristics to an
extent greater than normally found in automobile service stations.
B.
§ 44-1602 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1603
1:1902
clubs, private clubs, bottle clubs, and similar facilities serving alcoholic
liquor.
BASEMENT — The story of a building which is partly below and partly
above grade, and having at least 1/2 its height above grade. (See "Grade,"
"Story" and "Cellar'.)
BAY WINDOW — A window projecting beyond the wall line of a building.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENTS — An operator-occupied
residence providing accommodations for a charge to the public with no
more than five guest rooms," each limited to two transient adult guests
per night, for rent, in operation for more than 10 nights in a twelve-month
period. Only breakfasts may be provided to the guests. Bed-and-breakfast
establishments shall not include motels, hotels, boarding houses, lodging
houses or food service establishments.
BEE KEEPING — The maintenance of honey bee colonies for commercial,
personal, or educational purposes including, to collect their honey, beeswax,
propolis, flower pollen, bee pollen, and royal jelly; to pollinate crops; or to
produce bees for sale to other bee keepers.
BERM — A man-made mound of earth constructed so as to provide a barrier
in excess of two feet in vertical height used to shield or buffer properties
from adjoining uses, highways, or noise, or to control the direction of
surface water flow.
BICYCLE RACK — A bicycle rack or bicycle parking rack is a stationary
fixture to which a minimum of two bicycles can be securely attached to
prevent theft.
BIRTHING CENTER — A facility offering low-risk, generally healthy
pregnant females the option of experiencing childbirth in a non-hospital
setting on an outpatient basis. Generally these individuals will be
discharged to home after a short observance during the postpartum period
not to exceed 24 hours after delivery. The facility shall comply with all
statutory and administrative regulations that may be enacted from timeto-
time and shall include a collaborative agreement with a physician
specializing in obstetrical care or physician licensed to practice medicine in
all branches. Advanced practice nurses, including certified nurse midwives
as defined and mandated by 225 ILCS 65/15-5 and 225 65/15-15, may
participate in the childbirth process provided all statutory and
administrative regulations are complied with and met.
BLOCK — A tract of land bounded by streets or by a combination of
one or more streets and parks, cemeteries, shorelines of streams or other
waterways, corporate limit lines, railroad rights-of-way, or other lines of
demarcation.
BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS (ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS) — The
Board of Zoning Appeals for the City of Bloomington, Illinois.
BOARDING AND ROOMING HOUSE — A building arranged or used for
lodging, with or without meals, for compensation, by more than five and not
more than 20 individuals.
§ 44-1603 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1603
1:1903
BOARDING SCHOOL — An educational facility in which all or a portion of
students live on premises.
BOOK, STATIONERY STORES, NEWSSTANDS — Any business
establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock-intrade,
books, magazines, newspapers, other periodicals and stationery but
excludes therefrom any "adult media store" as defined herein.
BUILDING — Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering
any use or occupancy.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance from the grade to the top of the
highest roof beams of a flat roof or to the mean level of the highest gable
or slope of a hip roof. When a building faces on more than one street, the
height shall be measured from the average of the grades at the center of
each adjacent street frontage. Where it is not practical to use the average of
the grades at the center of each street, frontage height shall be measured
from the immediate average grade.
BUILDING MATERIALS AND SUPPLIES — An establishment which sells
materials and supplies used in the construction of buildings.
BUILDING SETBACK (REQUIRED YARD) — The area established by this
Code, into which a building shall not extend, except as otherwise provided
for by this Code.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — The line established by this Code, beyond
which a building shall not extend, except as otherwise provided for by this
Code.
BUILDING, EXISTING — Any building erected prior to the applicability of
this Code, thereto or one for which a legal building permit heretofore has
been issued.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building in which a principal use of a lot on
which it is located is conducted.
BUILDING, RESIDENTIAL — A building which is arranged, designed, used
as intended to be used for residential occupancy by one or more persons
and which includes, but is not limited, to the following types:
A. Single-family attached and detached dwelling units.
B. Two-family dwelling units.
C. Multiple-family dwelling units.
D. Agency supervised homes.
E. Agency-operated family homes.
F. Agency-operated group homes.
G. Barracks, convents, monasteries.
H. Group homes for parolees.
§ 44-1603 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1603
1:1904
BUILDING, TEMPORARY — Any building not designed or intended to be
permanently located, placed or affixed in the place where it is, but such
building shall not be permitted for more than one year.
BULK — A term used to measure, assess, and regulate the impact of
buildings, structures or land uses on other nearby buildings, structures or
land uses and includes the following factors:
BUS AND TAXI PASSENGER TERMINAL — Any premises for the transient
housing or parking of motor driven buses and taxis, and the loading and
unloading of passengers.
BUSINESS (COMMERCIAL) — A location wherein an occupation,
employment or enterprise which makes use of time and labor or attracts
attention, or wherein merchandise is exhibited or sold, or recreational
or amusement enterprises operated, or where services are offered for
consideration.
BUSINESS AND TRADE SCHOOLS — A specialized instructional
establishment that provides on-site training of business, commercial, and/
or trade skills.
§ 44-1604. [Ch. 44, 16-4] Definitions "C."
The following words and terms wherever they occur in this Code shall be
interpreted as herein defined:
CAMP AND CAMPING ESTABLISHMENT — Any plot of land intended
for exclusive occupancy by a tent, trailer, recreational vehicle, or similar
structure established or maintained and operated as temporary living
quarters for recreation, education, or vacation purposes.
CAMPING AND RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT — Any truck camper, trailer,
travel trailer, motor vehicle, marine craft, aircraft or tent used for
recreation purposes.
CANOPY — A roofed structure constructed of fabric or other material
supported by the building or by support extending to the ground directly
I. Dormitories.
J. Homes for the aged.
A. Size and height of buildings;
Location of exterior walls and required on-site facilities at all levels in
relation to lot lines, public streets, or to other buildings;
B.
C. Gross floor area of buildings in relation to lot area (floor area ratio);
D. All open spaces allocated to buildings;
E. Amount of lot area provided per dwelling unit; and
Type, amount and location of landscaping and site screening used to
shield or reduce the impact of land uses on surrounding property.
F.
§ 44-1603 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1604
1:1905
under the canopy placed so as to extend outward from the building
providing a protective shield for doors, windows and other openings.
CAR WASH — A building or portion thereof, containing facilities for washing
motor vehicles, using automatic production-line methods with a chain
conveyor blower, steam cleaning device, or other mechanical devices; or
providing space, water, and equipment for the hand-washing of autos,
whether by the customer or the operator.
CARPORT — An automobile shelter, usually formed by extension of the roof
from the side of a building, and enclosed on not more than two sides by
walls.
CATERING SERVICE — A business establishment engaged in the
preparation of food and beverages for consumption at another location.
Catering shall not include the manufacturing of food as defined in "Food and
Kindred Industries."
CELLAR — The portion of a building which is partly or completely below
grade and having at least 1/2 its height below grade (see "grade," "story"
and "basement").
CEMETERY — Property used for the interring of the dead.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS — A certificate issued by the
Historic Preservation Commission indicating its approval of plans for
alteration, construction, removal, or demolition of a landmark or of a
structure within an S-4 Historic Preservation District.
CERTIFICATE OF ECONOMIC HARDSHIP — A certificate issued by the
Historic Preservation Commission authorizing an alteration, construction,
removal, or demolition, even though a Certificate of Appropriateness has
previously been denied.
CERTIFICATE OF USE AND OCCUPANCY — The certificate issued by the
Director of Community Development which permits the use of a building in
accordance with the approved plans and specifications and which certifies
compliance with the provisions of law and ordinances for the use or
occupancy of the building in its several parts together with any special
stipulations or conditions therein.
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION (PHILANTHROPIC ORGANIZATION) —
Nonprofit organizations that are supported primarily by charity or
benevolence and whose principal function is the performance of charitable
or humanitarian works or religious activities. This definition shall include
but not be limited to churches, mosques, temples, synagogues, or other
religious institutions. Social organizations and clubs shall not be included in
this definition.
CHILD (CHILDREN) — Any person or persons under 18 years of age.
CHILD CARE FACILITY (FACILITY FOR CHILD CARE) — Any person, group
of persons, agency, association or organization, whether established for
gain or otherwise, who or which received or arranges for care of placement
of one or more children, unrelated to the operator of the facility, apart from
§ 44-1604 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1604
1:1906
the parents, with or without the transfer of the right of custody in any
facility as defined in the Illinois Child Care Act of 1969, established and
maintained for the care of children.
CHILD WELFARE AGENCY — A public or private child care facility,
receiving any child or children for the purpose of placing or arranging
for the placement of the child or children in foster family homes or other
facilities for child care, apart from the custody of the child's or children's
parents. The term "Child Welfare Agency" includes all agencies established
and maintained by a municipality or other political subdivision of the State
of Illinois to protect, guard, train or care, for children outside their own
homes, but does not include any circuit court or duly appointed juvenile
probation officer or youth counselor of the court, who receives and places
children under an order of the court.
CHIMNEY — An enclosure containing one or more passageways for the
products of combustion of a fire or furnace to flow through.
CHURCH (CHAPEL), (MOSQUE), (SYNAGOGUE), (TEMPLE) — A building
wherein persons regularly assemble for religious worship and which is
maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public
worship, together with all accessory buildings and uses customarily
associated with such primary purpose.
CITY (MUNICIPALITY) — The City of Bloomington, Illinois.
CITY CLERK — The City Clerk of the City of Bloomington, Illinois, or his or
her duly authorized representative.
CITY MANAGER — The City Manager of the City of Bloomington, Illinois, or
his or her duly authorized representative.
CITY PLANNER — The City Planner of the City of Bloomington, Illinois, or
his or her duly authorized representative.
CLEAN WOOD — Untreated wood or untreated wood products, including
clean untreated lumber.
CLOTHING CARE — An establishment which launders or dry cleans articles
dropped off on the premises directly by the customer or where articles are
dropped off, sorted, and picked up but where laundering or cleaning is done
elsewhere.
CLUB or LODGE — A nonprofit corporation or association of persons who
are bona fide members paying dues, which owns, hires, or leases a building,
or portion thereof, the use of such premises being restricted to members
and their guests.
CLUSTER SUBDIVISION — A subdivision in which the lot sizes are reduced
below those normally required in the zoning district in which the
subdivision is located, in return for the provision of permanent open space.
A development design technique that concentrates buildings in specific
areas on a site to allow the remaining land used for recreation, common
open space, or the preservation of historically or environmentally sensitive
features.
§ 44-1604 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1604
1:1907
COLLECTOR STREET — A street that serves as a connection between
a major street and minor streets. Its primary function is to distribute
and collect traffic to and from minor streets. A collector street functions
to conduct traffic between major streets and/or activity centers. It is a
principal traffic artery within residential areas and carries a moderate
volume of traffic. The collector street has potential for sustaining minor
retail or other commercial establishments along its route which will
influence the traffic flow.
COLLEGE AND UNIVERSITY CLASSROOMS — Any structure utilized as
classroom space by a private or public college or university.
COLLEGE AND UNIVERSITY FACILITIES — Any structure utilized by a
private or public college or university for purposes including but not limited
to congregation, assembly, performance, and recreation. Not to include
classrooms.
COLLOCATE — To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace
wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure or utility
pole.
COLUMBARIUM — A building or structure or area within a building or
structure intended to be used for the interment of the cremated remains of
a deceased person or animal.
COMMERCIAL CLEANING AND REPAIR SERVICES — A building, portion
of a building, or premises used or intended to be used for repair and/
or cleaning of fabrics, textiles, wearing apparel, or articles of any sort
by immersion and agitation, or by immersions only, in volatile solvents
including, but not by way of limitation, solvents of the petroleum distillate
type, and/or the chlorinated hydrocarbon type, and the processes incidental
thereto.
COMMERCIAL COMMUNITY KITCHEN — An approved facility licensed
as a Food Manufacturer that may be used by licensed businesses for
commercial purpose; allowed use of a Community Kitchen as an unlicensed
kitchen that is used by community members for cooking non-commercial or
exempt foods or for cooking classes and/or other related activities.
COMMERCIAL RECREATION FACILITIES — See "recreation facilities,
commercial."
COMMERCIAL SOLAR ENERGY CONVERSION FACILITY — A solar
photovoltaic system that is structurally mounted on the ground and is not
roof-mounted, with a minimum nameplate capacity of 250 kilowatts (kw)
direct current; energy generated by the system can be used onsite or sold
commercially.
COMMERCIAL WIND ENERGY CONVERSION FACILITY — A wind energy
system of one or more wind towers and turbines that has a rated capacity
of more than 100 kw and is used to generate energy for commercial sale.
COMMISSION (PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION) — The Planning
Commission of the City of Bloomington, Illinois.
§ 44-1604 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1604
1:1908
COMMON DRIVEWAY — A common driveway is a driveway serving two or
more structures or off-street parking areas, which are located on individual
lots.
COMMON RECREATION SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land reserved
primarily for the leisure and recreational use of the residents of a planned
unit development and privately-owned and maintained in accordance with
Chapter 24, § 24-502C, of the Bloomington City Code, 1960, as amended. All
common recreation space shall have an area of not less than 10,000 square
feet. The shortest distance between median points of any two sides of such
common recreation space shall not be less than 36 feet. All recreation space
shall not be less than 20 feet away from any first story residential building
wall containing a window.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE — Cable service, as defined in 47 U.S.C.
§ 522(6), as amended; information service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153(24),
as amended; telecommunications service, as defined in 47 U.S.C § 153(53),
as amended; mobile service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153(33), as amended;
or wireless service other than mobile service.
COMMUNITY CENTER — A facility maintained by a public agency or by
a not-for-profit community or neighborhood, corporation, association
primarily for social, recreation, or educational needs of the community or
neighborhood.
COMMUNITY RECEPTION ESTABLISHMENT — An owner/operator
occupied residential building of historic architectural significance located
on a lot in a "S-4 Historic Preservation District" and used as a "bed-andbreakfast
establishment" as defined herein and suitable to be used as a
"Place of Assembly" defined herein.
COMPACTED SURFACE — A closed graded, dust free, crushed aggregate
surface having a minimum thickness of eight inches compacted to 100% of
standard laboratory density.
COMPATIBLE USE — A land use which is capable of direct association with
certain other uses because it is complementary, congruous, or otherwise not
detrimental.
COMPOSTING — The controlled decomposition of organic materials using
aerobic bacteria.
COMPOSTING FACILITY — A facility where organic matter that is derived
primarily from off-site is to be processed by composting and/or is processed
for commercial purposes. Activities of a composting facility may include
management, collection, transportation, staging, composting, curing, the
storage, marketing or use of the compost.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — A compilation of policy statements, goals and
objectives, standards, maps and statistical data for the physical, social and
economic development, both public and private, of the City of Bloomington,
Illinois and its environs, as adopted by the City Council.
CONCEALMENT — A technique or combination of techniques that blend an
object into the surrounding environment and to minimize the visual impact
§ 44-1604 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1604
1:1909
as much as reasonable possible. Examples of concealment techniques
include eliminating all horizontal projections; architecturally screening
roof-mounted antennas and accessory equipment; integrating wireless
communications facilities into architectural elements; nestling wireless
communications facilities into the surrounding landscape so that the
topography or vegetation reduces their view; using the location that would
result in the least amount of visibility to the public; minimizing the size
and appearance of wireless communications facilities; and designing
telecommunications towers to appear other than as towers, such as light
poles, power poles, flag poles, and trees.
CONSTRUCTION — The act of adding an addition to an existing structure
or the erection of a new principal or accessory structure on a lot.
CONVALESCENT HOME — A privately operated establishment devoted to
the care of persons during the recuperative stage of an illness, or in which
persons may be cared for during an illness. This definition shall not be
construed to imply or permit the practice of general hospital functions such
as major surgical operations or the rendering of service beyond nursing
care in the operation of nursing homes or sheltered care homes or homes
for the aged, as defined herein and as regulated by 210 ILCS 45/1-101 et
sec. "The Nursing Home Care Act."
CONVENT — The dwelling units of a religious order or congregation.
CORPORATION COUNSEL — Legal counsel for the City of Bloomington,
Illinois or his or her duly authorized representative.
COUNCIL (CITY COUNCIL) — The City Council of the City of Bloomington,
Illinois.
COUNTRY CLUB — A club with recreation facilities for members, their
families, and invited guests.
COURTHOUSE — A building that is home to a local court of law and other
regional county government functions.
CUL-DE-SAC — A street terminated at one end with a turnaround, the open
end being the only means of access to another street.
CULTURAL INSTITUTIONS — Establishments that document the social
and religious structures and intellectual manifestations that characterize a
society, and include museums, art galleries, and similar establishments that
document and present natural, historic, scientific, or cultural interests.
CURB LEVEL — The level of the established curb in front of a building or
structure measured at the center of such front. Where no curb has been
established, it shall be deemed to be the established elevation of the center
line of the street surface in front of a building or structure measured at the
center line of such front.
CURRENCY EXCHANGE — An establishment that, for compensation,
engages in the business of cashing checks, warrants, drafts, money orders,
or other commercial paper serving the same purpose. This classification
does not include a state or federally chartered bank, savings association,
§ 44-1604 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1604
1:1910
credit union, or industrial loan company. Further this classification does not
include establishments selling consumer goods where the cashing of checks
or money orders is incidental to the main purpose of the business.
§ 44-1605. [Ch. 44, 16-5] Definitions "D."
The following words and terms wherever they occur in this Code shall be
interpreted as herein defined:
DAY-CARE CENTER (NURSERY AND NIGHT CARE CENTER) — A premises
licensed by the State of Illinois and receiving more than eight children
12 years of age and under for care during all or part of a day or night
for consideration. As used herein the term children does not include the
children of the operator(s) of the Day-care center.
DAY CARE HOME (NIGHT CARE HOME) — A dwelling unit in which care
is provided for more than three children that is licensed by the Illinois
Department of Children and Family Services under the Illinois Child Care
Act of 1969 (225 ILCS 10/1 et seq.). No day care home operator may care
for more than a total of eight children, not including the caregiver's own
children under age 12.
DECK — A roofless outdoor structure built as an aboveground platform
supported by posts, at least one foot above grade; a deck may or may not be
attached to the main building, and may or may not have railings or steps;
a deck is generally of significant size and is used primarily for recreation
uses, and secondarily as an entrance and exit to the building.
DEMOLITION — Any act or process that destroys in part or in whole a
building or structure.
DENSITY, GROSS — The numerical value obtained by dividing the total
number of dwelling units in a development by the gross area of the tract of
land (in acres) within a development. This would include all nonresidential
land uses and private streets of the development, as well as rights-of-way of
dedicated streets—the results being the number of dwelling units per gross
acre of land.
DESIGN GUIDELINE — A standard of appropriate activity that will preserve
the historic and architectural character of a structure or district.
DEVELOPER — (See "owner").
DEVELOPMENT — The act of changing or the state of a tract of land after
its function has been purposefully changed, including but not limited to,
erection of structures on the land and alterations to the land.
DIAGNOSTIC IMAGING CENTER — A facility offering diagnostic imaging
services on an outpatient basis to ambulatory patients. The imaging
modalities may include general X-ray services, CT scans, MRI scans,
ultrasound, fluoroscopy, mammography and any other generally recognized
imaging methods commonly utilized on an outpatient basis.
DIAGNOSTIC LABORATORY TESTING FACILITY — A facility offering
diagnostic and/or pathological testing and analysis of blood, blood fluids,
§ 44-1604 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1605
1:1911
pathological specimens, DNA sampling and analysis and any other
diagnostic test generally recognized in the health care industry.
DIRECT-TO-HOME SATELLITE SERVICES — The distribution or
broadcasting of programming or services by satellite directly to the
subscriber's premises without the use of ground receiving or distribution
equipment, except at the subscriber's premises or in the uplink process to
the satellite.
DIRECTOR OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT — The Director of the
Department of Community Development for the City of Bloomington,
Illinois, or his or her duly authorized representative.
DIRECTOR OF ENGINEERING — The Director of the Department of
Engineering for the City of Bloomington, Illinois, or his or her duly
authorized representative.
DISPLAY PUBLICLY — The act of exposing, placing, posting, exhibiting, or
in any fashion displaying in any location, whether public or private, an item
in such a manner that it may be readily seen and its content or character
distinguished by normal unaided vision viewing it from a street, highway,
or public sidewalk, or from property of others, or from any portion of the
premises where items and material other than adult media are on display to
the public.
DISTRIBUTED ANTENNA SYSTEM — A system consisting of:
DISTRICT — A portion of the City within which specific regulations or
requirements, unique thereto, apply under the provisions of this Code.
DOMESTIC UTILITY TRAILER — A single-axle trailer used for domestic
or recreational purposes only and not exceeding any of the following
dimensions: six feet in width; 12 feet in length or eight feet in height. No
domestic utility trailer may be used for business or commercial purposes.
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE SHELTER — A residential facility serving as a
center to receive and house persons who are victims of domestic violence,
including dependents of the victim, to provide temporary boarding, lodging,
counseling, and day care. The facility shall meet all certification
requirements of the State of Illinois.
DORMITORY (STUDENT RESIDENCE HALL) — A dormitory is a residential
building where group sleeping accommodations are provided for persons
A number of remote communications nodes deployed throughout the
desired coverage area, each including at least one antenna for
transmission and reception;
A.
A high capacity signal transport medium (typically fiber optic cable)
connecting each node to a central communications hub; and
B.
Radio transceivers located at the hub site (rather than at each
individual node as is the case for small cells) to process or control
the communications signals transmitted and received through the
antennas.
C.
§ 44-1605 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1605
1:1912
not members of the same family and where the number accommodated
exceeds that allowed in a dwelling unit in the district. The group sleeping
accommodations may be in one room or in a series of closely associated
rooms under occupancy and single management as in college dormitories,
fraternity houses, sorority houses, military barracks, etc., regardless of
whether meals are provided.
DRIVE-IN — A business or institution where a principal use is the offering of
goods or services to be carried out or to be served to customers waiting in
parked motor vehicles, but which may have facilities for offering such goods
or services to customers for use or consumption within the building.
DRIVE-IN MOTION PICTURE THEATER — Any outdoor business
establishment in which motion pictures, slides or similar photographic
reproductions are shown as the principal use of the premises or are shown
as an adjunct to some other business activity which is conducted on the
premises and constitutes a major attraction; and wherein fees of any kind
are charged; and wherein such motion pictures, slides or similar
photographic reproductions are shown on a regular basis; but excludes
therefrom "adult motion-picture theaters" as defined herein.
DRIVE-THROUGH — A component of a retail or service use designed and
operated to serve a patron who is seated in an automobile.
DRIVEWAY — A compacted private access way for motor vehicles between
a public or private street and one or more structures or off-street parking
areas.
DRIVING RANGE — An outdoor area equipped with distance markers, clubs
and balls, and tees for practicing golf drives and putting, and which may
include a snack-bar and a proshop but excludes miniature golf courses.
DRUG STORE — A pharmacy that includes general merchandise sales as
part of their business plan or operations.
DWELLING UNIT — A building designed or used principally for residential
occupancy, including, without limitation, single-family dwelling units, twofamily
dwelling units, and multiple-family dwelling units.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms arranged or designed for the use of
one family living together as a single housekeeping unit with cooking, living,
sanitary and sleeping facilities in a self-contained unit, so that access to the
street and any additional facilities (such as laundry, heating units, etc.) can
be gained without passing through any other residential or commercial unit.
DWELLING UNIT, ACCESSORY — A residential dwelling unit, excluding
mobile or manufactured homes, located on the same lot as a single-family
dwelling unit, either within the same building as the single-family dwelling
unit or in a detached building.
DWELLING UNIT, ATTACHED — A building containing two or more
abutting dwelling units that share a common wall at the lot line and that are
on separate lots.
§ 44-1605 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1605
1:1913
DWELLING UNIT, DETACHED — A dwelling unit surrounded by open space
on the same lot.
DWELLING UNIT, MULTIPLE-FAMILY — A dwelling containing more than
two dwelling units.
DWELLING UNIT, SINGLE-FAMILY — A dwelling, containing one dwelling
unit.
DWELLING UNIT, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED — A dwelling containing
two or more dwelling units each with their own entrance.
DWELLING UNIT, TWO-FAMILY (DUPLEX) — A dwelling containing two
dwelling units with a common entrance.
§ 44-1606. [Ch. 44, 16-6] Definitions "E."
The following words and terms wherever they occur in this Code shall be
interpreted as herein defined:
EASEMENT — A right to use a portion of the land or another for a purpose
not consistent with a general property right of the owner.
EFFICIENCY UNIT — A dwelling unit that has only one combined living and
sleeping room, said dwelling unit, however, may also have a separate room
containing only kitchen facilities and also a separate room containing only
toilet and bathing facilities.
ELEEMOSYNARY — Of, relating to, or supported by charity.
ELEVATIONS DRAWING — A vertical view drawing of the front, side, or
rear of a structure that describes the design, floor-to-floor dimensions,
building height, window and door dimensions, and signs.
EMERGENCY FACILITY — A facility in which the operations of publicly
owned safety and emergency services, such as, but not limited to, fire
stations and police stations are conducted.
ENTERTAINMENT VENUE — See "exhibition venue."
ESTABLISHMENT — Any business.
EXCAVATION — Any breaking of ground, except common household
gardening and ground care.
EXHIBITION VENUE — Any establishment at which an exhibit of animals,
human beings, or objects is featured for the purpose of amusement and
entertainment, and at which the public pays an admission fee.
EXPLICIT SEXUAL MATERIAL — Any hard-core material as defined by this
Code.
EXTENDED-STAY HOTEL/MOTEL — A building or structure intended as,
used as, maintained as or advertised as a place where sleeping
accommodations are furnished to the public as regular roomers, primarily
for one week or more.
§ 44-1605 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1606
1:1914
EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL APPEARANCE — The architectural character
and general composition of the exterior of a structure, including but not
limited to the kind, color and texture of the building material and the
type, design and character of all windows, doors, light fixtures, signs, and
appurtenant elements.
§ 44-1607. [Ch. 44, 16-7] Definitions "F."
The following words and terms wherever they occur in this Code shall be
interpreted as herein defined:
FAIRGROUND — An area of land use including but not limited to
agricultural related office buildings, animal shows and judging, carnivals,
circuses, community meeting or recreational buildings and uses, concerts,
food booths and stands, games, rides, rodeos, sales and auctions, storage,
theaters. Such county fairs, exhibitions, and shows do not include
racetracks or motorized contests of speed.
FAMILY — One or more persons, each related to the other by blood,
adoption, or marriage, living in a dwelling unit. One or more persons each
related to the other by blood, adoption, or marriage and not more than
two other persons not related by blood, adoption or marriage living in a
dwelling unit shall also be deemed to constitute a family. Any child living in
a "Foster Family Home" as that term is defined herein shall also be deemed
to be part of a family. However, in no case shall more than two persons
not related by blood, adoption or marriage occupy any efficiency unit or
a one bedroom dwelling unit as defined herein. Three or more unrelated
parolees living in one dwelling unit shall not be considered to be a "family"
for purposes of the Zoning Code unless all such parolees are actually related
by blood, adoption, or marriage. "Parolees" shall have the definition set
forth in Chapter 26, § 26-201, of the Bloomington City Code.
FARM MACHINERY SALES AND SERVICE — A use primarily engaged in
the sale or rental of farm tools and implements.
FARMER'S MARKET — An occasional or periodic market held in an open
area or in a structure where groups of individual sellers offer for sale to
the public such items as fresh produce, value added agricultural products,
seasonal fruits, fresh flowers, arts and crafts items, and food and beverages
(but not to include second-hand goods) dispensed from booths located onsite.
FENCE — A structure, other than a building or portion thereto, which is
a barrier and is used as a boundary, screen, separation, means of privacy,
protection, or confinement.
FINANCIAL SERVICES — Any building wherein the primary occupation is
concerned with such federal or state regulated businesses such as banking,
savings and loans, loan companies, and investment companies.
FIRE STATION — See "emergency facility."
FISH HATCHERY — A parcel or building where commercial water
dependent fishery facilities are located.
§ 44-1606 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1607
1:1915
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors
measured in square feet from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from
the center line of walls separating two buildings. The floor area of a building
shall also include the basement floor area; elevator shafts and stairwells at
each floor; floor space used for mechanical equipment (except equipment,
open or closed, located on the roof), penthouses and attic space having
average headroom of seven feet six inches or more; interior balconies
and mezzanines; enclosed porches; and floor area devoted to accessory
buildings, structures or uses, provided that any space devoted to outdoor
off-street parking or loading shall not be included in floor area.
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The numerical value obtained through dividing the
floor area of a building or buildings by the lot area on which such building(s)
are located.
FOOD AND KINDRED INDUSTRIES — Secondary manufacturing and
packaging for processing of raw agricultural products into foods.
FOOD PANTRY — The charitable distribution of food and/or assorted
clothing items, conducted by a nonprofit organization, which involves no
sales of goods or services.
FORESTRY — The growing or harvesting of forest tree species used for
commercial or related purposes.
FOSTER FAMILY HOME — A facility for child care in residences of families
who receive no more than eight children unrelated to them, unless all the
children are of common parentage, for the purposes of providing family
care and training for children on a full-time basis. The family's own children
under 18 years of age shall be included in determining the maximum
number of children served. The term "Foster Family Home" includes homes
receiving children from any state-operated institution for child care; or from
any agency established by a municipality or other political subdivision of
the State of Illinois authorized to provide care for children outside their
own homes — but excludes therefrom any "Agency-Operated Family Home,"
"Agency-Operated Group Home" or "Agency-Supervised Home" as defined
herein. The types of foster family homes are defined as follows:
BOARDING HOME — A Foster Family Home which receives payment
for regular full-time care of a child or children;
A.
FREE HOME — A Foster Family Home, other than an adoptive home,
which does not receive payments for the care of a child or children;
B.
ADOPTIVE HOME — A Foster Family Home which receives a child or
children for the purpose of adopting the child or children;
C.
WORK-WAGE HOME — A Foster Family Home which receives a child or
children who pay part or all of their board by rendering some services
to the family not prohibited by the Child Labor Law or by standards or
regulations of the Illinois Department of Children and Family Services
prescribed under the Illinois Child Care Act of 1969, as amended. The
D.
§ 44-1607 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1607
1:1916
FRONTAGE — The measure of lineal contiguity between a lot or portion
thereof and a street, alley or public way.
FRONTAGE, BUILDING — The length of any side of a building which fronts
on a public street, a public or private parking area, or a pedestrian walk
where costumer access to the building is available.
FRONTAGE, ROAD — Is a local street which is roughly parallel to and either
adjacent to or within the right-of-way of an arterial street.
FUNERAL PARLOR, MORTUARY — A building or part thereof used for
human funeral services. Such building may contain space and facilities for:
§ 44-1608. [Ch. 44, 16-8] Definitions "G."
The following words and terms wherever they occur in this Code shall be
interpreted as herein defined:
GARAGE, ACCESSORY — An accessory building which is intended for and
used for storing passenger motor vehicles owned and used by the occupants
of the building to which it is accessory.
GARAGE, REPAIR — A building, accessory building, or an accessory portion
of the principal building on the premises which is intended for or being used
for repair and servicing of motor vehicles or other motor driven means of
transportation.
GENERAL OFFICE, BUSINESS OR PROFESSIONAL — A building or
structure for the use of a person or persons for the conduct of business in
any of the following related categories, architecture, engineering, planning,
law, interior design, insurance, real estate, or any similar type of profession
excluding financial services and medical or dental offices or clinics.
child or children may receive a wage in connection with the services
rendered the foster family; and
INDEPENDENT HOME — A Foster Family Home, other than an
adoptive home, which receives no more than four children, unless of
common parentage, directly from parents, or other legally responsible
persons, by independent arrangement and which is not subject to direct
and regular supervision of a specified agency except as such
supervision pertains to licensing by the Illinois Department of Children
and Family Services.
E.
Embalming and the performance of other services used in the
preparation of the dead for burial;
A.
B. The performance of autopsies and other surgical procedures;
C. The storage of caskets, funeral urns, and other related funeral supplies;
D. The storage of funeral vehicles; and
E. Facilities for cremation.
§ 44-1607 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1608
1:1917
GOLF CLUB — A clubhouse, shelter, and other uses accessory to a golf
course.
GOLF COURSE — A tract of land laid out with at least nine holes for playing
a game of golf and improved with tees, greens, fairways, and hazards.
GOVERNMENT SERVICES AND FACILITIES — Services and facilities
owned and operated by Federal, State, or units of local government.
GOVERNMENTAL USES — Uses of land by Federal, State or units of local
government.
GRADE — A reference plane representing the average of finished ground
level adjoining the building at all exterior walls. When the finished ground
level slopes away from the exterior walls, the referenced plane shall be
established by the lowest points within the area between the building and
the lot line; or, when the lot line is more than six feet (1,829 millimeters)
from the building, between the building and a point six feet feet (1,829
millimeters) from the building.
GROCERY STORE, SUPERMARKET — A retail establishment with more
than 40,000 square feet of gross floor area which primarily sells food
products for home preparation and consumption, convenience, and
household goods, and secondarily sells prepared food items.
GROOMER — Any place or establishment, public or private, where animals
are bathed, clipped, or combed for the purpose of enhancing their aesthetic
value or health and for which a fee is charged.
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The total area of the building accessible or visible
to the public, including showrooms, motion-picture theaters, motion picture
arcades, service areas, behind-counter areas, storage areas visible from
such other areas, rest rooms (whether or not labeled "public"), areas used
for cabaret or similar shows (including stage areas), plus aisles, hallways,
and entryways serving such areas.
GROUP HOME FOR PAROLEES — A residential structure housing, in one
dwelling unit, three or more unrelated parolees. Three or more unrelated
parolees living in one dwelling unit shall not be considered to be a "family"
for purposes of the Zoning Code unless all such parolees are actually related
by blood, adoption, or marriage.
GUESTS, PERMANENT — A person who occupies or has the right to occupy
a hotel, motel, or apartment hotel accommodation as his place of permanent
residence.
GUN SHOP — Any premises or portion thereof used for the sale, vending,
dealing, exchange, or transfer of firearms.
§ 44-1609. [Ch. 44, 16-9] Definitions "H."
The following words and terms wherever they occur in this Code shall be
interpreted as herein defined:
HABITABLE ROOM — A room or enclosed floor space arranged for living,
eating, food preparation, or sleeping purposes, not including bathrooms,
§ 44-1608 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1609
1:1918
toilet compartments, laundries, pantries, foyers, hallways, and other
accessory spaces.
HANDICAP — With respect to a person, a physical or mental impairment
which substantially limits one or more major life activities; a record of
such impairment; or being regarded as having such an impairment. The
term does not include current, illegal use of or addiction to a controlled
substance (as defined in Section 102 of the Controlled Substances Act [21
U.S.C. § 802]). An individual shall not be considered to have a handicap
solely because that individual is a transvestite. As used in this definition:
PHYSICAL OR MENTAL IMPAIRMENT —
Includes:
Any physiological disorder or condition, cosmetic
disfigurement or anatomical loss affecting one or more of the
following body systems: neurological; musculoskeletal; special
sense organs; respiratory, including speech organs;
cardiovascular; reproductive; digestive; genito/urinary; hemio
and emphatic; skin; and endocrine; or
(a)
Any mental or psychological disorder, such as mental
retardation, organic brain syndrome, emotional or mental
illness and specific learning disabilities.
(b)
(1)
The term "physical or mental impairment" includes, but is not
limited to, such diseases and conditions as orthopedic, visual,
speech and hearing impairments, cerebral palsy, autism, epilepsy,
muscular dystrophy, multiple sclerosis, cancer, heart disease,
diabetes, Human Immunodeficiency Virus Infection, mental
retardation, emotional illness, drug addiction (other than addiction
caused by current illegal use of controlled substance) and
alcoholism.
(2)
A.
MAJOR LIFE ACTIVITIES — Functions such as caring for oneself,
performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking,
breathing, learning and working.
B.
HAS A RECORD OF SUCH AN IMPAIRMENT — Has a history of, or
has been misclassified as having, a mental or physical impairment that
substantially limits one or more major life activities.
C.
IS REGARDED AS HAVING AN IMPAIRMENT —
Has a physical or mental impairment that does not substantially
limit one or more major life activities but that is treated by another
person as constituting such a limitation;
(1)
Has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one
or more major life activities only as a result of the attitudes of other
toward such impairment; or
(2)
D.
§ 44-1609 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1609
1:1919
HARD SURFACE — Any asphalt or concrete surface of an approved
thickness as required by Article VII of this Code, but excluding rock, gravel,
grass, or dirt.
HARD-CORE MATERIAL — Media characterized by sexual activity that
includes one or more of the following: erect male genitals; contact of the
mouth of one person with the genitals of another; penetration with a finger
or male genital or other object into any genital or anal orifice in another
person; open female labia; penetration of a sexually oriented toy or novelty
into any orifice in another person; male ejaculation; or the aftermath of male
ejaculation.
HEALTH CLUB — An establishment that provides equipment and facilities
for physical exercise or athletic activities on the premises; it shall not
include, however, facilities for indoor sports activities that require a hardsurfaced
type of court, a bowling alley, a swimming pool, ice skating or
roller-skating rink facility.
HEIGHT, STORY — The vertical distance from top to top of two successive
tiers of beams or finished floor surfaces; and, for the topmost story, from the
top of the floor finish to the top of the ceiling joists, or, where there is not a
ceiling, to the top of the roof rafters.
HEIGHT, TELECOMMUNICATION ANTENNA FACILITY — The vertical
measurement from an identified base such as the ground or roof to the
vertical apex of the telecommunication antenna facility.
HEIGHT, WALL — The vertical distance from the foundation wall or other
immediate support of such wall to the top of the wall.
HELIPORT — An area of land, water and/or a structure or building which
is used or intended for use for the landing and taking off of helicopters;
and any appurtenant areas which are used or intended for use for heliport
buildings or other heliport facilities or rights-of-way, including all necessary
pads, helicopter storage and tie down areas, hangars, and other necessary
buildings and open spaces.
HELIPORT TERMINAL — A building at a heliport where passengers
transfer between ground transportation and the facilities that allow them to
board and disembark aircraft.
HEREAFTER — After the time that this Code becomes effective as to a
particular land use or parcel of land.
HERETOFORE — Before the time that this Code became effective as to a
particular land use or parcel of land.
HISTORIC AREA — An area containing buildings or places in which historic
events have occurred or which have special public value because of notable
architectural or other features relating to the cultural or artistic heritage of
the community which warrant conservation and preservation.
Has none of the impairments defined as a "physical or mental
impairment" in Subsection A of this definition but is treated by
another person as having such an impairment.
(3)
§ 44-1609 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1609
1:1920
HISTORIC DISTRICT — An historic area designated as an "S-4 Historic
Preservation District" by ordinance of the City Council and which may
contain within definable geographic boundaries one or more landmarks and
which may have within its boundaries other properties or structures that,
which not of such historic and/or architectural significance to be designated
as landmarks, nevertheless contribute to the overall visual characteristics
of the landmark or landmarks located within such historic area.
HOME FOR THE AGED — Any home operated not for profit under the
auspices of a religious, fraternal, charitable, or other nonprofit
organization, or operated not for profit under an endowment which through
its ownership or management and as its principal objective provides
maintenance and personal care, nursing, or sheltered care to aged persons,
and in the conduct of which provides such service or services to not less
than three persons over 60 years of age who are not related to the applicant
or owner by blood or marriage. Such terms shall not include the following:
HOME IMPROVEMENT CENTER — An establishment selling various
household goods, tools, and building materials, durable household goods
(e.g. refrigerators, lawn care machines, washing machines), electronic
equipment, household animal supplies, plant nursery products, etc. Plant
nursery items and building materials may be kept outdoors.
HOME OCCUPATION — An occupation or business conducted within any
dwelling unit which meets the standards of § 44-1020 of this Code.
HORTICULTURAL SERVICES (LANDSCAPING SERVICES, NURSERY,
GREENHOUSE) — A space, building or structure, or combination thereof,
for the storage of live trees, shrubs or plants offered for wholesale or retail
sale on the premises, including products used for gardening or landscaping.
The definition of horticultural services, nursery, or greenhouse within the
meaning of this Code does not include any space, building or structure used
principally for the sale of fruits, vegetables, or Christmas trees.
HOSPITAL — An institution, licensed by the State of Illinois, providing
primary health services and medical or surgical care to persons, primarily
inpatients, suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity and/or other
abnormal physical or mental conditions and includes, as an integral part
A home, institution, or other place operated by the Federal Government
or agency thereof, or by the State of Illinois, political subdivision
thereof, or a municipal corporation therein;
A.
A hospital, sanitarium, or other institution whose principal activity or
business is the care and treatment of persons suffering from mental or
nervous diseases;
B.
A hospital, sanitarium, or other institution whose principal activity
is the diagnosis, care, and treatment of human illness through the
maintenance and operation of organized facilities thereof;
C.
Any child welfare agency, maternity hospital, or lying-in home required
to be licensed by the State of Illinois.
D.
§ 44-1609 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1609
1:1921
of the institution, related facilities such as laboratories, outpatient facilities
and/or training facilities.
HOTEL (MOTEL, MOTOR HOTEL) — An establishment which is open to
transient guests, in contradistinction to a boarding house, lodging house,
or apartment hotel, and is commonly known as a hotel (motel) in the
community in which it is located; and which provides customary hotel
services such as mail service, the furnishing and laundering of linen,
telephone and secretarial or desk service, the use and upkeep of furniture
and bellhop service.
HYDROPONICS — The growing of plants in nutrient solutions without an
inert medium, such as soil, to provide mechanical support.
§ 44-1610. [Ch. 44, 16-10] Definitions "I."
The following words and terms wherever they occur in this Code shall be
interpreted as herein defined:
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any hard-surfaced, man-made area that does
not readily absorb or retain water including but not limited to building
roofs, parking and driveway areas, graveled areas, sidewalks, and paved
recreational areas; synonymous with non-pervious surface.
INSTITUTIONAL HOME FOR THE CARE OF CHILDREN (CHILD CARE
INSTITUTION) — A child care facility where more than seven children
are: received and maintained for the purpose of providing them with care
or training or both. The term "institution home for child care" includes
residential schools, primarily serving ambulatory handicapped children,
and those operating a full calendar year, but does not include:
INSTRUCTIONAL STUDIO — A workroom for the purpose of instruction
in a wide variety of fields including but not limited to architecture, acting,
pottery, painting, graphic design, and filmmaking.
Any state-operated institution for child care established by legislative
action;
A.
Any juvenile detention home established and operated by county or
child protection district established under the Illinois. Child Protection
Act," as amended;
B.
Any institution, home, place or facility operating under a license
pursuant to the Illinois "Nursing Homes, Sheltered Care Homes, and
Homes for the Aged Act," as amended;
C.
Any bonafide boarding school in which children are primarily taught
branches of education corresponding to those taught in public schools,
grades one through 12, or taught in public elementary schools, high
schools, or both elementary and high schools, and which operates on a
regular academic school year basis; or
D.
Any facility licensed as a "group home" or "night care center" as defined
in the Illinois "Child Care Act of 1969," as amended.
E.
§ 44-1609 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1611
1:1922
§ 44-1611. [Ch. 44, 16-11] Definitions "J."
The following words and terms wherever they occur in this Code shall be
interpreted as herein defined:
JUNK — Any manufactured good, appliance, fixture, furniture, machinery,
motor vehicle, or trailer that is abandoned, demolished, discarded,
dismantled, or so worn, deteriorated or in such a condition as to be
generally unusable in its existing state, including without limitation, motor
vehicles, scrap metal, scrap material, waste, bottles, tin cans, paper, rubble,
boxes, crates, rags, used lumber, building materials, machinery parts, and
used tires.
JUNKYARD (SALVAGE YARD) — Any lot, land, parcel, building, structure,
or part thereof, used for the storage, collection, processing, purchase, sale,
salvage, or disposal of junk.
§ 44-1612. [Ch. 44, 16-12] Definitions "K."
The following words and terms wherever they occur in this Code shall be
interpreted as herein defined:
KENNEL — Any premises or portions thereof on which four or more dogs,
cats, or other household domestic animals over four months of age are kept,
or on which more than two such animals are maintained, boarded, bred or
cared for in return for remuneration, or are kept for the purpose of sale.
KITCHEN — Any room principally used intended or designed to be used
for cooking or the preparation of food. The presence of a range or oven or
utility connections suitable for servicing a range or oven shall normally be
considered as establishing a kitchen.
§ 44-1613. [Ch. 44, 16-13] Definitions "L."
The following words and terms wherever they occur in this Code shall be
interpreted as herein defined:
LABORATORY — A building or group of buildings in which are located
facilities for scientific research, investigation, testing, or experimentation,
but not facilities for the manufacture or sale of products, except as
incidental to in the main purpose of the laboratory.
LANDING STRIP — A facility for take-off and landing of aircraft with or
without services available for aircraft.
LANDMARK — A property or structure designated as a "landmark" by
Ordinance of the City Council, pursuant to procedures prescribed herein,
that is worthy of rehabilitation, restoration, and preservation because of its
historic and/or architectural significance to the City.
LIBRARY — An establishment or structure dedicated to the collection of
books, periodicals, films, and other forms for people to read, borrow, and
refer to.
§ 44-1611 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1613
1:1923
LIGHTING —
AVERAGE ILLUMINATION LEVELS — The overall average of all points
on the surface of the illuminated area including the brightest and
dimmest points.
A.
CUT-OFF ANGLE — The angle between the vertical axis of a luminaire
and the first line of sight (of a luminaire) at which the light source is no
longer visible.
B.
CUT-OFF FIXTURES — Cut-off fixtures control glare by directing light
well below the horizon, out of the viewer's line of sight.
C.
DIRECT LIGHT — Light emitted directly by a lamp, off a reflector, or
through a refractor of a luminaire.
D.
FIXTURE — The assembly that holds a lamp and may include an
assembly housing, a mounting bracket or pole socket, a lamp holder, a
ballast, a reflector or mirror, and a refractor or lens.
E.
FLOODLIGHT — A light fixture designed to light a scene or object to a
level greater than its surroundings; the beam of floodlights may range
from narrow field angles of 10° to wide angles (more than 100°).
F.
FLUSH MOUNTED OR RECESSED LUMINAIRE — A luminaire that is
mounted above a ceiling (or behind a wall or other surface) with the
opening of the luminaire level with the surface.
G.
FOOT-CANDLE — A measure of light falling on a given surface. One
foot-candle is equal to the amount of light generated by one candle
shining on a square foot surface foot away; foot-candle may be
measured both horizontally and vertically by a light meter.
H.
GLARE — The condition that results from insufficiently shielded light
sources or areas of excessive light within field of view.
I.
LAMP — The component of a luminaire that produces the actual light
including luminous tube lighting.
J.
LIGHT POLLUTION — Artificial light which causes a detrimental effect
on the environment, enjoyment of night sky, or causes undesirable glare
or unnecessary illumination of adjacent properties or uses.
K.
LIGHT SHIELD — Any attachment which interrupts and blocks the path
of light emitted from a luminaire or fixture.
L.
LUMINAIRE — The complete lighting system, including the lamp and
the fixture.
M.
LUMINAIRE, FULL CUT-OFF — A luminaire that allows no direct light
emissions above a horizontal plane through the lowest-emitting part of
the luminaire.
N.
§ 44-1613 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1613
1:1924
LIQUOR STORE — An establishment engaged in the sale of alcoholic
beverages for off-premises consumption.
LIVE/WORK UNIT — A dwelling unit use for both dwelling purposes and
nonresidential use provided that no more than two persons who do not
reside in the unit are employed on the premises.
LOADING SPACE, OFF-STREET — Space located for bulk pickups and
deliveries, scaled to delivery vehicles expected to be used, and accessible to
such vehicles when required off-street parking spaces are filled.
LOT — A quantity of land capable of being described with such certainties
that its location and boundaries may be established, and which is
designated by its owner or developer as land to be conveyed, used or
developed as a unit or which has been conveyed, used or developed as a
unit, including any easements within its boundaries. Such lot shall have a
frontage on an improved public street or on an approved private street.
LOT AREA — The area of horizontal plane bounded by the vertical planes
through front, side, and rear lot lines.
LOT LINE, FRONT — That lot line which is abutting a public street or
private street.
LOT LINE, REAR — That lot line which is most distant from and is roughly
parallel to the front lot line. If the rear lot line is less than 10 feet in length,
or if the lot forms a point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be deemed to
be a line 10 feet in length within the lot, parallel to, and at the maximum
distance from the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line which is not a front or rear lot line.
LOT OF RECORD — A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the
office of the McLean County Recorder of Deeds, or a lot or parcel described
by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded.
LOT, CORNER — A lot located at the intersection of two or more streets. A
lot abutting on a curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot
LUMEN — A measure of light energy generated by a light source;
manufactures list lumen ratings for all their lamps; average lumen
levels are lightly lower than initial lumen ratings.
O.
MAXIMUM TO MINIMUM ILLUMINATION RATIO — The ratio of the
maximum illumination level to the minimum level.
P.
MOUNTING HEIGHT — The vertical distance between the surface to
be illuminated and the bottom of the light source.
Q.
LIGHTING, PEDESTRIAN-SCALE — Devices intended to provide
outdoor lighting that are lower in height than typical streetlighting and
located proximate to pedestrian areas such as sidewalks, open space
areas, or plazas.
R.
UNIFORMITY RATIO — The ratio of average illumination to minimum
illumination.
S.
§ 44-1613 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1613
1:1925
if straight lines drawn from the foremost points of the side lot lines to the
foremost point of the lot meet at an interior angle of less than 135°.
LOT, DEPTH — The distance between the midpoints of straight lines
connecting the foremost points of the side lot lines in front and the rearmost
points of the side lot lines in the rear.
LOT, FRONTAGE — The front of a lot shall be construed to be the portion
nearest the street. For the purposes of determining yard requirements on
corner lots and through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be
considered as having lot frontage.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot which faces on one street or with opposite sides on
two streets.
LOT, LINE — A property line dividing one lot from another, or from a street,
pedestrian way, or railroad right-of-way.
LOT, NON-CONFORMING — (See "nonconforming lot.)"
LOT, OUT — A lot depicted on a Final Subdivision Plat which does not meet
the requirements of this Code for lots of record and which may not be used
for building or parking lots.
LOT, REVERSED CORNER — A lot on which the frontage is at right angles
or approximately right angles (interior angle less than 135°) to the general
pattern in the area. A reversed corner lot may also be a corner lot, an
interior lot or a through lot.
LOT, THROUGH — A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than
one street. Through lots abutting two streets may be referred to as double
frontage lots.
LOT, WIDTH — The horizontal distance between side lot lines of a lot
measured at the required front yard setback line.
LOT, ZONING — A parcel of land that is designated by its owner at the
time of applying for a building permit as one lot, all of which is to be used,
developed, or built upon as a unit under single ownership. Such lot may
consist of: a. single recorded lot; b. a portion of a recorded lot; or c. a
combination of complete recorded lots, complete recorded lots and portions
of recorded lots, or portions of recorded lots.
§ 44-1614. [Ch. 44, 16-14] Definitions "M."
The following words and terms wherever they occur in this Code shall be
interpreted as herein defined:
MAJOR STREET — A public right-of-way with as high degree of continuity
which provides for the through traffic movement around and across the City,
as designated in the Official Comprehensive Plan.
MAJOR STREET PLAN — The major street and highway plan for the City
of Bloomington, Illinois approved by the City Council as part of the Official
Comprehensive Plan.
§ 44-1613 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1614
1:1926
MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOME SALES — An establishment
primarily dedicated to the sale of manufactured and mobile homes in an
open-air or enclosed environment.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width
or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is 320 or
more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed
to be used as a dwelling unit with or without a permanent foundation
when connected to the required utilities, and includes plumbing, heating,
air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. This structure
shall meet the requirements of the Federal Manufactured Housing and
Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, effective June 15, 1976 (24
CFR 3280).
MANUFACTURED HOME LOT — A parcel of land for the placement of
one manufactured home which is designated for the exclusive use of the
occupant.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK (MOBILE HOME PARK) — A parcel of land
which has been developed for the placement of two or more manufactured
homes or mobile homes and is owned by an individual, firm, trust,
partnership, public or private association or corporation.
MANUFACTURED HOME/MOBILE HOME STAND (PAD) — That part of a
manufactured home lot or mobile home lot which has been reserved for
the placement of one manufactured home or mobile home with accessory
structures.
MANUFACTURING, PRIMARY — Establishments engaged in the initial
processing or treatment of raw material or manufacturing of products that
require additional processing, fabrication, or assembly for ultimate use by
the consumer.
MANUFACTURING, SECONDARY — Establishments engaged in the
manufacture and/or assembly of product parts or components for final use
or consumption. This usually involves the secondary processing, fabrication,
or assembly of semi-finished products from a primary manufacturing
industry.
MARINA — A facility for secure mooring of boats, including facilities for
storage and repair of boats and sale of boating supplies and fuel, for use by
the owner or resident of the lot, and those other than the owner or resident
of the lot, upon which the facility is located.
MARINE CRAFT STORAGE — See "marina."
MASSAGE THERAPY STUDIO — An establishment offering massage
therapy and/or body work by a massage therapist, licensed by the City
under Chapter 22, Article X, of the Bloomington City Code, 1960, as
amended, or under the direct supervision of a licensed physician.
MEDIA — Anything printed or written, or any picture, drawing, photograph,
motion picture, film, videotape or videotape production, or pictorial
representation, or any electrical or electronic reproduction of anything that
§ 44-1614 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1614
1:1927
is or may be used as a means of communication. Media includes but shall
not necessarily be limited to books, newspapers, magazines, movies, videos,
sound recordings, cd-roms, digital video disks, other magnetic media, and
undeveloped pictures.
MEDIA SHOP — A general term, identifying a category of business that
may include sexually oriented material but that is not subject to the special
provisions applicable to adult media shops. In that context, media shop
means a retail outlet offering media for sale or rent, for consumption off
the premises provided that any outlet meeting the definition of "adult media
shop" shall be treated as an adult media store. (See special conditions in
Section 6-30(16) and Appendix "C" (16) of this Code for media shops in
which adult media constitute less than 10% of the stock-in-trade or occupy
less than 10% of the floor area.
MEDICAL LABORATORY — See "laboratory."
MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSING ORGANIZATION — An establishment
where marijuana is sold for medical purposes to qualified patients or their
caregivers, parents or legal gauardian(s) if applicable.
MEDICAL OR DENTAL OFFICE OR CLINIC — A building used exclusively
by physicians, dentists, and similar personnel for the treatment and
examination of patients solely on an outpatient basis, provided that no
overnight patients shall be kept on the premises.
MENTAL HEALTH FACILITY — Any licensed private hospital, institution or
facility or sections thereof, operated by the State of Illinois or a political
subdivision thereof for the treatment of persons who are mentally ill and
includes all hospitals, institutions, clinics, evaluation facilities, and mental
health centers which provide treatment for such persons.
MILITARY BASE, DEPOT, COMMUNICATION FACILITY — Military facilities
of the federal and state governments.
MINI WAREHOUSE — A building or group of buildings divided into
separate compartments used to meet the temporary storage needs of small
businesses and the storage of household and personal property with no
commercial transactions permitted other than the rental of said
compartments.
MINIATURE GOLF COURSE — A novelty version of golf played with a
putter and a golf ball on a miniature course, typically with artificial playing
surfaces, and including obstacles such as bridges and tunnels.
MINOR STREET — A street of limited continuity. Its primary purpose is to
serve abutting properties.
MOBILE FOOD AND BEVERAGE VENDOR — A self-contained food service
operation, licensed by the McLean County Health Department and located
in a readily movable motorized wheeled or towed vehicle, used to store,
prepare, display, or serve food intended for individual portion service.
MOBILE HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body
§ 44-1614 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1614
1:1928
feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square
feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used
as a dwelling unit with or without a permanent foundation when connected
to the required utilities, and includes plumbing, heating, air conditioning,
and electrical systems contained therein and manufactured prior to June 15,
1976.
MODULAR UNIT — A building constructed on-site in accordance with
Chapter 10 of the Bloomington City Code, 1960, as amended, and composed
of components substantially assembled in a manufacturing plant and
transported to the building site for final assembly on a permanent
foundation.
MONASTERY — See "convent."
MOTEL (MOTOR HOTEL) — See "hotel."
MOTION PICTURE THEATER — An indoor business establishment in which
motion pictures, slides or similar photographic reproductions are shown
as the principal use of the premises or are shown as an adjunct to some
other business activity which is conducted on the premises and constitutes
a major attraction; and wherein fees of any kind are charged; and wherein
such motion pictures, slides or similar photographic reproductions are
shown on a regular basis; but excludes therefrom school or public
auditoriums used for generally noncommercial purposes on an infrequent
basis and excludes therefrom "adult motion-picture theaters" as defined
herein.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any self-propelled vehicle designed primarily for
transportation of persons or goods.
MOTOR VEHICLE STORAGE — A parking lot type facility or building for
the orderly storage of operable/registered motor vehicles intended to be
sold (car dealerships), leased (car rental service), preserved (antique car
storage) or stored (RV and boat storage area as incidental use in a
subdivision).
MUSEUM — See "cultural institutions."
§ 44-1615. [Ch. 44, 16-15] Definitions "N."
The following words and terms wherever they occur in this Code shall be
interpreted as herein defined:
NAMEPLATE — A non-electric sign identifying only the name and
occupation or the profession of the occupant of the premises on which the
sign is located. If any premises include more than one occupant, nameplate
refers to the names and occupations or professions of all occupants of the
premises.
NIGHTCLUB — See "bar."
NON-CONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — A nonconforming
building or structure is any building or structure or portion thereof lawfully
existing at the time of adoption of this Code, or amendment thereto, which
§ 44-1614 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1615
1:1929
does not comply with all the regulations of this Code or any amendment
hereto governing bulk for the zoning district in which such building or
structure is located.
NON-CONFORMING LOT — A nonconforming lot is a lot of record which
when recorded met the minimum lot area and other dimension
requirements of the City Code of the City of Bloomington, IL., but which
through subsequent amendments to such Code or other acts of a public
body has caused the lot of record to be in conflict with the minimum lot area
or other dimension requirements of the Code.
NON-CONFORMING USE — A nonconforming use is any use of land,
buildings, or structures which use is not permitted in the zoning district in
which such use is located, but which use was permitted at the time such use
was established.
NOXIOUS MATTER — Any solid, liquid, or gaseous matter including but
not limited to gases, vapors, dusts, fumes, and mists containing properties
that by chemical means are inherently harmful and likely to destroy life or
impair health or capable of causing injury to the well-being of persons or
damage to property.
NUISANCE — A use of property or course of conduct that interferes with
the legal rights of others by causing damage, annoyance, or inconvenience.
NURSERY SCHOOL — See "day-care center."
NURSING HOME — A home for the aged, chronically ill, incurable persons,
or a place of rest for those suffering bodily disorders in which three or more
persons, not members of the immediate family residing on the premises, are
received, kept or provided with food and shelter or care, but not including
hospitals, clinics, or similar institutions devoted primarily to the diagnosis
and treatment of disease or injury, maternity or mental illness.
§ 44-1616. [Ch. 44, 16-16] Definitions "O."
The following words and terms wherever they occur in this Code shall be
interpreted as herein defined:
OFFICIAL COMPREHENSIVE PLAN (COMPREHENSIVE PLAN) — The
composite of the functional and geographic elements of the Comprehensive
Plan of the City of Bloomington, Illinois, or any segment thereof, in the form
of plans, maps, charts, textual materials and the Official Map, as adopted by
the Council.
OFFICIAL MAP — The map adopted by the Council in order to implement
the Official Comprehensive Land in accordance with the Illinois Municipal
Code (65 ILCS) showing, among other things, all existing and plan public
improvements.
OFFICIAL ZONING MAP — The map adopted by the Council in accordance
with the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS) showing all the zoning district
boundaries in the City of Bloomington, Illinois.
§ 44-1615 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1616
1:1930
OPEN SALES LOT — Any land used or occupied for the purpose of buying
and selling merchandise, any form of trailers, mobile homes, motorized
homes, motor scooters, motorcycles, boats, aircraft and monuments, or for
the storing of same prior to sale as accessory uses to a permitted use.
OPEN SPACE, LANDSCAPED — An accessory outdoor area on a lot which
shall be devoted to landscaping and shall accommodate no buildings or offstreet
parking spaces or other areas for motor vehicles. Said landscaping
shall be properly maintained and may include evergreen, deciduous,
perennial, or annual plant material. Artificial trees, shrubs, grass, or flora
shall not be construed as landscaping.
OUTDOOR ADVERTISING BUSINESS — A business establishment that
provides outdoor displays or display in open space on a lease or rental basis.
OUTDOOR STORAGE — The keeping of personal or business property or
motor vehicles in a required open parking space or in any area outside of a
building for a period of time exceeding 24 consecutive hours.
OUTDOOR STORAGE, BULK — Goods for sale, storage, or display that have
a large size, mass, or volume and are not easily moved or carried, such
as railroad ties, large bags of feed or fertilizer, wood, etc. Motor vehicle
storage shall not be included in this definition.
OUTDOOR STORAGE, NON-BULK — Goods for sale, storage, or display that
are distinguished from bulk items by being small in size, mass, or volume
and not requiring a mechanical lifting device to move them. Includes but is
not limited to storage of bikes, light weight furniture, lawn accessories, and
other items that can be easily moved indoors at the close of the business
day.
OUTDOOR STORAGE, SEASONAL — Outdoor storage of items for retail
sale that are, by their nature, sold during a peak season, including but not
limited to such items as fruits, vegetables, Christmas trees, pumpkins, lawn
accessories, bedding plants, etc.
OVERLAY DISTRICT — A zoning district that extends on top of one or more
base zoning districts and is intended to protect certain critical features and
resources. Where the standards of the overlay and base zoning district are
different, the more restrictive standards shall apply.
OWNER — The owner or owners of the freehold of the premises or lesser
estate therein, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents,
receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm, limited liability
company, or corporation, or a combination of any of them, or the duly
authorized agents of any of the above, or other legal entity having sufficient
proprietary interest as determined by the Director of Community
Development.
§ 44-1617. [Ch. 44, 16-17] Definitions "P."
The following words and terms wherever they occur in this Code shall be
interpreted as herein defined:
§ 44-1616 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1617
1:1931
PARK AND RECREATION FACILITY — A park or recreation facility that is
publicly owned and operated.
PARKING LOT — An outside area, not on public right-of-way, exclusive of
driveways, used for the parking of motor vehicles, and is established as the
principal use of the lot. For purposes of computing the number of parking
spaces in a lot, all areas used for parking under unified control on the same
or contiguous parcels of land, shall be considered as one lot.
PARKING LOT, COMMERCIAL — Parking space(s) or parking lot, associated
with any business, commercial or industrial use, where such lot is
established as the principal use of a lot.
PARKING LOT, NONCOMMERCIAL — Parking space(s) or parking lot,
associated with residential uses, i.e. multiple-family, dormitories, sororities
and fraternities, or other noncommercial uses, such as churches, which
are normally permitted or permitted as special uses in residential zoning
districts.
PARKING SPACE — An area on a parking lot sufficient in size according to
the provisions of this Code to store one passenger motor vehicle, connected
to a street or alley by a driveway or driving area and so arranged as
to permit ingress and egress of the motor vehicle at all times without
maneuvering on a sidewalk and without moving any other motor vehicles
parking adjacent to the parking space.
PARTICULATE MATTER — Material which is suspended in or discharged
into the atmosphere in finely divided form as a liquid or solid substance.
PARTY WALL — A common wall used or adopted for joint service between
two buildings.
PEDESTRIAN WAY — A right-of-way across or within a block designated for
pedestrian use.
PENTHOUSE — An enclosed structure above the roof of a building, other
than a roof structure or bulkhead, occupying not more than 33 1/3% of the
roof area.
PERFORMANCE STANDARD — A criterion to measure noise, odor, smoke,
toxic or noxious matter, vibration, fire and explosive hazards, or glare or
heat generated by or inherent in uses of land or buildings.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, joint stock association
or any City, state or any subdivision thereof; and includes any trustee,
receiver, assignee or personal representative thereof.
PERSONAL CARE — Any establishment where cosmetology services are
provided including hair care, skin care, nail care, on a regular basis for
compensation.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES — Commercial mobile
telecommunication services, cellular telephone services, specialized mobile
radio services (SMR), unlicensed wireless services, and common carrier
wireless exchange access services as now or hereafter defined in Title 47
United States Code, Section 332(c)(7)(C).
§ 44-1617 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1617
1:1932
PET CARE — A facility providing such services as domesticated animal
day care for all or part of a day, obedience classes, training, grooming, or
behavioral counseling, provided that overnight boarding is not permitted.
PHARMACY — An establishment having at least one licensed pharmacist
as owner or employee with fills prescriptions on the premise for sale, and
additionally sells nonprescription drugs, medicines and medical supplies.
PLACE OF ASSEMBLY — A room or space accommodating five or more
individuals for religious, recreational, education, political, social, or
amusement purposes, or for the consumption of food and drink, including
all connected rooms or space with a common means of egress and entrance.
This definition shall apply only to this Code.
PLACE OF OUTDOOR ASSEMBLY — Premises used or intended to be used
for public gatherings of 200 or more individuals in other than buildings. This
definition shall apply only to this Code.
PLACE OF WORSHIP — See "charitable organization (philanthropic
organization)."
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT — A lot or lots developed as a unit under
single ownership or unified control, which includes one or more principal
buildings or uses, and is processed under the planned unit development
procedure of Chapter 24 of the Bloomington City Code-1960, as amended.
PLAZA — A publicly- or privately-owned square or similar open area
intended as a gathering space that is typically paved and includes
pedestrian elements such as benches, seating, fountains, landscaping and
public art.
POLICE STATION — See "emergency facility."
PORCH, OPEN — An unenclosed horizontal surface consisting of a deck,
slab or other similar construction attached to a main building and designed
for outdoor seating or as a means of entry to the building; a porch is
considered open if covered by a roof and open on the sides that do not
abut the building; porches with railings, knee walls and screens shall be
considered open porches.
POST-SURGICAL RECOVERY CARE CENTER — A designated site which
provides post-surgical recovery care for generally healthy patients
undergoing surgical procedures that require overnight nursing care, pain
control, or observation that would otherwise be provided in an in-patient
setting. A post-surgical recovery care center is either a freestanding or a
defined unit in an ambulatory surgical treatment center or hospital. A postsurgical
recovery care shall comply with the requirements of 210 ILCS 3/
35(2). The recovery period shall not exceed 24 hours after surgery.
POULTRY HATCHERY — A parcel or building where commercial production
of poultry for eggs or meat is located.
PRE-SCHOOL — A school or class for young children three to five years of
age that develop basic skills and social behavior through developmentally
appropriate education.
§ 44-1617 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1617
1:1933
PREMISES — A lot, plat or parcel of land including the buildings or
structures thereon.
PRESERVATION COMMISSION (HISTORIC PRESERVATION
COMMISSION) — The Historic Preservation Commission for the City of
Bloomington, McLean County, Illinois.
PRINTING, COPYING, AND MAILING SERVICES — An establishment in
which the principal business conducted consists of the retail sale of
stationary products, provides printing, duplicating, packaging, and mail
services, and provides mailboxes for lease.
PRIVATE SOLAR ENERGY CONVERSION FACILITY — A system that
converts solar energy into electricity or heat through the use of photovoltaic
panels or film, solar thermal panels, and associated control or conversion
electronics; systems are intended to primarily reduce on-site consumption
of utility power; any system-generated power is consumed on-site.
PRIVATE WIND ENERGY CONVERSION FACILITY — A wind energy
conversion system consisting of a wind turbine(s), a tower or mounting, and
associated control or conversion electronics, which has a rated capacity of
not more than 100 kw; systems are intended to primarily reduce on-site
consumption of utility power; any system-generated power is consumed onsite.
PROPERTY LINES — The lines bounding a lot.
PROTECTED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Any property within the City that
meets any of the following conditions:
PUBLIC HEARING — A publicly advertised meeting of an official legislative
or quasi-judicial body conducting City business during which the public is
allowed to give testimony concerning issues under consideration.
PUBLIC LANDS — Lands or tracts, the title to which is held by the Federal
Government, the State of Illinois, or any County or municipal subdivision
thereof, or by any public or quasi-public body.
§ 44-1618. [Ch. 44, 16-18] Definitions "Q."
The following words and terms wherever they occur in this Code shall be
interpreted as herein defined:
(Reserved)
The property is zoned R-1A, R-1B, R-1C, R-1H, R-2, R-3A, R-3B, or R-4;
or
A.
B. The property is zoned P-2 and used for residential dwelling units; or
The property is zoned A-Agriculture and used for residential dwelling
units.
C.
§ 44-1617 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1619
1:1934
§ 44-1619. [Ch. 44, 16-19] Definitions "R."
The following words and terms wherever they occur in this Code shall be
interpreted as herein defined:
RADIO BROADCAST — Traditional AM and FM radio broadcasts and
shortwave or amateur radio (HAM Radio) transmissions/receptions.
RADIO TOWER — See "wireless communication facility."
RAIL PASSENGER TERMINAL — A building at a rail station where
passengers transfer between ground transportation and the facilities that
allow them to board and disembark aircraft.
RAILROAD MARSHALLING YARD — An area of land, a portion of which is
covered by a system of tracks, that provides for the making up of trains by
one or more railroads or private industry concerns. Necessary functions of
a railyard include but are not limited to the classifying, switching, storing,
assembling, distributing, consolidating, moving, repairing, weighing, or
transferring of cars, trains, engines, locomotives, and rolling stock.
RECORDING AND BROADCAST STUDIOS — An establishment containing
one or more broadcasting studios for over-the-air, cable, or satellite delivery
of radio or television programs, or studios for the audio or video recording
or filming of musical performances, radio or television programs or motion
pictures. This term does not include a transmission tower.
RECREATION FACILITY, COMMERCIAL — Recreation facilities operated as
a business and open to the general public for a fee.
RECREATION FACILITY, PUBLIC — See "park and recreation facility."
RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT — Camping trailers; motor homes; truck
campers; and travel trailers, as defined herein below, and also includes
boats and trailers holding boats; snowmobiles; jet skis; all-terrain vehicles
(ATV'S): The following are included:
CAMPING TRAILER — A vehicular portable unit mounted on wheels
and constructed with collapsible partial side walls which fold for towing
by another vehicle and unfold at the camp site to provide temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use.
A.
MOTOR HOME — A vehicular unit designed to provide temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use, built on or
permanently attached to a self-propelled motor vehicle chassis or on a
chassis cab or van which is an integral part of the completed vehicle.
B.
TRUCK CAMPER — A portable unit constructed to provide temporary
living quarters for recreational, travel or camping use, consisting of a
roof, floor, and sides, designed to be loaded onto and unloaded from the
bed of a pick-up truck.
C.
TRAVEL TRAILER — A vehicular unit, mounted on wheels, designed to
provide temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel
use and of such size or weight as not to require special highway
D.
§ 44-1619 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1619
1:1935
RECYCLING FACILITY — An establishment for the processing (separation
and/or recovery) or collection of recyclable materials from solid wastes.
Recycling of oil or other liquids may also occur.
REFRACTORY LINED PIT BURNER — An air curtain incinerator used for
the combustion of unvarnished, unpainted, unlacquered, and/or unstained
clean wood.
REFUSE — The entire scope of several categories of natural and man-made
waste including garbage and debris.
REFUSE DISPOSAL SERVICES — The professional collection and disposal
of refuse.
REMOVAL — Any relocation of a structure on its site or to another site.
REPAIR — Any change that is not construction, removal, or alteration. This
would include simple and minor mending to bring an element of a structure
back to its original condition. It assumes that minimal expense and effort
need be incurred to complete the repair.
REQUIRED PARKING — Parking space(s) or parking lot which is a required
accessory use to a principal use of a lot. Required parking shall be on
the same lot as the principal use to which it is an accessory use. In cases
where § 44-702C(2) of this Code (off-premise, off-street parking) is used,
said required parking shall be on a parking lot as defined in this Code.
RESEARCH FACILITY OR LABORATORY — A building, or group of buildings
in which are located facilities for scientific research, investigation, testing
or experimentation, but not facilities for the manufacture or sale of
products, except as incidental to the main purpose of the laboratory.
RESTAURANT — A commercial establishment in excess of 2,000 gross
square feet, where food and beverages are prepared, served, and consumed
primarily within the principal building and where food sales constitute more
than 50% of the gross sales receipts for food and beverages.
RESTAURANT, CARRY-OUT — A restaurant containing seating for fewer
than 10 patrons.
RESTAURANT, OUTDOOR CUSTOMER DINING AREA — An accessory area
of designated size used as a seating area with tables and chairs for the
contiguous restaurant. This seating may be in addition to the indoor seating
or it may be the only seating available for the restaurant. The area of such
seating shall be included in determining the area of the restaurant.
RESTAURANT, SMALL — A restaurant containing 2,000 or fewer gross
square feet and seating for 10 or more patrons.
RETAIL SALES, GENERAL — An establishment engaged in selling
commodities or goods to ultimate customers or consumers.
movement permits when towed by a motorized vehicle, and with a living
area of less than 220 square feet, excluding building equipment (such
as wardrobes, closets, cabinets, kitchen units or fixtures) and bath and
toilet rooms.
§ 44-1619 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1619
1:1936
RETAIL SALES, OUTDOOR — An open-air establishment engaged in selling
commodities or goods to ultimate customers or consumers.
RETAINING WALL — A wall or similar device used at a grade change to hold
the soil on the up-hill side of the wall from slumping, sliding, or falling, and
includes but is not limited to, segmental walls, masonry walls, poured-inplace
concrete walls, boulder walls, stacked railroad ties, and pre-split rock
walls.
RIDING STABLE — The lot, grounds and building where horses are bred,
raised, boarded, or kept for remuneration, hire or sale.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway,
street, public sidewalk, alley, parkway, or utility easement dedicated for
compatible use.
ROADSIDE MARKET — A structure for the display and sale of agricultural
products, including value added agricultural products, grown on the site,
with no space for customers within the structure itself.
ROOM — An unsubdivided portion of the interior of a dwelling unit
excluding bathrooms, closets, hallways, and service porches.
ROOMING HOUSE — Any residential building, or any part thereof,
containing one or more rooming units, in which space is let by the owner or
operator to four or more persons who do not constitute a family.
ROOMING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable
unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking
or eating purposes.
ROW HOUSE — (See "townhouse.")
RUBBISH — Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage, and the term shall include the residue from burning of wood, coal,
coke, and other combustible materials, paper, rags, bedding, cartons, boxes,
packing materials, rubber, leather, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass,
crockery and dust and other similar materials.
§ 44-1620. [Ch. 44, 16-20] Definitions "S."
The following words and terms wherever they occur in this Code shall be
interpreted as herein defined:
SADOMASOCHISTIC PRACTICES — Flagellation or torture by or upon a
person clothed or naked for the purpose of sexual arousal, or the condition
of being fettered, bound, or otherwise physically restrained on the part of
one clothed or naked for the purpose of sexual arousal.
SALES, GARAGE — The sale of goods at the seller's residence by a person
not a retailer for a limited period of time. "Garage Sale" also includes group
sales or yard sales and sales to dispose of the assets of an estate.
SALES, TEMPORARY — The disposition of goods or services, except in a
completely enclosed building, that by its nature is temporary and except
when involving the use of vacant land, could be determined as incidental or
§ 44-1619 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1620
1:1937
accessory to an existing principal use. "Temporary sales" includes garage
sales and sales to dispose of the assets of an estate.
SANITARY LAND FILL — An engineered land burial facility for the disposal
of solid waste which is so located, designed, constructed, and operated to
contain and isolate the solid waste so that it does not pose a substantial
present or potential hazard to human health or the environment.
SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA — A telecommunication antenna shaped like
a bowl or dish and used to receive wireless transmission of radio, data, or
video signals from a satellite orbiting the earth.
SCHOOLS, PUBLIC AND PRIVATE — A public or private institution serving
students between kindergarten and high school levels.
SCREEN or SCREENING — A method of visually shielding or obscuring an
abutting or nearby structure or use from another by fencing, walls, berms,
gates, parapets, penthouse enclosures, features of a building, or plantings
of sufficient height, length, and opacity to form a visual barrier.
SCREEN PLANTING — A dense compact of evergreen type trees or
shrubbery which shall mature to the required height and shall be
maintained in good condition thereafter.
SECONDARY MANUFACTURING ASSEMBLY PLANT — See
"manufacturing, secondary."
SENIOR HOUSING —
CONGREGATE CARE — Independent senior living with centralized
amenities including dining, housekeeping, and social/recreational
activities. Limited medical services may or may not be provided.
Residents live in separate apartments.
A.
ASSISTED SENIOR LIVING — Complexes that provide routine
oversight or assistance with activities for independent living. Services
include dining, housekeeping, and social/recreational activities.
Medical administration and transportation services may also be
provided. Skilled medical services are not required by residents.
Residents live in separate apartments.
B.
CONVALESCENT/NURSING HOME — Facilities that provide care for
persons who are not able to care for themselves.
C.
CONTINUING CARE — Facilities that provide multiple elements of
senior living. Complexes may include multiple levels of senior living
and care, including independent living, congregate care, assisted living,
and convalescent facilities. Independent living housing may include
apartments, group care, single room occupancies, detached or attached
single family units.
D.
SENIOR HOUSING — Multi unit developments designed and legally
restricted to limiting occupancies to at least one individual who is
age 55 or older, and where at least 80% of the units contain at least
one individual who is age 55 or older. Senior Housing developments
E.
§ 44-1620 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1620
1:1938
SETBACK — Setback is the horizontal distance between the lot line and any
building or structure located on such lot.
SEX SHOP — An establishment offering goods for sale or rent and that
meets any of the following tests:
SEXUALLY ORIENTED ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS — An inclusive term
used to describe collectively: adult cabaret; adult modeling studio; adult
motion-picture theater; video arcade located within an adult media store;
adult lingerie modeling studio; and/or sex shop.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED TOYS OR NOVELTIES — Instruments, devices, or
paraphernalia either designed as representations of human genital organs
or female breasts, or designed or marketed primarily for use to stimulate
human genital organs.
SHELTERED CARE HOME — A boarding home, institution, building,
residence, or other place which, through its ownership or management,
provides sheltered care to three or more adults who are not related to the
operator or owner by blood or marriage.
SHOPPING CENTERS — A unified group of commercial establishments
including office, retail, service, small and carry-out restaurants, or similar
permitted uses, sharing a common building or buildings, off-street plaza,
site access, signage and/or parking area to which such commercial
establishments are oriented on a site of not less than three acres.
SIDEWALK — That portion of a public right-of-way or pedestrian way
improved and designated for pedestrian use and other approved users as
defined by Bloomington City Code, 1960, as amended.
SIGN — See Chapter 3 of the Bloomington City Code, 1960, as amended.
SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL AREA — A facility for the purpose of treating,
burning, compacting, composting, storing, or disposing of solid waste.
may include single-family homes, duplexes, mobile homes, townhouses,
or condominiums; may provide supportive services such as meals,
housekeeping, social activities, and transportation; and may also be
used to describe housing with few or no services such a Senior
Apartments.
The establishment offers for sale items from any two of the following
categories: (a) adult media, (b) lingerie in a lingerie modeling studio, or
(c) leather goods marketed or presented in a context to suggest their
use for sadomasochistic practices; and the combination of such items
constitutes more than 10% its stock-in-trade or occupies more 10% of
its floor area.
A.
More than 10% of its stock-in-trade consists of sexually oriented toys or
novelties.
B.
More than 10% of its gross public floor area is devoted to the display of
sexually oriented toys or novelties.
C.
§ 44-1620 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1620
1:1939
SPECIAL USE — A specific use of land or buildings or both described and
permitted herein subject to special provisions and which because of its
unique characteristics cannot be properly classified as a permitted use.
SPECIALTY FOOD SHOP — A retail establishment with less than 40,000
square feet of gross floor area which primarily sells food products for
home preparation and consumption, convenience, and household goods,
and secondarily sells prepared food items.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Human genitals in a state of sexual
stimulation or arousal or acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse,
sodomy, or fondling or other erotic touching of nude human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, or female breast or other specified anatomical areas.
SPORTS AND FITNESS ESTABLISHMENT — A building or portion of a
building designed and equipped for the conduct of sports, exercise, leisure
time activities, or other customary and usual recreational activities,
operated for profit or not-for-profit and which can be open only to bona fide
members and guests of the organization or open to the public for a fee.
STACKING — An area dedicated to the temporary storage or "queuing" of
vehicles obtaining a service or other activities.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the upper surface of
a floor and the upper surface of the floor or roof next above.
STORY, ABOVE GRADE — Any story having its finished floor surface entirely
above grade plane, except that a basement shall be considered as a story
above grade plane where the finished surface of the floor above the
basement is:
STORY, HALF — A space under a sloping roof which has the line of
intersection of roof decking and wall not more than three feet above the
top floor level and in which space not more than 60% of the floor area is
completed for principal or accessory use.
STREET LINE — The right-of-way line of a street.
Less than completely and opaquely covered: human genitals, human
pubic region, human buttocks, and human female breast below a point
immediately above the top of areola; and/or
A.
Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely
and opaquely covered.
B.
A. More than six feet (1,829 mm) above grade plane;
More than six feet (1,829 mm) above the finished ground level for more
than 50% of the total building perimeter; or
B.
More than 12 feet (3,658 mm) above the finished ground level at any
point.
C.
§ 44-1620 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1620
1:1940
STREET, PRIVATE — A privately owned lane, road or street which affords
the principal means of access to adjacent property.
STREET, PUBLIC — A dedicated and accepted public right-of-way or other
public way used and maintained by the City which, in either case, affords
the principal means of access to adjacent lots or property.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS — Any change other than incidental repairs,
which would prolong the life of the supporting members of a building
or structure such as the addition, removal, or alteration of bearing walls
or partitions, columns, beams, girders or foundations or any substantial
change in the roof or exterior walls.
STRUCTURE — Anything that is built or constructed, including but not
limited to, any useable, permanent, in place device or appliance within the
lot making a projection of six inches or more above grade and having a
base area greater than 12 square feet. This does not, however, exclude such
underground or surface structures such as tunnels, future foundations, or
swimming pools in whole or in part below grade.
STUDENT RESIDENCE HALL — See "dormitory."
SWIMMING CLUB — Any structure that is membership based and is
intended for recreational bathing.
SWIMMING POOL, COMMUNITY — Any structure that is open to the public
and is intended for recreational bathing.
§ 44-1621. [Ch. 44, 16-21] Definitions "T."
The following words and terms wherever they occur in this Code shall be
interpreted as herein defined:
TAVERN — See "bar."
TELECOMMUNICATION ANTENNA — A device affixed to the ground, a
building or other structure which device is used for the wireless
transmission or reception of radio waves. Telecommunication antenna
includes but is not limited to devices capable of transmitting or receiving
radio waves supporting the following types of communication:
TELECOMMUNICATION ANTENNA FACILITIES — The mast, pole, lattice
work, structure, tower, building, equipment and other supporting material
Television broadcast, multi-channel multi-point distribution (wireless
cable), direct broadcast satellites (DBS).
A.
Radio broadcast (including AM, FM, shortwave and amateur radio
antennas).
B.
Wireless telecommunication, personal communication services,
personal wireless services, commercial mobile services, cellular
telephone services, specialized mobile radio services (SMR), unlicensed
wireless services and common carrier wireless exchange access
services.
C.
§ 44-1620 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1621
1:1941
used to mount and operate a telecommunication antenna and the
telecommunication antenna itself.
TELEVISION STATION TOWER — See "wireless communication facility."
TERMINAL — A facility for the transfer, pick up or discharge of people and/
or goods without the long-term storage of the same.
THEATER — A structure used for dramatic, operatic, motion pictures, or
other performance, for admission to which entrance money is received.
THOROUGHFARE — A street with a high degree of continuity and serving
as an arterial traffic way between the various districts of the City and its
environs.
TOURIST CAMP — A commercial recreational facility designed, used, or
intended to be used to accommodate the overnight temporary location,
hookup or use of its facilities for travel trailers, camp trailers, and other
major recreational equipment.
TOWING SERVICE — A service for the relocation of a disabled, unsafe, or
illegally parked motor vehicle to a place of repair or an approved facility for
proper disposal.
TOWNHOUSE (ROWHOUSE) — A multiple-family dwelling containing three
or more attached dwelling units, each on its own lot or plot of ground and
joined to one (end unit) or two (interior units) dwelling units by fire walls.
Each dwelling unit shall occupy the internal space from the ground to the
roof.
TRAILER — Any vehicle or portable structure designed and constructed
in a manner that will permit occupancy thereof, as sleeping quarters, for
one or more persons (or for use as an accessory building or structure in
the conduct of a business, trade, or occupation) and which is so designed
and constructed that it is, or may be, mounted on wheels and used as a
conveyance on City streets and highways, and which is propelled or drawn
by its own or other motive power, excepting a device used exclusively upon
stationary rails or tracks.
TRUCK PLAZA — See "truck stop."
TRUCK STOP — A facility intended to provide services to the trucking
industry, including but not limited to the following activities: dispensing of
fuel, repair shops, automated washes, restaurants, and motels; all as part of
the facility.
TRUCK WASH — A facility which provides manual or automated washing
services to trucks.
§ 44-1622. [Ch. 44, 16-22] Definitions "U."
The following words and terms wherever they occur in this Code shall be
interpreted as herein defined:
UNIFIED CONTROL — The combination of two or more tracts of land
wherein each owner has agreed by written agreement to allow the use and
§ 44-1621 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1622
1:1942
development of their tracts as a single lot under the provisions of Chapter
24 of the Bloomington City Code, 1990, as amended, for Planned Unit
Developments.
UNLICENSED WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICE — The
offering of telecommunication services using duly authorized devices which
do not require individual license by Federal Communications Commission
but does not mean the provision of direct-to-home satellite services.
URBAN AGRICULTURE — A zoning lot, as defined in this article, one acre
or greater, used to grow and harvest food crops and/or non-food crops
for personal or group use; an orchard or tree farm that is a principal use
is considered an urban agriculture; an urban agriculture may be divided
into plots for cultivation by one or more individuals and/or groups or may
be cultivated by individuals and/or groups collectively; the products of an
urban agriculture may or may not be for commercial purposes.
URBAN GARDEN — A lot under one acre, used to grow and harvest food or
non-food crops for personal or group use; the products of an urban garden
may or may not be for commercial purposes; an urban garden larger than
one acre is considered urban agriculture.
USE — The purpose or activity for which the land, building or structure
thereon is designed, arranged, or intended or for which it is occupied or
maintained, and shall include any manner or performance of such activity
with respect to the performance standards of this Code.[Ord. No.
2006-137]
USE, PERMITTED — A use which may be lawfully established in a particular
district or districts, provided it conforms with all requirements and
regulations of such district.
USE, PRINCIPAL — A primary use of land or structures as distinguished
from a subordinate or accessory use. A principal use may be either
permitted or special.
UTILITY — A use category for public and private services providing
essential services such as water, electric power, and heating systems, and
wireless communication facilities.
§ 44-1623. [Ch. 44, 16-23] Definitions "V."
The following words and terms wherever they occur in this Code shall be
interpreted as herein defined:
Electrical substation, communications switch facilities, central heating,
and cooling plant; must be enclosed by a solid wall, subject to design
review approval.
A.
B. Essential services.
C. Wireless communication facilities collocated.
D. Wireless communication facilities, freestanding/tower.
§ 44-1622 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1623
1:1943
VARIATION — A relaxation of the terms of this Code where such variation
will not be contrary to the public interest and where a literal enforcement
of the Code would result in unnecessary and undue hardship.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is,
or may be, transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by
human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
VEHICLE FUELING STATION — See "automobile service station."
VEHICLE RENTAL SERVICE — An area dedicated to the rental of
automobiles and light trucks and vans, including incidental parking and
servicing of vehicles for rent or lease.
VEHICLE REPAIR AND SERVICE — See "automobile service station."
VEHICLE SALES AND SERVICE — The use of any building or portion
thereof, or other premises or portion thereof, for the display, sale, rental,
or lease of new motor vehicles, or used motor vehicles as an ancillary use
of a zoning lot, and any warranty repair work and other repair service
conducted as an accessory use.
VEHICLE SALVAGE AND WRECKING OPERATIONS — See "junkyard
(salvage yard)."
VEHICLE STORAGE — A structure or part thereof used for the storage,
parking, or servicing of motor vehicles but not for the repair thereof.
VETERINARY HOSPITAL — See "animal hospital."
VETERINARY OFFICE OR CLINIC — See "animal hospital."
VIDEO-VIEWING BOOTH (ARCADE BOOTH) — Any booth, cubicle, stall,
or compartment that is designed, constructed, or used to hold or seat
patrons and is used for presenting motion pictures or viewing publications
by any photographic, electronic, magnetic, digital, or other means or media
(including, but not limited to film, video or magnetic tape, laser disc, cdrom,
books, magazines, or periodicals) for observation by patrons therein.
A video-viewing booth shall not mean a theater, movie house, playhouse, or
a room or enclosure or portion thereof that contains more than 600 square
feet.
VISIBILITY TRIANGLE — The triangular area formed by a diagonal line
connecting two points located on intersecting street curblines (edge of
pavement lines) or a right-of-way line and the curb or edge of the driveway.
§ 44-1624. [Ch. 44, 16-24] Definitions "W."
The following words and terms wherever they occur in this Code shall be
interpreted as herein defined:
WAREHOUSE — A warehouse is a building, structure, or part thereof, used
principally for the storage of goods and merchandise.
WASTE — Includes but is not limited to tin cans, combustible rubbish of any
type (paper, boxes, wood, lumber, scraps and furniture), noncombustible
rubbish (metals, glass, mineral waste), solid waste resulting from building
§ 44-1623 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1624
1:1944
construction or demolition, waste food, offal, swill, carrion, residual or
waste animal or vegetable materials resulting from handling, storage or
cooking.
WASTE TRANSFER STATION — A place or facility where nonhazardous
solid waste materials are taken from a collection vehicle, temporarily stored
or stockpiled, and ultimately placed in a transportation unit for movement
to another facility.
WELFARE AGENCY — An institution, public or private not-for-profit facility,
that provides care and/or services concerning the welfare and improvement
for persons of all ages.
WHOLESALE, DISTRIBUTION, AND STORAGE FACILITY — The display,
storage, and sale of goods to other firms for resale, as well as activities
involving significant movement and storage of products or equipment,
including truck terminal or bus servicing facilities, motor freight
transportation, moving and storage facilities, warehousing, and storage
activities.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY — All structures and equipment
involved in transmitting and receiving telecommunications signals from
mobile communication sources, such as private and commercial mobile
radio service facilities, personal communication services towers (pcs), and
cellular telephone towers; not included are AM/FM radio antennas,
television antennas, satellite dishes, and licensed amateur radio facilities.
ANTENNA — Any outdoor apparatus designed for telephonic, radio,
or television communication through the sending and/or receiving of
electromagnetic waves.
A.
CO-LOCATION — A communications facility that is used by more than
one wireless communications provider.
B.
FACILITY AS ESSENTIAL SERVICE — A communications facility that
is used for the primary purpose of providing local public safety
communication services that directly transmit information for fire
protection, police protection, and basic or advanced life support to
the City of Flint police and fire departments, as defined in a written
contractual agreement approved by the City Council and uniquely
connected to the police department data center.
C.
HEIGHT — When referring to a tower or other structure, the distance
measured from ground level to the highest point on the tower or other
structure, even if said highest point is an antenna.
D.
LATTICE TOWER — A support structure constructed of vertical metal
struts and cross braces forming a triangular or square structure which
often tapers from the foundation to the top.
E.
MONOPOLE — A support structure constructed of a single, selfsupporting
hollow metal tube securely anchored to a foundation.
F.
§ 44-1624 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1624
1:1945
WRITING — The term shall be construed to include handwriting,
typewriting, printing, photo offset or any other form of reproduction in
legible symbols or characters.
WRITTEN NOTICE — A notification in writing delivered in person to the
individual or parties intended, or delivered at, or sent by certified or first
class mail to the last residential or business address of legal record.
§ 44-1625. [Ch. 44, 16-25] Definitions "X."
The following words and terms wherever they occur in this Code shall be
interpreted as herein defined:
(Reserved)
§ 44-1626. [Ch. 44, 16-26] Definitions "Y."
The following words and terms wherever they occur in this Code shall be
interpreted as herein defined:
YARD — An open space, on the same lot with a building or structure,
unoccupied and unobstructed from its lowest level to the sky, except as
otherwise permitted in § 44-405 of this Code.
YARD, FRONT — A yard between the front lot line and a principal structure.
A front yard shall be established along with frontages of a corner lot as
required by § 44-640 of this Code.
YARD, REAR — A yard across the rear of the lot between the rear lot line
and a principal structure and extending from one side lot line to the other.
YARD, SIDE — A yard extending from the required front yard to the
required rear yard or in the absence of any clearly defined rear lot line to
the point on the lot farthest from the intersection of the lot line involved
with the public street.
STEALTH DESIGN — Camouflaging telecommunication facilities to
minimize their visibility and blend them in with their surroundings.
G.
TELECOMMUNICATION — The technology which enables information
to be exchanged through the transmission of voice, video, or data
signals by means of electrical or electromagnetic systems.
H.
TOWER — Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily
for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including selfsupporting
lattice towers, guy towers, or monopole towers; the term
includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers,
common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower
structures, and the like.
I.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT SHELTER — The
structure in which the electronic receiving and relay equipment for a
wireless communications facility is housed.
J.
§ 44-1624 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1627
1:1946
§ 44-1627. [Ch. 44, 16-27] Definitions "Z."
The following words and terms wherever they occur in this Code shall be
interpreted as herein defined:
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR — The Director of Community Development for
the City of Bloomington, Illinois, or such other person as designated by the
Director.
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS (BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS) — The
Zoning Board of Appeals for the City of Bloomington, Illinois.[Ord. No.
2006-137]
ZONING DISTRICT — A section or sections of incorporated territory of the
City for which the regulations and requirements governing use, lot and bulk
or buildings and premises are uniform.
ZOO — Any lot, building, structure, enclosure, or premises whereupon and
wherein are kept two or more wild animals.
§ 44-1627 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1627
1:1947

ARTICLE XVII
Administrative Procedures and Enforcement
§ 44-1701. [Ch. 44, 17-1] Purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of this article is described below.
§ 44-1702. [Ch. 44, 17-2] Decision-making bodies (Board of Zoning
Appeals, Historic Preservation Committee, Planning Commission).
A. Provide a clear and comprehensible development review process that is
fair and equitable to all interests including applicants, effected
neighbors, and the City;
B. Establish an orderly review process for all proposed projects involving
construction of a building or other structure, any site improvements or
alterations or a modification in the use of land within the City that is
consistent with this chapter;
C. Ensure that land, parcels, and lots are appropriately developed so that
their use and operation comply with all applicable requirements of this
chapter;
D. Ensure that development complies with the Comprehensive Plan and
allow for processes and procedures that support creative and
innovative proposals to enhancing the benefits of development to the
Bloomington community.
A. General.
(1) Terms. A person appointed to the Board of Zoning Appeals, Historic
Preservation Commission or Planning Commission shall serve a
term of three years. This term may be extended after the three
years for no more than two additional three-year terms. Members
of the Board shall serve no more than three consecutive three-year
terms (a total of nine years). Vacancies shall be filled for the
unexpired term only. Members may be recalled for cause as
provided by Chapter 2, § 2-350, of the Bloomington City Code, 1960
as amended.
(2) Officers.
(a) Officers of the Board of Zoning Appeals, Historic Preservation
Commission and Planning Commission shall consist of a
chairperson and a vice-chairperson elected by the Board or
commission, who shall each serve a term of one year and shall
be eligible for reelection; but no member shall serve as
chairperson for more than two consecutive years.
(b) The chairperson shall preside over meetings. In the absence of
the chairperson, the vice-chairperson shall perform the duties
of the chairperson.
§ 44-1701 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1702
1:1949
(c) If both the chairperson and vice-chairperson are absent, a
temporary chairperson shall be elected by those present.
(3) Meetings.
(a) A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members. All
decisions or actions of the Board or commission shall be made
by a majority vote of those members present and voting at any
meeting where a quorum exists.
(b) Meetings shall be held at regularly scheduled times
established herein or at any time upon the call of the
chairperson.
(c) No member of the Board or commission shall vote on any
matter that may materially or apparently affect the property,
income, or business interest of that member.
(d) The chairperson, and in his or her absence the acting
chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance
of witnesses.
(e) All meetings shall be conducted in accordance with the Open
meetings Act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 120/1, et seq.
B. Board of Zoning Appeals.
(1) Creation. The Board of Zoning Appeals of the City of Bloomington,
Illinois, which has been duly created by the City Council, is the
Board of Zoning Appeals referred to in this Code.
(2) Composition. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall consist of seven
members who are residents of the City of Bloomington, Illinois, and
all of whom shall be appointed by the Mayor and approved by the
City Council.
(3) Powers and duties.
(a) To conduct administrative public hearings, make findings of
fact, and recommend approval or disapproval to the City
Council of applications for special uses (§ 44-1707);
(b) To conduct administrative public hearings, make findings of
fact, and decide duly initiated appeals from any administrative
order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the
Director of Community Development or his or her deputies or
assistants in the enforcement of this Zoning Code;
(c) To conduct administrative public hearings, make findings of
fact and grant or deny variations in the manner provided
herein;
(d) To hear appeals of decisions made pursuant to the Sign Code
relating to the denial of permits, the removal of illegal signs or
§ 44-1702 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1702
1:1950
the granting of variances, except when said appeal is related to
construction specifications of signs, in which case said appeal
shall be heard by the Construction Board of Appeals pursuant
to Chapter 10 of this Code; and
(e) To give advice to the Sign Code Administrator when requested.
(f) To establish or amend its procedural rules as necessary to
facilitate the performance of its duties;
(g) To recommend to the City Council amendments to this Zoning
Ordinance;
(4) Meetings. Meetings shall be held on the third Wednesday of each
month at 4:00 p.m. or at any time upon the call of the chairperson
at such times and place as the Board may determine.
C. Historic Preservation Commission.
(1) Composition. The Bloomington Historic Preservation Commission
("Preservation Commission") shall consist of seven members, all of
whom shall be appointed by the Mayor and approved by the City
Council. Members shall be residents of the City or owners of
taxable real estate located within the corporate limits of the City
and whose place of residence is located not more than five miles
from said corporate limits. The Mayor shall make every reasonable
effort to try to appoint persons with a demonstrated interest in the
history or architecture of the City, and at least one member of the
Preservation Commission should, if possible, be an Illinois
registered architect, one an attorney and one a person experienced
in real estate.
(2) Powers and duties. The Preservation Commission shall have the
following powers and duties:
(a) To adopt its own procedural regulations;
(b) To conduct surveys to identify historically and architecturally
significant properties, structures, and areas that exemplify the
cultural, social, economic, political, or architectural history of
the United States of America, the State of Illinois, or the City of
Bloomington;
(c) To investigate and recommend to the Planning Commission
and to the City Council the adoption of ordinances designating
properties or structures having special historic, community or
architectural values as "landmarks";
(d) To investigate and recommend to the Planning Commission
and to the City Council the adoption of ordinances designating
areas as having special historic, community or architectural
value as "historic districts";
§ 44-1702 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1702
1:1951
(e) To keep a register of all properties and structures that have
been designated as landmarks or historic districts, including
all information required for each designation;
(f) To determine an appropriate system of markers and make
recommendations for the design and implementation of
specific markings of the streets and routes leading from one
landmark or historic district to another;
(g) To advise and assist owners of landmarks and property or
structures within historic districts on physical and financial
aspects of preservation, renovation, rehabilitation, and reuse,
and on procedures for inclusion on the National Register of
Historic Places;
(h) To nominate landmarks and historic districts to the National
Register of Historic Places, and to review and comment on any
National Register Nominations submitted to the Preservation
Commission upon request of the Mayor or City Council;
(i) To inform and educate the citizens of the City concerning the
historic and architectural heritage of the City by publishing
appropriate maps, newsletters, brochures, and pamphlets, and
by holding programs and seminars;
(j) To hold public hearings and to review applications for
construction, alteration, removal, or demolition affecting
proposed or designated landmarks or structures within historic
districts and issue or deny certificates of appropriateness for
such actions;
(k) To consider applications for certificates of economic hardship
that would allow the performance of work for which a
certificate of appropriateness would otherwise be denied;
(l) To develop specific design guidelines for the alteration,
construction, or removal of landmarks or property and
structures within historic districts;
(m) To review proposed zoning amendments, applications for
special use permits, or applications for zoning variations that
affect proposed or designated landmarks and historic districts.
The Director of Community Development shall send
applications for special use or zoning variations to the
Preservation Commission for comment prior to the date of the
hearing by the Planning Commission or Board of Zoning
Appeals;
(n) To administer through the City Parks and Recreation
Department any property or full or partial interest in real
property, including easements, that the City may have or
§ 44-1702 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1702
1:1952
accept as a gift or otherwise, upon authorization and approval
by the City Council;
(o) To accept and administer through the Office of the Director of
Finance on behalf of the City such gifts, grants, and money as
may be appropriate. Such money may be expended for
publishing maps and brochures or for hiring staff persons or
consultants or performing other appropriate functions for the
purpose of carrying out the duties and powers of the
Preservation Commission;
(p) To call upon available City staff members as well as other
experts for technical advice;
(q) To retain such specialists or consultants with the permission of
the City Council or to appoint such citizen advisory committees
as may be required from time to time;
(r) To testify before all boards and commissions, including the
Planning Commission and the Board of Zoning Appeals, on any
matter affecting historically and architecturally significant
property, structures, and areas;
(s) To confer recognition upon the owners of landmarks or
property or structures within historic districts by means of
certificates, plaques, or markers;
(t) To develop a preservation component in the official
Comprehensive Plan and to recommend it to the Planning
Commission and to the City Council;
(u) To periodically review the Bloomington Zoning Code and to
recommend to the Planning Commission and the City Council
any amendments appropriate for the protection and continued
use of landmarks or property and structures within historic
districts; and
(v) To undertake any other action or activity necessary or
appropriate to the implementation of its powers and duties or
to implementation of the purpose of this Code.
(3) Surveys and research. The Preservation Commission may
undertake survey and research efforts in the City to identify
neighborhoods, areas, sites, structures, and objects that have
historic, community, architectural, or aesthetic importance,
interest, or value. As part of a survey, the Preservation Commission
may review and evaluate any prior surveys and studies by any unit
of government or private organization and compile appropriate
descriptions, facts, and photographs. Before the Preservation
Commission may on its own initiative nominate any landmark for
designation, it shall first develop a plan and schedule for landmarks
§ 44-1702 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1702
1:1953
and adopt procedures to nominate them in groups based upon the
following criteria:
(a) The potential landmarks in one identifiable neighborhood or
distinct geographical area of the City;
(b) The potential landmarks associated with a particular person,
event, or historical period;
(c) The potential landmarks of a particular architectural style or
school, or of a particular architect, engineer, builder, designer,
or craftsman;
(d) Such other criteria as may be adopted by the Preservation
Commission to assure systematic survey and nomination of
potential landmarks within the City.
(4) Meetings.
(a) Meetings shall be held on the third Thursday of each month at
5:00 p.m. or at any time upon the call of the chairperson at
such times and place as the Commission may determine.
(b) No action shall be taken by the Preservation Commission that
could in any manner deprive or restrict the owner of a property
in its use, modification, maintenance, disposition, or demolition
until such owner shall first have had the opportunity to be
heard at a public meeting of the Preservation Commission, as
provided herein.
D. Planning Commission.
(1) Creation. The Planning Commission of the City of Bloomington,
Illinois, which has been duly created by the City Council is the
Planning Commission referred to in this Code.
(2) Composition. The Planning Commission shall consist of 10
members who are residents of the City of Bloomington, Illinois, and
all of whom shall be appointed by the Mayor and approved by the
City Council.
(3) Powers and duties.
(a) To conduct legislative public hearings and submit reports and
recommendations to the City Council on applications or
proposals to amend the boundaries of the zoning districts
created by this Code;
(b) To conduct public hearings and submit reports and
recommendations to the City Council on proposed
amendments to the regulations imposed by this Code, that is,
zoning text amendments;
§ 44-1702 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1702
1:1954
§ 44-1703. [Ch. 44, 17-3] General application requirements.
(c) To conduct public hearings and recommend approval or
disapproval of preliminary plans for subdivisions and, if
directed by the City Council, to report on final subdivision plats
in the manner provided in Chapter 24 of the Bloomington City
Code, 1960, as heretofore or hereafter amended;
(d) To conduct public hearings and recommend approval or
disapproval of preliminary development plans for planned unit
developments and, if directed by the City Council, to report on
final development plans in the manner provided in Article XV of
this Zoning Ordinance and Chapter 24 of the Bloomington City
Code, 1960, as heretofore or hereafter amended;
(e) When required by this Code or the City Council to conduct
public hearings and recommend approval or disapproval of site
plans as required by provisions of this Code;
(f) To recommend to the City Council amendments to this Zoning
Code and Chapter 24 of the Bloomington City Code, 1960, as
amended;
(g) To carry out and perform such additional duties as are
assigned to them by the City Council.
(4) Meetings. Meetings shall be held on the second and fourth
Wednesday of each month at 4:00 p.m. or at any time upon the call
of the chairperson at such times and place as the Commission may
determine.
A. Forms. Applications for the procedures established under this section
shall be submitted on application forms and in such numbers as
required by the applicable review official or review body. The
application form for each development review procedure shall establish
the minimum information required for that procedure.
B. Proof of ownership or sufficient proprietary interest. All applications
required under this section shall include proof of ownership satisfactory
to the applicable review official or decision-making body. Such proof
may include a preliminary title report from a licensed title company or
attorney listing the name of the property owner(s) and all liens,
easements and judgments of record affecting the subject property.
(1) Where the owner is not the applicant, the applicable review official
shall require an applicant to present evidence that the applicant is
a duly authorized agent of the owner or has sufficient proprietary
interest, such as a contract to purchase.
C. Property owner endorsement. All applications shall include the name
and signature of the current property owner(s) of all property within
the boundaries; or
§ 44-1702 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1703
1:1955
§ 44-1704. [Ch. 44, 17-4] Application processing.
D. Filing fees.
(1) All applications shall be accompanied by the associated filing fee as
set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-125, "Schedule of Fees" and shall be filed
with the Community Development Department.
(2) Each application shall be accompanied by a check, payable to the
City of Bloomington, or a cash payment, to cover the cost of
publication, posting, and hearings. Each application shall also be
accompanied by a payment to cover the cost of publishing any
public notices.
(3) Filing fees are not refundable except where an application was
accepted in error or the fee paid exceeded the amount due. Fees
may be refunded or partially refunded, where applications are
withdrawn prior to publication of any notices. Under no condition
shall said sum or any part thereof be refunded for failure of said
application to be approved. No fee shall be required from any
governmental or public agency.
A. Completeness review. An application shall not be considered by any
decision-making body unless such application is complete, as described
herein.
(1) A determination of application completeness shall be made by the
review official within seven days of application filing.
(2) An application is considered complete only if it is provided in the
required form, includes all mandatory information as may be
required by the review official, and is accompanied by the
applicable fee.
(3) If an application is determined to be incomplete, the review official
shall contact the applicant in writing to explain the application's
deficiencies. No further processing of the application shall occur
until the deficiencies are corrected.
(4) If the deficiencies of an incomplete application are not corrected by
the applicant within 30 days, the application shall be considered
withdrawn and returned to the applicant.
(5) All applications must be deemed complete at least 21 days prior to
a meeting or public hearing, unless otherwise allowed by the
review official.
B. Referrals. The review official may forward complete applications
submitted under this article to such other public officials and agencies
as required by law or as deemed appropriate for further review.
C. Staff reports. The Director of Community Development shall submit a
written report containing a summary of the land use application, its
§ 44-1703 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1704
1:1956
§ 44-1705. [Ch. 44, 17-5] Notice and public hearings.
compliance with the Zoning Ordinance, Comprehensive Plan, and/or
any other relevant official document, and recommendations on the
basis thereof, at least seven days prior to the meeting or hearing of the
review-and/or decision-making body before which the application is to
be heard.
D. Concurrent applications.
(1) If approved by the Director of Community Development,
applications for development approvals may be filed and reviewed
concurrently; provided, however:
(a) Any application that also requires a legislative decision shall
not be eligible for final approval until the legislative decision
has been approved; and
(b) No site plan or special use shall be approved before any
necessary rezoning is approved.
(2) Applications submitted concurrently are subject to approval of all
other related applications; denial or disapproval of any
concurrently submitted application shall stop consideration of any
related applications until the denied or disapproved application is
resolved.
E. Successive applications. A successive application for an application that
has been denied shall not be reviewed or heard within one year after
the date of denial, except if the Director of Community Development
determines that substantial new information has become known since
the denial. A successive application filed within one year of the date of
denial shall include detailed information that justifies its consideration.
A. Required legal notice. After an application has been certified complete
as required by § 44-1704, the applicable review or decision-making
body shall fix a reasonable time for the required hearing of the
application or appeal. Notice of the time and place of a legislative or
administrative hearing shall be given in accordance with the laws of the
State of Illinois.
(1) The Zoning Administrator or designee shall publish notice of the
hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of
Bloomington.
(2) Notice shall also be sent by first class mail or personal delivery to
the property owner as shown on the records of the Local Tax
Assessor's Office of record of all parcels, lying in whole or in part
within 500 feet, inclusive of public right-of-way, of the property
lines of the property for which the action is requested.
§ 44-1704 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1705
1:1957
(3) The notice shall be given at least 15 days, but not more than 30
days before the date the application will be considered for
approval.
(4) If the name of the occupant is not known, the term "occupant" may
be used in making notification under this subsection. The notice
shall include all of the following:
(a) The name and address of the applicant and property owner;
(b) The common address or location of the subject property;
(c) A description of the nature and purpose of the requested
action;
(d) The location, date and time of the public hearing or meeting;
and
(e) The office address and telephone number of the City office
where information concerning the application may be
obtained.
B. Courtesy notice. In addition to any required legal notice as provided
herein, courtesy notice may be given at the direction of the Director of
Community Development by posting the property affected with a sign
indicating that zoning action affecting the property is pending and that
additional information may be obtained from the Director of Community
Development. Distribution of courtesy notice shall not constitute a
precedent for future notice on the subject application or on any future
application.
C. Administrative public hearing.
(1) Parties. The applicant, the City and persons filing a written entry of
appearance may all be parties to an administrative public hearing;
(2) Testimony. Any person may appear and testify at an administrative
public hearing, either in person or by a duly authorized agent or
attorney;
(3) Oaths or affirmation. The chairperson or in his or her absence, the
acting chairperson, may administer oaths or affirmations;
(4) Compelling the attendance of witnesses. The chairperson or in his
or her absence, the acting chairperson, may compel the attendance
of witnesses by mailing to such persons a notice compelling
attendance, not less than five calendar days before the public
hearing. Failure of a person to appear in response to such a notice
shall constitute a violation of this Code.
(5) Hearing procedures. In order that the Board or commission may
efficiently transact the business before it and provide an
§ 44-1705 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1705
1:1958
opportunity for all interested parties to be heard, the following
rules and procedures shall be followed:
(a) The chairperson shall provide a short description of the
application, the relief requested, and the procedures
governing the public hearing;
(b) The secretary shall report whether notice of the public hearing
was given as required by this Code;
(c) City staff shall summarize basic facts and relief requested in
the application, and may provide a recommendation to the
Board or commission;
(d) The chairperson shall invite persons at the public hearing to
speak in favor of the application;
(e) The chairperson shall invite persons at the public hearing to
speak against the application;
(f) The chairperson shall open the floor for cross-examination by
those interested parties who request the right to crossexamination.
Questions must be relevant, as determined by the
chairperson, to the application before the Board or
commission;
(g) The chairperson shall allow the applicant reasonable time to
respond, to the public testimony, evidence, and comments
presented;
(h) The chairperson shall close the public hearing and allow time
for members of the Board or commission to discuss the
application. The Board or commission shall make findings,
applying the standards and factors set forth in this Code;
(i) At the end of such discussion the chairperson shall invite a
motion of approval. After the motion of approval is seconded,
those members who are in favor of approving the application
shall vote "Yes," those in favor of denying the application shall
vote "No," and those wishing to abstain from voting on the
application shall vote "Present." Board members shall cast
their votes on roll call by the Secretary;
(j) The chairperson shall then review the decision of the Board or
commission and discuss the procedures to be followed for the
benefit of the applicant.
(6) Record keeping:
(a) The Board or commission shall make a sound recording of all
administrative public hearings and shall retain such recording
for not less than six months following the closing of the
hearing;
§ 44-1705 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1705
1:1959
§ 44-1706. [Ch. 44, 17-6] Zoning Map (rezoning) and text
amendments.
(b) Verbatim transcripts. In the event that any party desires a
verbatim transcript of the administrative public hearing, a
written request therefor shall be filed with the chairperson not
less than three weeks before the hearing date. Any party
desiring a transcript of the proceedings shall pay any
transcription or copying costs;
(c) Decisions and orders. The Board or commission shall retain in
the Office of the Community Development Department a copy
of every ruling, decision, or determination.
(7) Notification of decision. Copies of findings of fact and decisions or
recommendations of the Board or commission shall be served by
mailing a copy thereof to all parties within five business days of
such decision.
D. Legislative public hearing procedure.
(1) Notice for all legislative public hearings shall be given in
accordance with § 44-1705A. All legislative public hearings shall be
held at regularly scheduled meetings, except when conditions
require a special meeting.
(2) Testimony. Any person may submit written comment which shall be
made part of the public record or may appear and testify at a
legislative public hearing, either in person or by duly authorized
agent or attorney.
(3) Oaths. The chairperson may administer oaths.
(4) Compelling the appearance of witnesses. The chairperson may
compel the attendance of witnesses by mailing to such persons a
notice compelling attendance, not less than five days before the
public hearing. Failure of a person to appear in response to such a
notice shall constitute a violation of this Code.
(5) Record keeping. The commission shall keep minutes of its
proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question
or if absent or failing to vote, indicate such fact.
(6) Transmittal of recommendation to Council. A copy of the meeting
minutes and any reports or recommendations shall be filed with the
Community Development Department prior to final action by the
City Council on a particular item and shall become part of the
public records of the municipality, provided however, the failure to
file such minutes shall not invalidate final action of the City
Council.
§ 44-1705 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1706
1:1960
A. Purpose. Recognizing that conditions may change subsequent to the
adoption of the City's Zoning Map and Zoning Ordinance, and/or that
amendments may be necessary to clarify or correct the zoning
regulations, the amendment process is hereby established. For this
purpose and for the purpose of promoting the public health, safety,
morals, comfort and general welfare, conserving the value of property
throughout the City and lessening and avoiding congestion of the public
streets and highways, City Council may, from time to time, in the
manner hereinafter set forth, amend the regulations imposed in this
Code and the districts provided hereby, provided that in all
amendments adopted under the authority of this section, due allowance
shall be given for the existing condition, the conservation of property
values, the direction of building development to the best advantages of
the entire City and the use to which the property is devoted at the time
of adoption of such amendment.
B. Initiation of amendment. Amendments to the Zoning Map may be
proposed by the City Council, property owners or parties to a valid and
enforceable purchase option contract. Amendments to the Zoning
Ordinance, that is, zoning text amendments, may be proposed by a
motion or resolution of the City Council.
C. Application.
(1) An application for a map amendment shall be submitted on the
form provided by the Office of the Community Development
Department.
(2) Applications shall conform to the requirements of § 44-1703. In
addition to the minimum requirements of the application, the
Director of Community Development may request additional
information necessary to facilitate a review of the application.
D. Action by Director of Community Development. Upon submission of a
complete application, the Director of Community Development shall
review the application for compliance with § 44-1703 of this article and
other applicable requirements and prepare a written report.
E. Action by Planning Commission.
(1) Hearing. The Planning Commission shall give notice and hold a
legislative public hearing on each application for a Zoning Map or
zoning text amendment.
(2) Recommendation. At the close of the legislative public hearing, the
Planning Commission shall make findings of fact and prepare a
recommendation to the City Council. In making its
recommendation, the Planning Commission shall be guided by
those purposes, standards, and objectives of this Code and shall not
recommend the adoption of any amendment unless it finds that
such amendment is in the public interest and not solely for the
§ 44-1706 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1706
1:1961
benefit of the applicant. In making such a finding, the Commission
may consider:
(a) The suitability of the subject property for uses authorized by
the existing zoning;
(b) The length of time the property has remained vacant as zoned
considered in the context of land development in the area;
(c) The suitability of the subject property for uses authorized by
the proposed zoning;
(d) The existing land uses and zoning of nearby property;
(e) Relative gain or hardship to the public as contrasted and
compared to the hardship or gain of the individual property
owner resulting from the approval or denial of the zoning
amendment application;
(f) The extent to which adequate streets are connected to the
arterial street system and are available or can be reasonably
supplied to serve the uses permitted in the proposed zoning
classification;
(g) The extent to which the proposed amendment is inconsistent
with the need to minimize flood damage and that the
development of the subject property for the uses permitted in
the proposed zoning classification will not have a substantial
detrimental effect on the drainage patterns in the area;
(h) The extent to which adequate services (including but not
limited to fire and police protection, schools, water supply, and
sewage disposal facilities) are available or can be reasonably
supplied to serve the uses permitted in the proposed zoning
classification;
(i) The extent to which the proposed amendment is consistent
with the public interest, giving due consideration for the
purpose and intent of this Code as set forth in § 44-1701
herein;
(j) The extent to which property values are diminished by the
particular zoning restriction;
(k) The extent to which the destruction of property values
promotes the health, safety, morals, or general welfare of the
public;
(l) Whether a Comprehensive Plan for land use and development
exists, and whether the ordinance is in harmony with it;
(m) Whether the City needs the proposed use.
F. Action by the City Council.
§ 44-1706 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1706
1:1962
§ 44-1707. [Ch. 44, 17-7] Special uses.
(1) The City Council upon receiving the report and recommendation of
the Planning Commission, as an exercise of the legislative
discretion vested in the corporate authority of the City of
Bloomington, Illinois, may grant or deny the proposal.
(2) If an application for a proposed amendment is not acted upon
finally by the City Council within three months of the date upon
which such application is received by the City Council, it shall be
deemed to have been denied unless extended by agreement of the
applicant and the City Council.
(3) In case a written protest against any proposed amendment of the
zoning districts created under this Code, signed and acknowledged
by owners of 20% of the frontage proposed to be altered, or by the
owners of 20% of the frontage directly opposite the frontage
proposed to be altered or by the owners of 20% of the frontage
immediately adjoining or across the alley therefrom is filed with the
Community Development Department, the amendment cannot be
passed except on the favorable vote of 2/3 of the Aldermen of the
City then holding office.
(4) No application for a map amendment which has been denied wholly
or in part by the City Council shall be resubmitted for a period of
one year from the date of said order of denial, except on the
grounds of new evidence or proof of change of conditions found to
be valid by the City Council.
A. Purpose. The development and execution of this Code is based upon the
division of the City into districts, within which districts the use of land
and buildings and the bulk and location of buildings and structures in
relation to the land are substantially uniform. It is recognized, however,
that there are certain uses which, by their very nature and their unique
characteristics cannot be permitted in a particular district or districts
without special consideration being given to the characteristics of
surrounding property, as well as the site itself and the impact such a use
would have on adjoining or nearby property. The purpose of this section
is to specify standards that shall be required to be met before the
issuance of a special use permit. In addition to the underlying zoning
district regulations and the general standards applicable to all special
use requests, each special use shall meet any applicable specific
standards set forth for that use and any conditions imposed by the City
Council in the ordinance granting the special use permit. Special uses
fall into two categories:
(1) Uses publicly operated or traditionally serving a public interest;
(2) Uses entirely private in character but of such an unusual nature
that their operation may give rise to unique problems with respect
to their impact upon neighboring property or public facilities.
§ 44-1706 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1707
1:1963
B. Existing special uses. Where a building or structure and the use
thereof, or the use of land lawfully exists on the effective date of this
Code, including amendments thereafter as an allowable special use in
the zoning district in which it is located, the existing building or
structure and its use thereof, or the use of land where no building, or
structure is involved, comprising such a special use shall be considered
a lawful existing special use.
C. Initiation of application. The City Council or the City Manager at the
direction of the City Council or any person having a freehold interest in
land, or a possessory interest entitled to exclusive possession, or a
contractual interest which may become a freehold interest, or an
exclusive possessory interest, and which is specifically enforceable,
may file an application to use such land for one or more of the special
uses provided for in this Code in the zoning district in which the land is
located.
D. Application requirements.
(1) An application for a special use permit shall be submitted on the
form provided by the Office of the Community Development
Department.
(2) The application shall include a statement describing the nature of
the proposed use and a full-size, legible site plan.
(3) Applications shall conform to the requirements of § 44-1703. The
information requested on the application is deemed to be a
minimum, and the applicant may be required to supply additional
information prior to the public hearing on their requests.
(4) The site plan shall provide the following information on one or
more sheets:
(a) Location by Section, Town and Range or other legal
description;
(b) Names and addresses of the persons having proprietary
interest over the property;
(c) Graphic (engineering) scale;
(d) North-points;
(e) Date of preparation;
(f) The boundary lines of the property in question;
(g) Location of all survey monuments and their descriptions;
(h) Proposed location, width, and type of surface material of all
proposed sidewalks, pedestrian ways, driveways, parking
areas, service areas, and recreation areas;
§ 44-1707 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1707
1:1964
(i) Size, location, height, number of stories, building design, and
arrangement of proposed buildings and structures and existing
buildings and structures;
(j) Size and location of proposed parking areas with arrangement
of bays and aisles and curb cuts, and with indication of the
total number of spaces;
(k) Size, location, and composition of all proposed fencing, refuse
enclosures and landscaped screening material;
(l) Landscaping plan indicating size, location, and general
characteristics of plant materials as specified in Article XIII of
this Zoning Ordinance.
E. Action by Director of Community Development. Upon submission of a
complete application, the Director of Community Development shall
review the application for compliance with Subsection H of this section
and other applicable requirements and prepare a written report.
F. Action by Board of Zoning Appeals.
(1) Hearing. Upon receipt in proper form of the application and
supporting material referred to above, the Board of Zoning Appeals
shall hold a least one administrative public hearing on the proposed
Special Use in the manner provided in § 44-1705. If any variations
to the regulations of this code would otherwise be necessary for the
development proposal, such review procedure shall be deemed to
occur simultaneously with the Zoning Board of Appeals'
administrative public hearing and recommendation on the special
use permit application.
(2) Recommendation. For each special use application, the Board of
Zoning Appeals shall report to the Council its findings of fact and
recommendations, including the stipulations of additional
conditions and guarantees, when they are deemed necessary for
the protection of the public interest or to meet the standards as
specified herein.
G. Action by the City Council. The City Council shall either deny the
application or shall grant the special use permit, with or without
modifications or conditions.
H. Standards of approval. No special use application shall be
recommended by the Board of Zoning Appeals or approved by the City
Council unless all of the following factors are found:
(1) That the establishment, maintenance, or operation of the special
use will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety,
comfort, or general welfare;
(2) That the special use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment
of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already
§ 44-1707 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1707
1:1965
permitted, nor substantially diminish and impair property values
within the neighborhood;
(3) That the establishment of the special use will not impede the
normal and orderly development and improvement of the
surrounding property for uses permitted in the zoning district;
(4) That adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and/or necessary
facilities have been or will be provided;
(5) That adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide
ingress and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in
the public streets; and
(6) That the special use shall, in all other respects, conform to the
applicable regulations of the district in which it is located, except
as such regulations may be modified by the Council pursuant to the
recommendations of the Board of Zoning Appeals.
I. Conditions and guarantees. Prior to the granting of any special use
application, the Board of Zoning Appeals may recommend, and the
Council may require, such conditions and restrictions upon the
establishment, location, construction, maintenance, and operation of
the special use as deemed necessary for the protection of the public
interest and to secure compliance with the standards and requirements
specified herein. The Council may require such evidence and
guarantees as it may deem necessary as proof of compliance with the
conditions of approval.
J. Expiration and revocation of special use permits and existing special
use. The revocation or expiration of a special use permit issued
pursuant to § 44-1003 of this Code or the expiration or revocation of
existing special use shall cause the use to become an illegal use for the
property in question and shall be subject to the enforcement
procedures under § 44-1301 of this Code.
K. Revocation of special use permits. In any case where a special use has
not been physically undertaken within one year after the date of
granting thereof, then without further action by the Council, the special
use or authorization thereof shall null and void.
L. Change of use. In any case where a special use permit has been granted
or where existing special use status has been granted, and the special
use has been established, a change in use, from the approved or
authorized special use to another use, shall cause the special use
permit or existing special use status authorized by § 44-1003 of this
Code to expire.
M. Discontinuance of special use. When a special use or an existing special
use is discontinued for six consecutive months, or for 18 months during
a three-year period, the special use permit or existing special use status
shall expire.
§ 44-1707 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1707
1:1966
§ 44-1708. [Ch. 44, 17-8] Variations.
N. Destruction of structure. The removal or destruction of a structure
containing a Special Use shall cause the special use permit or the
existing special use status to expire. Destruction, for the purpose of this
subsection, is defined as damage to an extent of more than 50% of its
fair market value prior to the time of destruction.
O. Expansion of use. Expansion of the special use beyond the level of
activity stated in the special use permit or beyond the level of activity of
the existing special use shall cause the special use permit or such
existing special use status to be revoked.
A. Applicability.
(1) The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the power to authorize,
upon application, variations to this Code-except where in conflict
with other provisions of this section, and to allow the enlargement
and structural alterations of nonconforming structures. Such
variations shall only be granted when the variation would be in
harmony with this Code's general purpose and intent.
(2) The Board of Zoning Appeals may grant variations only in specific
instances where there would be practical difficulties or particular
hardships in carrying out the strict letter of those sections of this
Code stated herein.
(3) The Board of Zoning Appeals may grant variances from the
provisions or requirements of the Sign Code only where the
Standards for Variations (§ 44-1708F) are met.
(4) Any and all variations to this Code granted by the Board of Zoning
Appeals prior to January 9, 1996 are hereby authorized and
validated.
(5) Under no circumstances shall the Board of Zoning Appeals grant a
variation to allow a use of land not permissible under the terms of
the Code in the zoning district involved or any use of land expressly
or by implication prohibited by the terms of this Code in said zoning
district.
B. Initiation of application. An application for a variation may be made by
any person, firm or corporation, or by any office, department, board,
bureau or Commission requesting or intending to request application
for a building permit or by the City Council or the City staff at the
direction of the City Council.
C. Application requirements.
(1) An application for a variation shall be submitted on the form
provided by the Office of the Community Development Department.
The application shall specify the grounds for the variation.
§ 44-1707 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1708
1:1967
(2) Before the application is filed, a pre-application review by the
Community Development Department is required.
(3) Applications shall conform to the requirements of § 44-1703. The
information requested on the application is deemed to be a
minimum, and applicants may be required to supply additional
information prior to the public hearing on their requests.
D. Action by Director of Community Development. Upon submission of a
complete application, the Director of Community Development shall
review the application for compliance with Subsection G of this section
and other applicable requirements and prepare a written report.
E. Action by Board of Zoning Appeals. Upon receipt in proper form of the
application and supporting material referred to above, the Board of
Zoning Appeals shall hold a least one administrative public hearing on
the proposed variation in the manner provided in § 44-1705.
F. Standards for variations. A variation from the terms of this Code shall
not be granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals unless and until findings
of fact are submitted demonstrating all the following factors are met:
(1) That the property has physical characteristics that pose
unreasonable challenges which make strict adherence to the Code
difficult; and
(2) That the variance would be the minimum action necessary to afford
relief to the applicant; and
(3) That the special conditions and circumstances were not created by
any action of the applicant; and
(4) That granting the variation requested will not give the applicant
any special privilege that is denied to others by the Code; and
(5) That the granting of the variation will not be detrimental to the
public welfare, alter the essential character of the neighborhood,
nor unreasonable impair the use or development of adjoining
properties.
G. Approval. An affirmative vote of four members is required to approve
the variance.
H. Conditions of approval. The Zoning Board of Appeals may impose such
conditions and restrictions upon the premises benefited by a variation
as may be necessary to comply with the standards established in this
section, to reduce or minimize the effect of such variation upon other
property in the neighborhood, and to better carry out the general intent
of this ordinance.
I. Decisions. All decisions of the Board of Zoning Appeals on variations
initiated hereunder shall be final and reviewable only in the Court in
accordance with the applicable Statutes of the State of Illinois. (735
§ 44-1708 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1708
1:1968
§ 44-1709. [Ch. 44, 17-9] Site plan review.
ILCS 5/3-101, et seq.) However, the aggrieved party may appeal to
the City Council if a variation is rejected by the vote of less than five
members of the Board of Zoning Appeals; the Director of Community
Development may appeal to the City Council if he or she believes the
Board's decision allowing the variations violate the intent of this Code.
To receive consideration by the City Council the aggrieved party or the
Director of Community Development must file with the City Clerk a
"Notice of Appeal" which shall be substantially in one of the following
forms:
Notice of Appeal
I, the undersigned, have requested and made application for a
variation. Less than five members of the Board of Zoning Appeals
concurred in the action which rejected may application.
I, therefore, request that the City Council review the record of the
administrative hearing conducted by the Board of Zoning Appeals and
make a final administrative determination thereon.
(Signature)__________
Notice of Appeal
The City of Bloomington, McLean County, Illinois, a Municipal
Corporation, requests that the City Council review the record of the
Board of Zoning Appeals' administrative public hearing and make a
final administrative determination thereon. This request is based on
my belief that the decision made by the Zoning Board of Appeals
granting the variation is invalid.
(Signature)__________
(1) No application for variation which has been denied wholly or in
part by the Board of Zoning Appeals or Council shall be submitted
for a period of one year from the date of said order of denial except
on grounds of new evidence or proof of change of conditions found
to be valid by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
J. Expiration. No order granting a variation shall be valid for a period
longer than one year from the effective date of such order, unless a
building permit for the building or structure for which such variation
was granted is obtained from the Director of Community Development
within such one-year period and unless construction of such building or
structure is started and completed in accordance with the terms of such
permit. No order granting a temporary use variation shall be valid for a
period longer than one year from the effective date of such order.
A. Purpose. It is the intent of the Site Plan Review procedure to facilitate
the creative and coherent development of the community through the
review of specific and detailed plans for parcels of land to stimulate
creative approaches to commercial development of land, to provide
§ 44-1708 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1709
1:1969
more efficient use of land, to develop new approaches to the living
environment through variety in type, design, and layout of buildings,
transportation systems, and public facilities, to unify building and
structures through design, to promote long term planning pursuant to
the Bloomington Comprehensive Plan as adopted in 2015 and amended
from time to time, and to find creative solutions to stormwater and
sustainability related issues.
B. Initiation of site plan review. An application for a site plan review may
be made by any person, firm, or corporation, or by any office,
department, board, bureau, or Commission requesting or intending to
request application for a building permit or by the City Council or the
City staff at the direction of the City Council.
C. Application requirements.
(1) An application for a site plan review shall be submitted on the form
provided by the Office of the Community Development Department.
(2) Applications shall conform to the requirements of § 44-1703. The
information requested on the application is deemed to be a
minimum, and the applicant may be required to supply additional
information.
(3) The site plan shall provide the following information on one or
more sheets:
(a) Location by Section, Town and Range or other legal
description;
(b) Names and addresses of the persons having proprietary
interest over the property;
(c) Graphic (engineering) scale;
(d) North-points;
(e) Date of preparation;
(f) The boundary lines of the property in question;
(g) Size, location, height, number of stories, building design, and
arrangement of proposed buildings and structures and existing
buildings and structures;
(h) Schematic drawings illustrating the locations and dimensions
of proposed buildings and structures, the design and character
of the building, elevations, exterior building materials and
types of construction of all proposed buildings and structures;
(i) A scaled site plan showing the existing buildings and land uses,
contiguous land uses, natural topographic features, zoning
districts, public thoroughfares, transportation, and utilities.
§ 44-1709 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1709
1:1970
(j) A scaled site plan of the proposed development showing lot
area, the required yards and setbacks, contour lines, common
space, and the location, floor area ratio, lot area coverage and
heights of buildings and structures, size, and location of
proposed parking areas with arrangement of bays and aisles
and curb cuts, and with indication of the total number of
spaces;
(k) Schematic drawings illustrating the design and character of
the building elevations, types of construction, and floor plans
of all proposed buildings and structures. The drawings shall
also include a schedule showing the number, type, and floor
area of all uses or combinations of uses, and the floor area of
the entire development.
(l) Size, location, and composition of all proposed fencing, refuse
enclosures, and landscaped screening material;
(m) Landscaping plan indicating size, location, and general
characteristics of plant materials as specified in Article XIII of
this Zoning Ordinance if the project would result in new
landscaping or landscape changes.
(n) A site drainage plan for the proposed project if required.
(o) A photometric/lighting plan for the proposed project if the
project would result in new exterior lighting or changes to
exterior lighting.
D. Concurrent applications. If variations to the bulk, sign and off-street
parking and loading regulations of this Code would otherwise be
necessary for the development proposal, such proposal shall be exempt
from the administrative public hearing on the variation request and
such review procedure shall be deemed to occur simultaneously with
the Planning Commission's review of the plan. Land uses proposed to
be included in a development requiring a legislative public hearing site
plan review which would otherwise be allowed by special use permit
only are exempted from the administrative public hearing normally
required for such special use permit applications and the Planning
Commission shall consider the standards for granting a special use and
make a recommendation to the City Council on the granting of such site
plan approval, special use and variation and the legislative public
hearing.
E. Site plan review requiring legislative public hearing. Applications for
site plan review required pursuant to § 44-505 shall require a
legislative public hearing.
(1) Procedure. Legislative public hearings shall be conducted in
accordance with § 44-1705 of this Code.
§ 44-1709 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1709
1:1971
(2) Recommendation and decision on site plan. In making its
recommendation, the City staff, the Planning Commission and, in
making its legislative determination, the City Council shall be
guided by those purposes for which this Code was adopted and
shall endeavor to accomplish those standards and objectives for
which this Code is designed and may consider:
(a) The extent to which potential incompatibilities between the
proposed development and surrounding existing development
and/or zoning is minimized by such design features as
placement of buildings, parking areas, access driveways and
existing or proposed topography.
(b) The extent to which the proposal minimizes any adverse
impact of the development upon adjoining land.
(c) The extent to which adequately improved streets connected to
the improved arterial street system are available or can be
reasonably supplied to serve the uses proposed in the
development.
(d) The extent to which the proposed development will favorably
or adversely affect other persons or property and, if so,
whether because of circumstances peculiar to the location the
effect is likely to be greater than is ordinarily associated with
the development of the type proposed.
(3) General conditions.
(a) Approval of a site plan by the City Council is required before a
building permit is issued. Construction and use of the premises
must be in accordance with the approved site plan and no
occupancy permit shall be issued for any building or structure
that is not in conformance with an approved site plan.
(b) Minor changes to an approved site plan that do not change the
intent or character of development or modify the conditions of
approval, such as adjustments to the the location, siting, and
height of structures, the location of parking stalls and loading
areas, and the location and species of landscaping may be
authorized by the Director of Community Development
pursuant to the administrative procedures in § 44-1709F;
(c) All other changes to an approved site plan shall be made by the
City Council. The Council may require the Planning
Commission to conduct an additional legislative public hearing
and submit a recommendation on such proposed changes or
deviations.
F. Administrative site plan review. The Director of Community
Development shall be authorized to conduct site plan review for off-
§ 44-1709 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1709
1:1972
§ 44-1710. [Ch. 44, 17-10] Certificate of appropriateness.
street parking and loading facilities or landscaping as required
pursuant to Articles XII and XIII.
(1) The Director may refer any application to the Planning Commission
and City Council pursuant to legislative public hearing procedures.
(2) In approving a site plan, the Director of Community Development
shall consider the following:
(a) Consistency with the intent and purpose of this Code and the
Comprehensive Plan;
(b) The quality of site design and appropriateness of development
intensity;
(c) Adequacy and location of parking areas and pedestrian and
vehicular access points;
(d) Compliance with requirements for easements or dedications;
(e) Compliance with any applicable subdivision improvements;
and
(f) If applicable, compliance with any development conditions.
(3) The Director's decision on administrative site plan review may be
appealed pursuant to the provisions of § 44-1712.
G. Exemptions. The following construction activities shall be exempt from
site plan review:
(1) Construction of improvements inside buildings;
(2) Construction of accessory buildings or structures;
(3) Previously approved site plans showing future additions; and
(4) Construction of telecommunication tower facilities.
A. Applicability.
(1) A certificate of appropriateness shall be required before the
following actions affecting the exterior architectural appearance of
any landmark or property within a historic district may be
undertaken:
(a) Any construction, alteration, or removal requiring a building
permit from the City;
(b) Any demolition in whole or in part requiring a permit from the
City;
§ 44-1709 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1710
1:1973
(c) Any construction, alteration, demolition, or removal affecting a
significant exterior architectural feature as specified in a
historic resource survey or in the ordinance designating the
landmark or historic district.
(2) Actions that do not alter the exterior architectural appearance of a
landmark or property within a historic district, regardless of
whether such actions require a building or demolition permit, are
exempt from the requirement for a certificate of appropriateness.
(3) Initiation of application. An application for a certificate of
appropriateness may be made by any person, firm, or corporation,
or by any office, department, board, bureau or Commission
requesting or intending to request application for a building or
demolition permit or by the City Council or the City staff at the
direction of the City Council.
B. Application requirements.
(1) The application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be
submitted on a form provided by the Office of the Community
Development Department.
(2) Applications shall conform to the requirements of § 44-1703. The
information requested on the application is deemed to be a
minimum, and the applicant may be required to supply additional
information.
(3) The following information shall be provided on one more sheets.
(a) Street address of the property involved.
(b) Applicant and/or owner's name and address.
(c) Architect's name if one is utilized.
(d) Brief description of the present improvements situated on the
property and photographs of existing conditions.
(e) A detailed description of the construction, alteration or
demolition proposed, together with any architectural drawings
or sketches if those services have been utilized by the
applicant and, if not, a description of the construction,
alteration, or demolition, sufficient to enable anyone to
determine what the final appearance of the improvement will
be.
C. Action by Historic Preservation Commission.
(1) Every application for a certificate of appropriateness, including the
accompanying plans and specifications transmitted to the
Preservation Commission within 20 days after the application is
§ 44-1710 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1710
1:1974
deemed complete, unless such time frame is extended in writing by
mutual agreement of the City and applicant.
(2) The Community Development Department shall not issue the
building or demolition permit for a designated landmark or a
property within a designated historic district until a certificate of
appropriateness has been issued by the Preservation Commission.
D. Standards for review. In considering an application for a building or
demolition permit or for a certificate of appropriateness, the
Preservation Commission shall be guided by the design guidelines in
Subsection E and any guidelines established in the ordinance
designating the landmark or historic district, as well as the following
general standards:
(1) Every reasonable effort shall be made to provide a compatible use
for a property that requires minimal alteration of the building,
structure, or site and its environment, or to use a property for its
originally intended purpose;
(2) The distinguishing original qualities or character of a building,
structure, or site and its environment shall not be destroyed. The
removal or alteration of any historic material or distinctive
architectural feature should be avoided when possible;
(3) All buildings, structures, and sites shall be recognized as products
of their own time. Alterations that have no historical basis and that
seek to create an earlier appearance shall be discouraged;
(4) Changes that may have taken place in the course of time are
evidence of the history and development of a building, structure, or
site and its environment. These changes may have acquired
significance in their own right, and this significance shall be
recognized and respected;
(5) Distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled craftsmanship
that characterize a building, structure, or site shall be treated with
sensitivity;
(6) Deteriorated architectural features shall be repaired rather than
replaced, wherever possible. In the event replacement is necessary,
the new material should match the material being replaced in
composition, design, color, texture, and other visual qualities.
Repair or replacement of missing architectural features should be
based on accurate duplication of features, substantiated by
historic, physical, or pictorial evidence, rather than on conjectural
designs or the availability of different architectural elements from
other buildings or structures;
(7) The surface cleaning of structures shall be undertaken with the
gentlest means possible. Sandblasting and other cleaning methods
§ 44-1710 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1710
1:1975
that will damage the historic building materials shall not be
undertaken;
(8) Every reasonable effort shall be made to protect and preserve
archeological resources affected by, or adjacent to, any project;
(9) Contemporary design for alteration and additions to existing
properties shall not be discouraged when such alterations and
additions do not destroy significant historical, architectural, or
cultural material, and such design is compatible with the size,
scale, color, material, and character of the property, neighborhood,
or environment.
(10) For landmarks, the Commission shall ensure consistency with the
Secretary of Interior's Guidelines for the Treatment of Historic
Properties and the Bloomington Architectural Review Guidelines.
E. Design guidelines. Design guidelines for applying the criteria for review
of certificates of appropriateness shall, at a minimum, consider the
following architectural criteria:
(1) Height. The height of any proposed alteration or construction
should be compatible with the style and character of the landmark
and with surrounding structures in a historic district;
(2) Proportions of windows and doors. The proportions and
relationships between doors and windows should be compatible
with the architectural style and character of the landmark and with
surrounding structures within a historic district;
(3) Relationship of building masses and spaces. The relationship of a
structure within a historic district to the open space between it and
adjoining structures should be compatible;
(4) Roof shape. The design of the roof should be compatible with the
architectural style and character of the landmark and of
surrounding structures and landscapes in historic districts;
(5) Landscaping. Landscaping should be compatible with the
architectural character and appearance of the landmark and of
surrounding structures and landscapes in historic districts;
(6) Scale. The scale of the structure after alteration, construction, or
partial demolition should be compatible with its architectural style
and character and with surrounding structures in a historic
district;
(7) Directional expression. Facades in historic districts should blend
with other structures with regard to directional expression.
Structures in a district should be compatible with the dominant
horizontal or vertical expression of surrounding structures. The
directional expression of a landmark after alteration, construction,
§ 44-1710 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1710
1:1976
or partial demolition should be compatible with its original
architectural style and character;
(8) Architectural details. Architectural details including materials,
colors, and textures should be treated so as to make a landmark
compatible with its original architectural style and character and to
preserve and enhance the architectural style or character of a
landmark or historic district.
F. Conditions of approval. The Preservation Commission may impose such
conditions and restrictions upon the certificate of appropriateness as
may be necessary to comply with the standards established in this
section, to reduce or minimize the effect of such upon a landmark or
historic district, and to better carry out the general intent of this
ordinance.
G. Certificate of economic hardship.
(1) A certificate of economic hardship may be granted by the
Preservation Commission when an applicant presents evidence
clearly demonstrating that failure to approve a certificate of
appropriateness will cause an immediate extreme financial
hardship because of conditions specific to the particular structure
that is the subject of the application. Upon granting a certificate of
economic hardship, the commission may approve or conditionally
approve a certificate of appropriateness even though it does not
meet the standards set forth in Subsection D.
(2) An application for a certificate of economic hardship shall be made
on a form prepared by the Community Development Department.
The applicant shall supply the following minimum information in
support of an application for a certificate of economic hardship:
(a) Estimate of the cost of the proposed construction, alteration,
demolition, or removal and an estimate of any additional cost
that would be incurred to comply with the recommendations of
the Preservation Commission for changes necessary for the
issuance of a certificate of appropriateness;
(b) A report from a licensed engineer or architect with experience
in rehabilitation as to the structural soundness of any
structures on the property and their suitability for
rehabilitation;
(c) Estimated market value of the property in its current
condition; after completion of the proposed construction,
alteration, demolition, or removal; after any changes
recommended by the Preservation Commission; and, in the
case of a proposed demolition, after renovation of the existing
property for continued use;
§ 44-1710 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1710
1:1977
(d) In the case of a proposed demolition, an estimate from an
architect, developer, real estate consultant, appraiser, or other
real estate professional experienced in rehabilitation as to the
economic feasibility of rehabilitation or reuse of the existing
structure on the property;
(e) Amount paid for the property, the date of purchase, and the
party from whom purchased, including a description of the
relationship, if any, between the owner of record or applicant
and the person from whom the property was purchased, and
any terms of financing between the seller and buyer;
(f) If the property is income producing, the annual gross income
from the property for the previous two years; itemized
operating and maintenance expenses for the previous two
years; and depreciation deduction and annual cash flow before
and after debt service, if any, during the same period;
(g) All appraisals obtained within the previous two years by the
owner or applicant in connection with the purchase, financing,
or ownership of the property;
(h) Any listing of the property for sale or rent, price asked and
offers received, if any, within the previous two years;
(i) Assessed value of the property according to the two most
recent assessments;
(j) Real estate taxes for the previous two years;
(k) Form of ownership or operation of the property, whether sole
proprietorship, for-profit or not-for-profit corporation, limited
partnership, joint venture, or other;
(l) Any other information, including the income tax brackets of the
owner, applicant, or principal investors in the property
considered necessary by the Preservation Commission to a
determination as to whether the property does yield or may
yield a reasonable return to the owners.
(3) The Preservation Commission shall review all required evidence
and information, conduct an administrative public hearing, and
make a determination on the application within 45 days of receipt
of the completed application unless such time frame is extended in
writing by mutual agreement of the City and applicant.
(4) In order to grant a certificate of economic hardship, the
Preservation Commission must find that denial of the proposed
certificate of appropriateness would deprive a designated
landmark or property within a Historic District of all reasonable
use of or return.
§ 44-1710 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1710
1:1978
(a) In the case of a proposed removal, relocation or demolition, the
Preservation Commission must find that the designated
landmark cannot be remodeled or rehabilitated in a manner
that would allow a reasonable use of or return from such
landmark or property to a property owner.
(b) The Preservation Commission or Director of Community
Development may order that the issuance of a permit for
removal, relocation, or demolition be delayed for a period of up
to 180 days in order that such steps may be taken as are
reasonably likely to result in the preservation of the building or
structure involved. These efforts may include consultation with
civic groups, public agencies, and interested citizens, and the
exploration of possible acquisition.
H. Decision of Preservation Commission.
(1) The Preservation Commission shall review the application for a
certificate of appropriateness and issue or deny the certificate of
appropriateness within 45 days following transmission of the
completed application, unless such time frame is extended in
writing by mutual agreement of the City and applicant.
(2) The Preservation Commission may establish a subcommittee of
three of its members to review applications for a certificate of
appropriateness when delay to the next regular meeting would
create an unnecessary inconvenience to the applicant. A certificate
of appropriateness may be issued with full authority of the
Commission prior to the next regular meeting upon the signature of
the Chairperson of the subcommittee or upon the signature of the
review official with his or her written finding that the application is
consistent with the standards described in this section. The
Commission may further designate staff support responsible for
reviewing routine applications for certificates of appropriateness
when the proposed work is clearly appropriate and in accordance
with the criteria set forth in Subsection D of this section.
(3) Written notice of the approval or denial of the application for a
certificate of appropriateness shall be provided to the applicant
within seven days following the determination.
(4) A denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by
a statement of the reasons for the denial. The Preservation
Commission shall make recommendations to the applicant
concerning changes, if any, in the proposed action that would cause
the Preservation Commission to reconsider its denial and shall
confer with the applicant and attempt to resolve as quickly as
possible the differences between the owner and the Preservation
Commission. The applicant may resubmit an amended application
or reapply for a building or demolition permit that takes into
§ 44-1710 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1710
1:1979
§ 44-1711. [Ch. 44, 17-11] Demolition review.
consideration the recommendations of the Preservation
Commission.
I. Appeals.
(1) Decisions of the Preservation Commission on certificates of
appropriateness and certificates of economic hardship shall be final
and reviewable only in the Court in accordance with the applicable
Statutes of the State of Illinois. (735 ILCS 5/3-101, et seq.),
However, the Preservation Commission's determination may be
appealed to the City Council if such application is rejected by the
vote of fewer than five members.
(2) An applicant may appeal such decision to the City Council by filing
notice of intent to do so with the Community Development
Department within 30 days after receiving notice of the decision of
the Commission.
(3) An appeal from a final administrative decision as defined herein
shall be to the Circuit Court as provided in the Administrative
Review Act (735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.) For purposes of the Illinois
Administrative Review Act any of the following shall constitute a
final administrative decision:
(a) A decision of the Bloomington City Council finally disposing of
the matter;
(b) A decision of the Historic Preservation Commission that is not
subject to appeal under this section;
(c) An appealable decision of the Historic Preservation
Commission that has not been appealed to the City Council at
the end of the time for appeal to the City Council.
A. Applicability. Except for historic landmarks and buildings located in a
historic district, buildings shall be subject to the requirements of this
section where:
(1) The proposed demolition exceeds 500 square feet of gross floor
area; and
(2) The building was constructed more than 50 years before the date of
the application for a demolition permit, as determined on the basis
of available records.
B. Administrative review of demolition. Upon receipt of an application for
a demolition permit, or a building permit involving demolition, the
Director of Community Development shall review the application to
determine if the building meets the criteria of Subsection A. If it does,
the Director of Community Development shall:
§ 44-1710 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1711
1:1980
(1) Notify the applicant in writing within five days that the application
for demolition must be reviewed before proceeding.
(2) Within five days, forward a copy of the application to the
Preservation Commission chairperson and any standing committee
of the Preservation Commission that is empowered to review
demolition permits.
(a) Within five days of a receipt of the copy of the application, the
chairperson or duly authorized committee shall issue a
preliminary recommendation regarding the granting of the
demolition permit. If a favorable recommendation is issued, the
demolition permit shall be issued. If the chairperson or
committee determines that the building is potentially
significant pursuant to the standards of § 44-804B, a
recommendation may be made in opposition to granting the
demolition permit.
(b) If the chairperson or committee determines that the building is
potentially significant, it shall schedule an administrative
public hearing before the Preservation Commission to consider
the building's historical or architectural significance. Said
hearing shall be conducted within 35 days of initial submittal of
the permit application. The City shall give notice in the manner
prescribed by § 44-1705.
C. Public hearing. The administrative public hearing shall be conducted in
accordance with the procedures of § 44-1705.
(1) The Preservation Commission shall hear all public testimony
regarding the potential significance of the building and the
proposed demolition.
(2) At the conclusion of the hearing, the Commission shall make
findings and issue a determination as to the significance of the
building.
D. Decision.
(1) If the building is determined to be not significant, the Director of
Community Development shall cause such demolition or building
permit to be issued, provided that it complies with all other
requirements of the Code.
(2) If the building is significant, Director of Community Development
shall conduct a meeting between the chairperson or committee and
the owner (or his or her representative), within 10 days of the
public hearing, to discuss alternatives to demolition.
E. Demolition.
(1) The demolition review process shall not delay the issuance of a
demolition or building permit by more than 60 days.
§ 44-1711 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1711
1:1981
§ 44-1712. [Ch. 44, 17-12] Administrative appeals.
(2) If no alternatives to demolition have been identified and agreed to
by the applicant within said sixty-day period, the Director of
Community Development shall cause the demolition or building
permit to be issued provided that it complies with all other
requirements of this Code.
(3) Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent immediate
demolition or partial demolition where public safety is at risk and
where the building has been determined by the Building Official to
be a public hazard and demolition is the only viable recourse.
A. Authority. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hear and decide appeals
from an administrative order, requirement, or determination made by
the Director of Community Development.
B. Initiation. An administrative appeal may be taken to the Board of
Zoning Appeals by any property owner, the City Council, or parties to an
enforceable purchase option contract aggrieved by an administrative
order, requirement decision, or determination under this Code by the
Director of Community Development, provided the terms "any property
owner" and "parties to an enforceable purchase option contract" refer
to persons with an ownership or contractual interest in the parcel
which is the subject of the administrative order, requirement, decision
or determination made by the Director of Community Development.
C. Application requirements. An administrative appeal shall be filed made
by filing a written notice of appeal, specifying the grounds of the
appeal, in the Community Development Department. The appeal shall
thereafter be forwarded to the Board of Zoning Appeals within 20 days.
D. Administrative public hearing. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall
conduct an administrative public hearing on all appeals duly initiated
hereunder.
(1) In appeals to the Board from decisions of the administrator denying
a sign permit or declaring a sign to be illegal, the Board's scope of
review shall be limited to determining whether or not the
Administrator's decision is in accordance with the requirements of
the Sign Code and applicable law and accordingly affirm or reverse
the appealed decision. The Board may direct the Administrator to
issue the permit or statement permitting the sign in accordance
with its decision or may remand the matter for further
consideration and investigation consistent with the Board's ruling.
E. Decisions. All decisions of the Board of Zoning Appeals on appeals
initiated hereunder shall be final and reviewable only in the Courts in
accordance with the applicable Statutes of the State of Illinois.
However, the aggrieved party may appeal to the City Council if his or
her appeal is rejected by the vote of less than five members of the Board
§ 44-1711 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1712
1:1982
§ 44-1713. [Ch. 44, 17-13] Zoning Enforcement Officer.
of Zoning Appeals; the Director of Community Development may appeal
to the City Council if he or she believes the Board's decision reversing
his action violates the intent of this Code. To receive consideration by
the City Council, the aggrieved party or the Director of Community
Development must file with the City Clerk a "Notice of Appeal" which
shall be substantially in one of the following forms:
Notice of Appeal of Zoning Administration Interpretation
I, the undersigned, appealed an order, requirement, decision or
determination of the Director of Community Development. Less than
five members of the Zoning Board of Appeals concurred in the action
which rejected my appeal. I, therefore, request that the City Council
review the record of the Board of Zoning Appeals' administrative
public hearing and make a final administrative determination thereon.
(Signature) __________
Notice of Appeal of Board of Zoning Appeals Administrative
Interpretation
The City of Bloomington, McLean County, Illinois Municipal
Corporation, requests that the City Council review the record of the
Board of Zoning Appeals' administrative public hearing and made a
final administrative determination thereon. This request is based on
my belief that the decision made by the Zoning Board of Appeals
reversing my action violates the intent of Bloomington City Code
Chapter 44.
(Signature)__________
(1) If a Notice of Appeal is filed with the aggrieved party or by the
Director of Community Development within 10 working days from
the date on which the Board of Zoning Appeals' decision, rule or
order was served, the appeal shall be considered by the City
Council and the determination of the Council on the matter shall be
final. If no such Notice of Appeal is filed with the City Clerk within
said period, the action of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be final,
even if taken by less than five concurring votes.
A. Duties. The Director of Community Development shall administer and
enforce this Code. He or she may be provided with assistance of such
other persons as the City Manager may direct. In furtherance of such
authority the Director of Community Development, or his or her
designee, shall:
(1) Notify in writing any person responsible for violating any of the
provisions of this Code, indicating the nature of the violation and
ordering the action necessary to correct it;
(2) Order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings, or structures;
removal of illegal buildings or structures or of illegal additions,
§ 44-1712 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1713
1:1983
§ 44-1714. [Ch. 44, 17-14] Zoning verification letters.
alterations, or structural changes; discontinuance of any illegal
work being done; or shall take any other action authorized by
this Code to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its
provisions;
(3) Issue all building permits, and make and maintain records thereof;
(4) Issue all zoning compliance certificates and make and maintain
records thereof;
(5) Issue all special use permits after they are approved by the Council
in accordance with 10 of this Code;
(6) Issue all zoning verification letters and maintain records thereof;
(7) Conduct inspections of buildings, structures, and use of land to
determine compliance with this Code;
(8) Maintain permanent and current records pertaining to this Code,
including but not limited to, maps, amendments, plans, special
uses, variations, appeals, and applications therefor; and designate
on the Official Zoning Map each amendment;
(9) Provide and maintain a public information bureau relative to all
matters arising out of this Code;
(10) Receive, file and forward to the Board of Zoning Appeals all
applications for appeals, special uses, authorized variations, or
other matters on which the Board of Zoning Appeals is required to
pass under this Code;
(11) Forward to the Community Development Department all
applications for special use permits, amendments, and other
matters which are to be referred to the Board of Zoning Appeals,
Historic Preservation Commission, or the Planning Commission.
B. Building permit requirements. No building or other structure shall be
erected, moved, added to, or structurally altered without a permit
therefor issued by the Director of Community Development. No
building permit shall be issued by the Director of Community
Development except in conformity with the provisions of this Code and
Chapters 10 and 24 of the Bloomington City Code, 1960, as amended,
unless he or she receives a written order from the Board of Zoning
Appeals in the form of an administrative review or variation or from the
City Council in the form of a special use permit or amendment as
provided by this Code.
A. Purpose. A zoning verification letter may be requested from the
Community Development by any individual seeking information about
the zoning status of a specific parcel of land.
§ 44-1713 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1714
1:1984
B. Request.
(1) The request for a zoning verification shall be submitted in writing,
and shall include the following:
(a) Sufficient information to identify the property including the
property address, parcel number, and/or a map indicating the
property location;
(b) Specific list of information requested.
(c) Administrative fee.
(2) If the request covers multiple parcels, the Director of Community
Development may determine that each parcel is a separate request
and assess additional fees.
C. Content. A zoning verification letter shall be prepared based upon
information on file in the Community Development Department, and
shall be limited to the following:
(1) The future land use designation of the property;
(2) The current zoning district of the property;
(3) Verification that a particular use is permitted within the property's
current zoning district;
(4) Information about special uses, variations, planned unit
developments or other parcel-specific regulations that pertain to
the site;
(5) Zoning action, if any, that is needed to permit a particular use;
(6) Any current, outstanding violations that are the subject of code
enforcement action.
D. Errors, inaccuracies or omissions. If the Director of Community
Development determines that a zoning verification letter was based on
inaccurate or misleading information or if the zoning verification letter
does not comply with this Code, then, at any time, the Director may
issue a modified letter that complies with the Code or revoke the zoning
verification letter. No refunds will be provided.
E. Effect.
(1) The zoning verification letter shall not be construed to verify
compliance of a parcel with development regulations, parking, or
landscaping requirements, or to certify legal nonconforming status.
(2) A zoning verification letter does not authorize any development
activity or use.
(3) The determinations made within a zoning verification letter are not
subject to appeal.
§ 44-1714 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1715
1:1985
§ 44-1715. [Ch. 44, 17-15] Complaints and penalties.
A. Compliance required. All land developed or redeveloped, all buildings
and structures erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, moved, or
structurally altered, and all land, buildings, structures, and uses must
comply with all applicable provisions of this Code. Failure to comply
with applicable provisions constitutes a violation of this Code. The
following list of violations is intended to be illustrative, and not limited
to the specific items.
(1) Development or redevelopment violations.
(a) Engaging in the development or redevelopment of land in any
way not consistent with the requirements of this Code.
(b) Erecting a building or other structure in any way not
consistent with the requirements of this Code.
(c) Failure to comply with any condition or stipulation imposed on
a permit or approval, including conditions of approval for a
map amendment, special use, site plan review, variation,
certificate of appropriateness, planned unit development, or
other approval.
(2) Alterations to existing land, buildings or structures violations.
(a) Modifying, converting, filling, excavating, removing, enlarging,
reconstructing, moving or structurally altering land,
vegetation, fences, and other site features in any way except as
permitted by or pursuant to this Code.
(b) Modifying, converting, enlarging, reconstructing, demolishing,
moving or structurally altering an existing building or
structure except as permitted by or pursuant to this Code.
(3) Use violations.
(a) Using land, buildings, or structures in any way except as
permitted by or pursuant to this Code.
(b) Engaging in the use of a building or land or any other activity
requiring one or more permits, variance, or other approval
under this Code without obtaining all such permits, variances,
or approvals.
(4) Compliance violations.
(a) Failure to comply with any lawful order issued by the Director
of Community Development.
(b) Failure to arrange for an initial inspection or a re-inspection to
determine compliance with notices issued under this Code.
§ 44-1715 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1715
1:1986
(c) Failure to comply with any permit, variance, special use,
planned development, or approval granted under this Code.
(5) Separate violation. Each act of violation and each day upon which a
violation occurs or remains shall constitute a separate violation.
B. Complaints. In case any building or structure is constructed,
reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained, or any
building, structure or land is used in violation of this Code, any person
may file a written complaint. Such complaint stating fully the causes
and basis thereof shall be filed with the Director of Community
Development. The Director shall properly record such complaint,
immediately investigate and may, if a violation exists, institute any
appropriate action or proceeding to:
(1) Prevent the unlawful construction, reconstruction, alteration,
repair, conversion, maintenance, or use;
(2) Prevent the occupancy of the building, structure, or land;
(3) Prevent any illegal act, conduct, business, or use in or about the
premises;
(4) Restrain, correct, or abate the violation; or
(5) Seek fines, court costs, and attorney fees in administrative or
circuit court.
C. Enforcement process.
(1) Basis of inspections. Inspections shall be made to obtain and
maintain compliance with the provision of this Code based upon
one or more of the following:
(a) To determine conformity with a permit, variation, special use
or other approval, as well as any special conditions imposed at
any time.
(b) The need to determine compliance with a notice or an order
issued by the City.
(c) A complaint is received by the City, indicating that there is a
violation of the provisions of this chapter.
(d) An observation by the City of a violation of the provisions of
this Code.
(e) An emergency is observed or reasonably believed to exist.
(f) A request for an inspection is made by the owner or
responsible person.
§ 44-1715 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1715
1:1987
(g) Designation of an area where all dwelling units, accessory
building, yards, and/or signs are to be inspected uniformly or
intensively or for specific violations.
(2) Content of violation notices. Violation notices authorized by this
chapter shall:
(a) Be in writing.
(b) Include a description of the real estate and/or project name
sufficient for identification.
(c) Include a statement of the violation or violations.
(d) Include a correction order allowing a reasonable time to
correct the violation and bring the property into compliance. If
a Notice to Abate, the notice shall indicate that the City may
obtain a court order to abate the violation if not brought into
compliance, may charge the owner for the cost of abatement,
and may place a lien against the property for said costs until
paid.
(e) State that failure to comply with the Notice may result in
further enforcement action which may include prosecution in
administrative or circuit court to obtain fines and court costs
and/or injunctive relief.
(f) Include a description of the right to appeal, if applicable.
(3) Method of service. A written notice shall be deemed to be properly
served in one of the following ways:
(a) Delivered personally;
(b) Sent by first-class mail addressed to the last known address of
the responsible person; or
(c) Any other method authorized for the service of process by
court rule or State statute.
(4) Posting. After issuing a written notice, the City may, but is not
required to, post a copy of the written notice and/or a placard on
the property.
(5) Reasonable entry. If needed, inspections inside a structure,
building, dwelling, dwelling unit, or accessory building shall be
made during reasonable hours. Entry without consent of an owner
or an occupant shall require an administrative warrant, or an order
of the court as provided by State law.
D. Penalties. The City may use any lawful remedy or enforcement powers
against the owner or responsible person for any violation of this Zoning
Ordinance. Remedies may be pursued simultaneously or sequentially
and the pursuit of one remedy does not foreclose the simultaneous or
§ 44-1715 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1715
1:1988
subsequent pursuit of other remedies. The remedies are cumulative,
and the City shall have all power granted from time to time under all
applicable federal, state, and local laws, rules, and regulations. Such
remedies include, without limitation, one or more of the following:
(1) Fines, court order. The City may bring and prosecute an action in
administrative or circuit court to:
(a) Obtain fines of from $100 to $750 per violation per day, plus
court costs and attorney fees; and/or
(b) Enjoin the owner or responsible person from continuing such
violation, use, erection, construction, moving or alteration,
which may include demolition, removal, or abatement of the
violation; and/or
(c) Comply with the requirements of this Code.
(2) Withhold permit. The City may deny or withhold any and all permits
or other forms of authorization from an applicant on any property
where there is an uncorrected violation of a provision of this Code
or of a condition or stipulation of approval for a permit or other
authorization previously granted by the City.
(3) Permit approved with conditions. In addition to denying or
withholding a permit or other authorization, the City may grant
such permit or other authorization subject to the condition that the
violation be corrected.
(4) Temporarily suspend permit. A permit or other form of
authorization under this Code may be temporarily suspended until
the violation is corrected.
(5) Revoke permit. A permit or other form of authorization authorized
under this Code may be revoked when the Zoning Administrator
determines that: a) there is departure from the plans,
specifications, or conditions required under the permit; b) the
permit or other form of authorization was procured by false
representation or was issued in error; or c) any of the provisions of
this Code are being violated. Any permit or other authorization
revoked under this procedure shall become null and void.
(6) Cease and desist order. With or without revoking a permit, the
Director of Community Development may issue a cease and desist
order on any land, building or structure for which there is an
uncorrected violation of a provision of this Code. The cease and
desist order must be in writing and must state the work in violation
that is to be stopped, the reasons for the stoppage, and the
conditions under which the work may be resumed.
(7) Declaration of nuisance. A violation of this chapter is a nuisance
per se and the City may institute appropriate actions or court
§ 44-1715 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1715
1:1989
proceedings to correct or abate any violation of the provisions
of this chapter. If the owner or responsible person fails to abate
a violation, the City may take action to abate the violation. The
abatement may be performed by the City, by a contract vendor, or
by other means determined by the City. The cost of such action,
plus an administrative fee, shall be a personal debt of the owner,
and may be assessed as a lien against the property until paid.
(8) Performance guarantee or surety. If a performance guarantee or
surety was previously required as a special condition by the
Planning Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals, City Council, or
Zoning Administrator, the City may seek forfeiture of the
performance guarantee or surety.
§ 44-1715 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1715
1:1990
ARTICLE XVIII
GAP Districts
[See the GAP Form-Based Code included as an attachment to this chapter.]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-1715
1:1991
Chapter 45
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
§ 44-1715 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 44-1715
1:1992
ARTICLE I
Adoption of Property Maintenance Code
§ 45-101. [Ch. 45, Sec. 1] Adoption of the International Property
Maintenance Code 2012. [Ord. No. 2014-12]
A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the City
Clerk of the City of Bloomington, being marked and designated as "The
International Property Maintenance Code, 2012" as published by the
International Code Council, Inc., be and is hereby adopted as the Property
Maintenance code of the City of Bloomington, in the State of Illinois, for the
control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all of
the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Property
Maintenance Code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof,
as if fully set out in this Ordinance, with the Additions, insertions, deletions
and changes, if any, prescribed in Article II of this Ordinance.
§ 45-102. [Ch. 45, Sec. 2] Conflicting provisions.
A. In the event of any conflict: between or among any Codes adopted in
this article; or between any Code adopted in this article and any other
provision of Bloomington City Code; or between any Code adopted in
this article and any provision of any Code adopted by any other
provision of Bloomington City Code; or between any Code adopted in
this article and any provision of State law, the provision setting the
highest standard for health and safety shall prevail.
B. Decisions of representatives of the Department of Community
Development under this section shall be reviewable by the Property
Maintenance Review Board as provided in this chapter. [Ord. No.
2017-96]
§ 45-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 45-102
1:1993

ARTICLE II
Amendments, Revisions, Additions and Modifications to the
International Property Maintenance Code 2012
[Ord. No. 2014-12]
§ 45-201. [Ch. 45, Sec. 1] Amendments, revisions, additions and
modifications. [Ord. No. 2011-64]
That the International Property Maintenance Code is amended and revised
in the following respects:
SECTION 101.0 GENERAL.
Amend the following sections to read as follows:
SEC. 101.1 TITLE.
These regulations shall be known as the Property Maintenance Code of
the City of Bloomington, hereinafter referred to as "this Code." [Ord. No.
2011-64]
SECTION 102.0 APPLICABILITY.
SEC. 102.5 WORKMANSHIP.
Repairs, maintenance work, alterations or installations which are caused
directly or indirectly by the enforcement of this code shall be executed and
installed in a workmanlike manner and installed in accordance with the
manufacturer's installation instructions. Materials used for repairs shall be
of like or similar materials of the surrounding surface. [Ord. No. 2011-64]
SECTION 103.0 DEPARTMENT OF PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
INSPECTION.
SEC. 103.5 FEES.
Insert the following two sections at the end of the paragraph:
(a) Reinspection fee. If a contractor/owner notifies the Code Official that
a project is ready for final inspection and, upon inspection the Code
Official finds the project not complete, then the Contractor/Owner shall
pay a fee as set forth in the Schedule of Fees per inspector for each
reinspection required. The fee shall be paid prior to any subsequent
reinspection. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
(b) Inspection fee for code compliance. If requested, an inspection/
investigation of an existing building/facility for Code compliance may
be done by the Code Official or employee charged with enforcement of
this code with authorization from the owner. A fee in an amount as set
forth in the Schedule of Fees per inspector shall be charged for said
inspection/investigation. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
SECTION 106.0 VIOLATIONS.
The following sections shall be amended to read as follows:
SEC. 106.4 VIOLATION PENALTIES.
§ 45-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 45-201
1:1995
Any person who shall violate a provision of this Code shall, or fail to
comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $500. Each
day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be
deemed a separate offense. [Ord. No. 2011-64]
SECTION 107.0 NOTICES AND ORDERS.
SEC. 107.3 METHOD OF SERVICE.
Add the following to the section to read as follows:
(4) Transmitted via e-mail to the email address of the owner or owner's
agent. [Ord. No. 2014-12]
SECTION 108.0 UNSAFE STRUCTURES AND EQUIPMENT.
Add the following sections to read as follows:
SEC. 108.2.2 CLOSING STANDARDS.
Structures shall be closed with uniform materials, cut to fit in a
workmanlike manner, securely attached and painted to match the
surrounding surfaces. [Ord. No. 2014-12]
SEC. 108.8 ADMINISTRATIVE FEE AND FINES FOR OWNING
CONDEMNED PROPERTY.
(a) Any person who owns a structure condemned under this Code and who
fails to bring the structure into compliance with this code within one
year of the condemnation shall be assessed a fee of $500.
(b) If the same structure referred to in paragraph (a) of this section is not
in compliance with this code within 18 months of the condemnation,
the owner shall be fined an additional $750.
(c) If the same structure referred to in paragraph (a) of this section is not
in compliance with this code within two years of the condemnation, the
owner shall pay a fine of $2,000. The owner shall be fined $2,000 for
each additional year thereafter that the structure remains condemned.
(d) Any person who owns a structure already condemned under this Code
and who has a second structure condemned shall be assessed an
additional fine of $2,000 for each year the second structure remains on
the condemned list.
(e) Any person who owns two structures condemned under this Code and
who has a third or more structures condemned shall be assessed a fine
of $5,000 per structure for every year they remain on the condemned
list.
The administrative fees and fines authorized by this section shall be a lien
on any real estate owned by such person. In addition to filing a lien upon
such real estate, the City shall have the authority to collect such fee or fines
by filing an ordinance violation suit or a personal collection action against
the owner in court. [Ord. No. 2014-12]
SEC. 108.9 NOTICE TO BUYERS OF CONDEMNED STRUCTURE.
§ 45-201 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 45-201
1:1996
(a) Code Enforcement Division to Publish List. The Department of
Community Development, Code Enforcement Division, shall each
month compile and publish a list of all structures which have been
condemned and any Code violations existing in any structure on the
list shall be public information and shall be disclosed to any person
making inquiry. In addition, the Division shall disclose to any person
making inquiry the location of any other structure condemned since
the publication of the most recent list of condemned structures. A
copy of the monthly list of condemned structures shall be sent to the
Bloomington-Normal Board of Realtors to be made available to any
members thereof. When any structure is condemned, notification of
condemnation along with a copy of the inspection sheet with regard to
said property shall be forwarded to the Bloomington-Normal Board of
Realtors. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
(b) Contents of notice. The notices provided for in this section shall contain
the following information:
(1)The common street address of the property;
(2)The legal description or real estate index number of the property;
(3)The fact that the structure on the property has been "Condemned";
(4)The Code deficiencies found to exist on the property (which may be in
the form of an attached inspection sheet) and the fact that occupancy
of the structure is prohibited until necessary repairs are made, and if
known, an approximate cost estimate of the cost of making sufficient
repairs to permit occupancy of the structure.
(c) Real estate agent must give notice of defects. It shall be unlawful for
any real estate agent to permit a person to execute a formal offer
to purchase any property on which a condemned structure is located
without furnishing said person a copy of the notice required by this
section and obtaining written receipt of such notice. The original of
said notice and receipt shall be forwarded to the Code Enforcement
Division. [Ord. No. 2014-12]
SECTION 110.0 DEMOLITION.
Add the following section to read as follows:
SEC. 110.1.1 UNREASONABLE REPAIRS.
Whenever the Code Official determines that the cost of such repairs would
exceed 100% of the current value of such structure, such repairs shall be
presumed unreasonable and it shall be presumed for the purpose of this
section that such structure is a public nuisance which shall be ordered
razed. [Ord. No. 2011-64]
SECTION 111.0 MEANS OF APPEAL.
Delete the entire Section 111 and substitute the following:
§ 45-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 45-201
1:1997
SEC. 111.1 Any person directly affected by a decision of the Code Official
or a Notice or Order issued under this Property Maintenance Code shall
have the right to appeal to the Property Maintenance Board of Review as
provided in Section 1000 of this chapter. [Ord. No. 2014-12]
SECTION 202.0 GENERAL DEFINITIONS.
The following definitions shall be amended or added to read as follows:
Add the following definitions:
Carport: A structure, attached or detached, intended for the parking of
motor vehicles; open on at least two sides, or with the aggregate areas of
all walls not less than 50% open. Carports not meeting this definition shall
be considered a garage. [Ord. No. 2011-64]
Dormitory. A space in a building where group sleeping accommodations are
provided for persons not members of the same family group in one room or
in a series of closely associated rooms. [Ord. No. 2011-64]
Efficiency Unit. A dwelling unit consisting of one principal room together
with bathroom, kitchen, hallway, closets, and/or dining alcove directly off
the principal room provided such dining alcove does not exceed 125 square
feet in area. [Ord. No. 2011-64]
Garage, Accessory: An accessory building or an accessory portion of the
principal building which is intended for and used for storing passenger
motor vehicles owned and used by the occupants of the building to which
it is accessory or attached. An accessory garage shall be provided with
operable vehicle access doors. See also "Carport" and "Shed." [Ord. No.
2011-64]
GRAFFITI. Graffiti shall mean any drawing, inscription, writing, figure or
mark made upon a wall or other exposed surface, including but not limited
to any house, garage, rock, bridge, fence, gate, tree, monument, motor
vehicle, sidewalk, street, lamp post, street sign, underpass or retaining
wall, whether publicly or privately owned, with paint, chalk, dye, ink,
pencil, wax or other similar substance or by etching, scratching, cutting,
burning or carving without the express consent of the owner of said wall or
other exposed surface. [Ord. No. 2011-64]
Hotel. (Motel, Motor Hotel): Any building containing six or more guest
rooms intended or designed to be used, or which are used, rented or hired
out to be occupied or which are occupied for sleeping purposes by guests.
[Ord. No. 2011-64]
One-family Dwelling. (a.k.a. Single-family dwelling) A dwelling, containing
one dwelling unit. [Ord. No. 2011-64]
Two-family Dwelling. A dwelling containing two dwelling units. [Ord. No.
2011-64]
§ 45-201 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 45-201
1:1998
FAMILY. One or more persons, each related to the other by blood, adoption
or marriage, living in a dwelling unit. One or more persons each related
to the other by blood, adoption or marriage and not more than two other
persons not related by blood, adoption or marriage living in a dwelling unit
shall also be deemed to constitute a family. Any child living in a "Foster
Family Home" as defined in this Code shall also be deemed to be part of
a family. However, in no case shall more than two persons not related by
blood, adoption or marriage occupy any efficiency unit or a one bedroom
dwelling unit as defined in this Code. [Ord. No. 2011-64]
FOSTER FAMILY HOME. Means a facility for child care in residences of
families who receive no more than eight children unrelated to them, unless
all the children are of common parentage, for the purposes of providing
family care and training for children on a full-time basis. The family's
own children under 18 years of age shall be included in determining the
maximum number of children served. The term "Foster Family Home"
includes homes receiving children from any state-operated institution for
child care; or from any agency established by a municipality or other
political subdivision of the State of Illinois authorized to provide care for
children outside their own homes — but excludes therefrom any "Agency-
Operated Family Home," Agency-Operated Group Home" or "Agency-
Supervised Home" as defined in Bloomington City Code, Chapter 44,
Zoning Code. The types of foster family homes are defined as follows: [Ord.
No. 2011-64]
(a) "Boarding Home" means a Foster Family Home which receives payment
for regular full-time care of a child or children.
(b) "Free Home" means a Foster Family Home, other than an adoptive
home, which does not receive payments for the care of a child or
children.
(c) "Work-Wage Home" means a Foster Family Home which receives a
child or children who pay part or all of their board by rendering some
services to the family not prohibited by the Child Labor Law or by
standards or regulations of the Illinois Department of Children and
Family Services prescribed under the Illinois Child Care Act of 1969, as
amended. The child or children may receive a wage in connection with
the services rendered the foster family; and
(d) "Independent Home" means a Foster Family Home, other than an
adoptive home, which receives no more than four children, unless of
common parentage, directly from parents, or other legally responsible
persons, by independent arrangement and which is not subject to
direct and regular supervision of a specified agency except as such
supervision pertains to licensing by the Illinois Department of Children
and Family Services. [Ord. No. 2011-64]
Amend the following definition:
Rooming House. Any building, or any part thereof, containing one or more
rooming units, in which space is let by the owner or operator to more than
four persons. [Ord. No. 2011-64]
§ 45-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 45-201
1:1999
Shed: A completely enclosed accessory structure, not intended for the
storage of motor vehicles. Access doors on a shed shall be maintained in an
operable condition. See also, "Carport" and "Garage." [Ord. No. 2011-64]
SECTION 302.0 EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS.
The following sections shall be amended to read as follows:
SEC. 302.1 SANITATION.
All exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe
and sanitary condition and free from any accumulation of rubbish. The
occupant shall keep that part of the exterior property which such occupant
occupies or controls in a clean and sanitary condition. [Ord. No. 2011-64]
SEC. 302.2.1 DETENTION BASINS AND DRAINAGE SWALES.
Maintenance detention basins and swales shall include the following:
1. Facilities including the outlet structure, inflow pipes, and basin
contours shall be maintained in conformance with the approved
construction plans on file with the City of Bloomington.
2. No trees or shrubs shall be allowed to grow in detention basins or in
drainage swales such that full flow is restricted.
3. Appropriate ground cover shall be maintained so that no erosion
occurs.
4. Existing pipes, underdrains, and other infrastructure shown on
construction plans shall remain in working order. [Ord. No. 2011-57]
SEC. 302.4 WEEDS.
All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds
or plant growth in excess of eight inches. All noxious weeds shall be
prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and
vegetation, other than trees or shrubs provided; however, this term shall
not include cultivated flowers and gardens. [Ord. No. 2011-64]
The following section shall be added to read as follows:
SEC. 302.7.1 ACCESSORY STRUCTURE DOORS MAINTAINED.
Vehicle and man doors on accessory structures shall be free and
maintained in an operable condition. [Ord. No. 2011-64]
SEC. 302.8.1 REMOVAL.
The Code Official may direct the vehicles to be removed as provided in
Chapter 29, §§ 29-2205 and 29-2206, of the Bloomington City Code. [Ord.
No. 2011-64]
SECTION 304.0 EXTERIOR STRUCTURE.
The following sections shall be amended or added to read as follows: [Ord.
No. 2011-64]
SEC. 304.14 INSECT SCREENS.
§ 45-201 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 45-201
1:2000
During the period from April 15th through October 31st, every door,
window and other outside opening utilized or required for ventilation
purposes serving any structure containing habitable rooms, food
preparation areas, food service areas, or any areas where products to
be included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed,
manufactured, packaged or stored, shall be supplied with approved tightly
fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch and every swinging door
shall have a self-closing device in good working condition.
EXCEPTION: Screen doors shall not be required where other approved
means, such as air curtains or insect repellent fans are employed. [Ord.
No. 2011-64]
SEC. 304.3 PREMISES IDENTIFICATION.
Buildings shall have approved address numbers placed in a position to be
plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property.
These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers
shall be Arabic numerals. Numbers shall not be printed or in script.
Numbers shall be a minimum of four inches high with a minimum stroke
width of 1/2 inch. [Ord. No. 2011-64]
SEC. 304.3.1 SUITES OR UNITS.
All suite or units shall be marked at the front of each suite or unit. Style
shall be consistent with all suites or units in the building. [Ord. No.
2011-64]
SEC. 304.3.2 MULTIPLE BUILDINGS.
Multiple buildings in a complex shall be individually marked and visible
from the street or parking lot. Only Arabic numerals or letters shall be
used. [Ord. No. 2011-64]
SEC. 304.6 EXTERIOR WALLS.
All exterior walls shall be free from holes, breaks and loose or rotting
materials; and maintained weatherproof and properly surface coated
where required to prevent deterioration. Surface coatings shall be
consistent with surrounding areas of the exterior wall. [Ord. No.
2011-64]
SECTION 305.0 INTERIOR STRUCTURE.
The following sections shall be amended or added to read as follows:
SEC. 305.0 INTERIOR SURFACES.
All interior surfaces, including windows and doors, shall be maintained in
good, clean and sanitary condition. Peeling, chipping, flaking or abraded
paint shall be repaired, removed or covered. Cracked or loose plaster,
decayed wood and other defective surface conditions shall be corrected.
For the purposes of this section, raw or unfinished drywall is not
considered clean or sanitary. [Ord. No. 2011-64]
SEC. 305.6 INTERIOR DOORS.
§ 45-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 45-201
1:2001
Every interior door shall fit reasonably well within its frame and shall
be capable of being opened and closed by being properly and securely
attached to jambs, headers or tracks as intended by the manufacturer
of the attachment hardware. Doors containing cracks, breaks, holes, or
otherwise damage shall be replaced or repaired in a workmanlike manner.
[Ord. No. 2011-64]
SECTION 308.0 RUBBISH AND GARBAGE.
The following section shall be added:
SEC. 308.4 APPROVED REFUSE CONTAINER. [Ord. No. 2011-64]
(1) A can made of galvanized iron or lined with galvanized iron, of not more
30-33 gallon capacity, which is watertight, has a tight fitting cover and
two handles; or
(2) A heavy duty durable plastic container of not more than 30-33 gallon
capacity, which is watertight, has a tight fitting cover and has two
handles; or
(3) Plastic refuse bags meeting specifications established by the Director
of Public Works and approved by the City Manager. [Ord. No.
2018-93]
(4) Wheeled garbage carts issued exclusively by the City through the
Department of Public Works or its designee or vendor as provided in
Chapter 21 of the Bloomington City Code. [Ord. No. 2014-12]
SEC. 404.0 LIGHT, VENTILATIONS AND OCCUPANCY
LIMITATIONS. [Ord. No. 2011-57]
The following section shall be added:
SEC. 404.7.1 RESIDENTIAL KITCHENS.
Residential kitchens shall contain appliances for cooking, baking and
refrigeration to ensure the safe and sanitary preparation and storage of
food. [Ord. No. 2014-12]
SEC. 506.0 SANITARY DRAINAGE SYSTEM.
SEC. 506.3 GREASE INTERCEPTORS.
Delete the section in its entirety. [Ord. No. 2014-12]
SECTION 602.0 HEATING FACILITIES. [Ord. No. 2011-64]
The following sections shall be amended to added to read as follows:
SEC. 602.2 RESIDENTIAL OCCUPANCIES.
Dwellings shall be provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining
a room temperature of 68° F. (20° C.) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms
and toilet rooms based on the winter outdoor design temperature for the
locality. Cooking appliance and/or portable space heating appliances shall
not be used to provided space heating to meet the requirements of this
section. [Ord. No. 2011-64]
SEC. 602.3 HEAT SUPPLY.
Insert the following dates into the locations:
§ 45-201 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 45-201
1:2002
"... from October 1st. to May 31st. to maintain..." [Ord. No. 2011-64]
SEC. 602.4 OCCUPIABLE WORK SPACES.
Insert the following dates into the locations:
"...from October 1st. to May 31st. to maintain..." [Ord. No. 2011-64]
SEC. 704.5 CARBON MONOXIDE DETECTORS.
Carbon monoxide detectors shall be installed and maintained in all
residential occupancies within 15 feet of every room used for sleeping
purposes in buildings that rely on combustion of fossil fuel for heat,
cooking, ventilation or hot water, or that are directly connected to a
garage. [Ord. No. 2019-14]
SECTION 900.0 RENTAL PROPERTY INSPECTION
SEC. 900.1 PURPOSE.
To maintain the City's rental housing stock by enforcement of property
maintenance, life safety and health codes, "applicable codes," through
periodic building inspections and annual registration. [Ord. No. 2003-72]
SEC. 900.2 DEFINITIONS.
For purposes of this Section 900, the following definitions shall apply:
(a) Acceptable Building: A building that is free of life, safety or health
code violations that pose a threat to tenants or the public, or a
building having few or no property maintenance code violations. This
definition shall also include new buildings. [Ord. No. 2013-79]
(b) New Building: A recently constructed or rehabilitated building that
has received a certificate of occupancy from the Department of
Community Development in the past year. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
(c) Owner: Any person, agent, operator, firm, limited liability company or
corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or
recorded in the official records of the state, county or municipality as
holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the
property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and
the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered
to take possession of real property by a court. [Ord. No. 2013-79]
(d) Residential Rental Units: Any unit in an apartment house, duplex,
condominium or a single family home that is rented or available for
rent located in the City of Bloomington. [Ord. No. 2013-79]
(e) Rent: The consideration, including any payment, deposit, benefit,
service, bonus or gratuity, bargained for, demanded, accepted or
received by an owner for or in exchange for the use or occupancy of a
residential rental unit. [Ord. No. 2013-79]
(f) Rental Inspection Pool: A group of buildings containing residential
rental units subject to periodic, systemic inspection. The pool shall
consist of buildings in one or more of the following categories:
(1)Buildings having a rental inspection program rating of B, C or D upon
the date of the passage of this ordinance; or
§ 45-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 45-201
1:2003
(2)Buildings given an unacceptable rating as defined in this section; or
(3)Buildings that are the subject of substantiated complaints involving
one or more life, health or safety related code violations that pose a
threat to tenants or the public, involving numerous, less serious
property maintenance code violations; or
(4)Buildings converted to rental units, other than new buildings. [Ord.
No. 2013-79]
(g) Unacceptable Building: A building having one or more code violations
that pose a threat to the life, health or safety of tenants or the public,
or a building with numerous property maintenance code violations.
[Ord. No. 2013-79]
SEC. 900.3 REGISTRATION.
(a) Except as otherwise provided in this section, every owner of a building
containing residential rental units, vacant or occupied, shall file
annually a registration statement with the Department of Community
Development on forms provided by the Department. Registration
periods are concurrent with the calendar year, beginning on January 1
and ending on December 31. Registration statements must be filed
prior to January 1 of the year for which registration is sought, unless
registration of a building is transferred, in which case the new owner
is required to register within 30 days of said transfer as provided in
paragraph (e) of this section. Owners who fail to register rental
property as required herein, or as provided in paragraph (e) of this
section, shall be subject to a fine of not less than $50, nor more than
$500 for each day the building remains unregistered, regardless of
whether the building is occupied. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
(b) An owner of a single family residence will be exempted from this
requirement for a particular building if the owner files a sworn
statement with the City of Bloomington attesting to its status as an
owner-occupied building or its status as a vacant building that is not
intended to be rented. [Ord. No. 2005-112]
(c) Once a single family home is registered as a rental, it must be
registered every year unless occupied by the owner or vacated and the
owner does not intend to rent the single family home. A sworn
statement by the owner must be filed with the City of Bloomington
attesting to its status as an owner-occupied single family home or its
status as a vacant single family home that is not intended to be rented.
Any outstanding violations may be recorded with the McLean County
Recorder of Deeds. [Ord. No. 2013-79]
(d) The provisions of this section shall not apply to the following:
(1)Owner occupied single family homes and that portion of a duplex or
multifamily structure occupied by the owner.
(2)Condominiums (owner/occupied only).
(3)Hotels and Motels as defined in Chapter 44, § 44-1609.
(4)Nursing Homes as defined in Chapter 44, § 44-1615.
§ 45-201 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 45-201
1:2004
(5)Housing operated by the Bloomington Housing Authority.
(6)Rooming houses as defined in Chapter 44, § 44-1619.
(7)Bed-and-breakfast establishments as defined in Chapter 44, § 44-1603.
(8)Community reception establishments as defined in Chapter 44,
§ 44-1604. [Ord. No. 2005-112]
(9)Contract sales of single family residential structures provided that
such contract or a Memorandum of Contract is recorded with the
McLean County Recorder and that a copy of the contract for deed or
Memorandum of Contract is provided to the Department of
Community Development. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
(e) Transfer of ownership. Registration is not transferable. All buildings
must be registered and the registration fee paid by the new owner
within 30 days of transfer of ownership. New owners who fail to
register as required by this paragraph shall, after the thirty-day grace
period, be considered to have failed to register and, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than $50, nor more than $500,
for each day beyond the grace period the building remains
unregistered, regardless of whether the building is occupied. [Ord.
No. 2008-67]
(f) Information Required. The registration statement shall include:
1. The address of the building.
2. The type of building and number of units and addresses for each unit,
e.g. "1," "A," "upper."
3. The name, street address, mailing address, and telephone number of
the owner of the building.
4. If the owner of the building is not an individual or a partnership, but is
a corporation, limited liability company, land trust or other legal entity,
the registration statement shall contain the name, street address, and
mailing address of the registered agent or trustee. If this information
is not included on the registration statement, it will not be considered
complete and the owner may be subject to penalties as provided in
this section.
5. The name, street address, mailing address and telephone number of
the person preparing the registration statement and a certification by
that persons that the information on said statement is true and correct
to the best of that person's information, knowledge and belief. Any
registration statement that lacks this certification will be considered
incomplete and the owner may be subject to penalties for failure to
register the property as provided in this section.
6. The name of any buyer on a contract for deed. A copy of the contract
shall be provided to the Department of Community Development.
[Ord. No. 2017-96]
§ 45-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 45-201
1:2005
(g) The Director of Community Development may, at any time, require
additional relevant information of the owner or owner's agent to
clarify items on the application for registration statement. [Ord. No.
2017-96]
(h) Owners required to register shall pay a fee for each registration as
provided in Section 900.13. Registration statements will not be
considered completed unless accompanied by the required fee.
Registrations filed after March 1st shall be assessed a late filing fee in
the amount provided in Section 900.13 in addition to any other fines
or penalties provided in this section. [Ord. No. 2013-79]
(i) All registration statements must be signed by a person who is either
the owner of the property or a person acting with authority from the
owner in matters related to the maintenance and control of the
property. The person signing the form certifies:
1. That they have personal knowledge that the statements contained in
the form are true and correct.
2. That they are either the owner of the property or a person acting with
direct authority from the owner in matters pertaining to the control
and maintenance of the property. [Ord. No. 2013-79]
(j) Any person who provides false information on the registration
statement shall be subject to a fine of not less than $500 nor more
than $1,000 for each false statement made on the registration
application in addition to the fees provided in Section 900.13. [Ord.
No. 2013-79]
SEC. 900.4 INSPECTION.
(a) All buildings in the rental inspection pool as defined in Section
900.2(f) shall be inspected to determine if they comply with all
applicable codes. Based upon the inspection, each building will be
rated as acceptable or unacceptable as those terms are defined in
Sections 900.2(a) and (g), respectively.
(b) Buildings in the rental inspection pool shall be inspected on a rotating
basis, prioritizing for inspection those buildings that have not received
a rental inspection for the greatest length of time. Notwithstanding
the rotating nature of the rental inspection pool, a building may be
inspected earlier than its place in the rotation if the Director of
Community Development certifies that, based upon the number and/or
serious nature of code complaints pertaining to a building, inspection
is necessary to protect the life, health or safety of tenants or the
public. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
(c) Nothing in this Section 900 shall be construed to prevent the
Department of Community Development from responding to property
maintenance complaints received by the department as they pertain to
a particular building or premises. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
SEC. 900.5 INSPECTION NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.
§ 45-201 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 45-201
1:2006
(a) The code official shall send notice of the date and time that the
inspection of a building listed in the rental inspection pool is to take
place to the Owner or Owner's Agent at least 15 days prior to the
scheduled inspection date. [Ord. No. 2013-79]
(b) Upon receipt of the notice of inspection, the owner or owner's agent
will have 10 business days to contact the code official to reschedule
the inspection. The maximum extension allowed shall be 10 business
days from the date specified on the original inspection notice. Failure
to appear at a rental inspection shall subject the owner, owner's
agent, or both, to penalties as provided in Section 900.7 of this
section. [Ord. No. 2013-79]
(c) Notices shall be mailed to the business address provided on the
registration statement. The owner of a building is responsible for
notifying the Department of Community Development of any and all
changes of address pertaining to the registration of a building. [Ord.
No. 2017-96]
(d) Notices of Inspection shall advise the owner/tenant of his or her right
to refuse inspection of the building and the City's right to seek the
issuance of an administrative search warrant in the event of any such
refusal. No inspection of an occupied building shall occur without the
consent of the tenant/occupant unless an administrative search
warrant is obtained. [Ord. No. 2013-79]
(e) The owner, or owner's agent will be notified of inspection results and
whether the building has been classified as an acceptable or
unacceptable building within five business days of the inspection.
Inspection results will be in the form provided in Chapter 45, Section
107.2 with the additional requirement that they shall include the
amount of fines applicable to all code violations noted in the results in
the event said violations are not remedied in the time provided in the
report of inspection results. [Ord. No. 2013-79]
SEC. 900.6 OWNER'S RESPONSIBILITIES FOR INSPECTION.
(a) It shall be the responsibility of the owner, the owner's agent or the
occupant to be present at the time scheduled for a rental inspection in
order to provide access for the inspection. [Ord. No. 2013-79]
(b) Access is required for all units in a building at the scheduled time of
inspection. Failure to grant full access to the building at the scheduled
time of the inspection may be deemed a refusal of the inspection and
the City may apply to the Circuit Court for an administrative search
warrant. Failure to grant full access to the building at the time of
inspection shall also subject the owner to a fine for missed inspection
as provided in Section 900.7 of this section. [Ord. No. 2013-79]
(c) Any owner who fails to register a building as required by Section
900.3 shall be deemed to consent to receive by posting at the building
any and all notices of code violations concerning the building. [Ord.
No. 2013-79]
§ 45-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 45-201
1:2007
(d) Owners or their Agents shall contact the City at least seven business
days prior to a scheduled inspection if they are unable to obtain their
tenants' consent to the inspection. Failure to do so will be considered
a missed inspection and shall subject the owner, owner's agent, or
both to penalties as provided in Section 900.7. [Ord. No. 2013-79]
SEC. 900.7 PENALTIES.
(a) Every day that any building required to be registered by Section 900.3
remains unregistered shall constitute a separate offense and shall,
upon conviction thereof, subject the owner, owner's agent, or both to a
fine of not less than $50 nor more than $500 per day. [Ord. No.
2013-79]
(b) Any person who provides false information on a registration statement
shall be subject to a fine of not less than $500 nor more than $1,000
for each false statement. [Ord. No. 2013-79]
(c) Any owner or owner's agent found to have missed an inspection as set
forth in Section 900.6 shall be subject to a fine of not less than $250
nor more than $500 for each offense. [Ord. No. 2013-79]
SEC. 900.8 ASSESSMENT OF PENALTIES ON PAST DUE ACCOUNTS.
Any fees, debts, accounts receivable or other payments due to the
Department of Community Development which remain unpaid for more
than 30 days after the due date set forth in the first demand for payment
sent by the City to the debtor, shall have an interest penalty of 10%
per month assessed on the unpaid principal of such fee, debt, account
receivable or other payment. These penalties may be waived, reduced, or
otherwise settled by the Director of Community Development. [Ord. No.
2017-96]
SEC. 900.9 APPEAL PROCESS.
An owner or other person aggrieved by any action taken by the City
pursuant to this section may appeal the decision before the Property
Maintenance Review Board as provided in Chapter 45, Section 1000.0 et
seq. [Ord. No. 2013-79]
SEC. 900.10 SEVERABILITY.
If any section, subsection, paragraphs, sentence, clause or word of this
ordinance shall be held to be invalid, either on its face or as applied, the
invalidity of such provision shall not affect the other sections, subsections,
paragraph, sentences, clauses or words of this ordinance, and the
application thereof; and to that end the sections, subsections, paragraph,
sentences, clauses, and words of this section shall be deemed severable.
[Ord. No. 2013-79]
SEC. 900.11 ENFORCEMENT.
(a) The Director of Community Development or his or her designee shall
enforce the provisions of this section and, in addition to any other
remedies provided by law, may apply to the Corporation Counsel for
prosecution of owners who fail to comply. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
§ 45-201 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 45-201
1:2008
(b) The code official may refuse to issue any permit required under the
Code for any construction, alteration, installation, razing or other
work done in or on any building covered by this section, unless the
owner or other applicant for such permit has a current registration
statement on file with the City. [Ord. No. 2013-79]
(c) The code official may refuse to issue any permit required under the
Code for construction, alteration, installation, razing or other work
done in or on any building containing rental units for which fines
pertaining to Code violations remain unpaid until the total amount of
said fines, together with any court costs, as well as any unpaid
accounts or bills for water service or other City services to said
building are paid in full. [Ord. No. 2013-79]
SEC. 900.12 OTHER REMEDIES.
Nothing in this section shall prevent the City from taking action under any
applicable City code or ordinance for any violation thereof or limit the right
or authority of the City to seek injunctive relief or other appropriate legal
remedy for any violation of such code or ordinance. [Ord. No. 2013-79]
SEC. 900.13 FEES.
(a) The City shall assess the fees, as set forth in the Schedule of Fees, for
registrations and inspections required by this section [Ord. No.
2018-89].
(b) Any fees due and owing shall be added to the yearly registration fee
and must be paid in full at the time of registration. [Ord. No.
2013-79]
SEC. 1000.0 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE REVIEW BOARD.
SEC. 1000.1 PURPOSE.
The Property Maintenance Review Board is hereby established:
1. To conduct public hearings and decide duly initiated appeals from any
order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Director
of Community Development or code enforcement officials in the
enforcement of Chapter 45 of the Bloomington City Code. Appeals
should be based on the grounds that:
(a)The true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder
have been incorrectly interpreted;
(b)The provisions of this chapter 45 do not fully apply; or
(c)The requirements of this code are fully satisfied by other means.
2. Interpretation of the Property Maintenance Code, Chapter 45 of the
City Code and related amendments.
3. The making of recommendations to the City Council concerning
amendments to the Property Maintenance Code, Chapter 45. [Ord. No.
2017-96]
SEC. 1000.2 MEANS OF APPEAL.
§ 45-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 45-201
1:2009
1. Any person directly affected by a decision of the code official or a
notice or order issued under Chapter 45 of the City Code shall have
the right to appeal, provided that a written application for the appeal
is filed within 15 days after the day the decision, notice or order was
served. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true
intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been
incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or
the requirements of this code are fully satisfied by other means.
2. Applications for an appeal shall be accompanied by a filing fee of $100.
[Ord. No. 2011-06]
SEC. 1000.3 MEMBERSHIP OF BOARD.
1. The Property Maintenance Review Board shall consist of seven
members who are qualified by experience, education and/or training
to pass on matters pertaining to property maintenance and who are
not employees of the jurisdiction. The code official shall be an exofficio
member but shall have no vote on any matter before the Board.
The Board shall be appointed by the Mayor and ratified by the City
Council for three-year terms. This term may be extended after the
three years for no more than two additional three-year terms.
Members of the Board shall serve no more than three consecutive
three-year terms (a total of nine years). [Ord. No. 2014-04]
2. Except as provided in Subsection (b), all Board members must be
residents of the City of Bloomington. Board membership shall be as
follows: [Ord. No. 2014-04]
(a)Two contractors in good standing experienced in general construction,
remodeling and/or property maintenance. No person named to the
Board as a contractor shall, during the term of his or her membership,
also have an ownership, management, or tenant interest in rental
property. [Ord. No. 2014-04]
(b)Two landlords in good standing owning rental property within the City
of Bloomington, of which one may reside outside the corporate limits
of the City. One landlord member shall be named from each of the
following categories:
(i) Small - owning not more than 12 units;
(iLi)arge - owning more than 12 units.
(c)Two tenants, leasing and residing in dwelling units located within the
corporate limits of the City of Bloomington.
(d)One at-large citizen of the City of Bloomington.
(e)Disqualification of member - A member shall not hear an appeal in
which that member has a personal, professional or financial interest.
A member shall resign, or shall be removed from the Board by the
Mayor, if that member no longer meets the prescribed standards and
requirements of this section. [Ord. No. 2014-04]
(f)Chairman - The Board shall annually select one of its members to serve
as Chairman. [Ord. No. 2014-04]
§ 45-201 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 45-201
1:2010
(g)Alternate members - The Mayor shall appoint four alternate members
who, following ratification of their appointment by the City Council,
shall be called by the Board Chairman to hear appeals during the
absence or disqualification of a member. All alternate members shall
possess the qualifications required for Board membership. One
alternate Board member shall be named for each category of
membership described in paragraphs (a) through (d) of this section.
[Ord. No. 2014-04]
SEC. 1000.4 SECRETARY. The Director of Community Development shall
designate a qualified person to serve as secretary to the Board. The
secretary shall file a detailed record of all proceedings in the office of the
City Clerk. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
SEC. 1000.5 NOTICE OF MEETINGS.
1. The Board shall meet quarterly, upon notice from the Chairman, or
within 20 days of the filing of an appeal.
2. Legal notice of an administrative public hearing shall be given not less
than three days before the hearing.
3. Courtesy notices may be given by posting the property affected with a
sign indicating that a property maintenance action is pending affecting
the property and that additional information may be obtained from the
Department of Community Development. Courtesy notices may also
be given by mailing notice to the residents or tenants of any building
or complex directly affected by the appeal, or by mailing notice to
owners of properties adjoining or adjacent to the property subject to
the appeal. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
SEC. 1000.6 PROCEDURE.
1. All hearings before the Board shall be open to the public. The appellant,
the appellant's representative, the code official and any person whose
interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard.
2. The Secretary of the Board may, at the request of the code official,
the appellant or his attorney, issue subpoenas directing witnesses to
appear and give testimony at the hearing. Persons who fail to appear
at a hearing after having been served with a subpoena shall be fined
by the Board in an amount not to exceed $500. If such person fails
to pay such fine within 30 days of being served notice thereof, and/
or continues to fail to appear at a hearing which has been continued,
the Board shall have the authority to obtain injunctive relief from the
courts to compel the payment of the fine and the attendance of such
witness.
3. The Board shall adopt and make available to the public procedures
under which hearings will be conducted. The procedures shall not
require compliance with strict rules of evidence, but shall mandate that
only relevant information be received.
§ 45-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 45-201
1:2011
4. If, on the date set for hearing, the appellant or his attorney fails to
appear, the Board may find the appellant in default and shall proceed
with the hearing and accept evidence relevant to the appeal. [Ord. No.
2011-06]
SEC. 1000.7 TRANSCRIPTS, RECORDS AND COPIES.
1. In the event that any party desires a verbatim transcript of the
administrative public hearing, a written request shall be filed with
the Chairman of the Property Maintenance Review Board not less
than three weeks before the hearing date. Costs of taking such a
transcript shall be shared equally between the requesting party and the
City. Any party desiring a transcript of the proceedings shall pay any
transcription or copying costs.
2. The Board shall make a sound recording of all public hearings and shall
retain such recording for not less than six months following the closing
of the hearing. [Ord. No. 2011-06]
SEC. 1000.8 BOARD DECISIONS.
1. The Board shall modify or reverse the decision of the code official only
upon a concurring vote of a majority of the total number of appointed
regular board members. The vote of an alternate board member shall
be counted only in the event that member attends a hearing at the
request of the Chairman and shall be counted in lieu of the vote of the
regular member in whose place he has attended.
2. Records and copies. The decision of the Board shall be recorded.
Copies shall be furnished to the appellant and to the code official. The
Property Maintenance Review Board shall retain in the office of the
City Clerk a copy of every rule, decision or determination made by the
Board. [Ord. No. 2011-06]
SEC. 1000.9 NOTIFICATION OF DECISION. Copies of findings and
decisions of the Board shall be served by mailing a copy thereof to all
parties. [Ord. No. 2011-06]
SEC. 1000.10 COURT REVIEW. All decisions of the Property Maintenance
Review Board on appeals initiated hereunder shall be appealable to the
courts in the manner provided by law. Application for review shall be made
in the manner and time required by law following the filing of the decision
in the office of the City Clerk. [Ord. No. 2011-06]
SEC. 1000.11 STAYS OF ENFORCEMENT. Appeals of notices and orders
(other than Imminent Danger and condemnation notices) shall stay the
enforcement of the notice and order until the appeal is heard by the
appeals board. [Ord. No. 2011-06]
§ 45-201 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 45-201
1:2012
ARTICLE III
Neighborhood Preservation
§ 45-301. [Ch. 45, Sec. 1100.1] Title and scope of article. [Ord. No.
2011-14]
This article shall be known as the "Neighborhood Preservation Ordinance"
and shall apply to all derelict buildings and premises thereof in the City of
Bloomington now existing or hereafter becoming derelict.
§ 45-302. [Ch. 45, Sec. 1100.2] Intent. [Ord. No. 2011-14]
It is the intent of this article to protect the public health, safety, and welfare
by establishing a registration process for derelict buildings and requiring
responsible parties to implement a maintenance plan for such buildings
to prevent deterioration, unsightly blight and consequent adverse impact
on adjacent property and neighborhoods. This article shall be liberally
construed to effect its purposes.
§ 45-303. [Ch. 45, Sec. 1100.3] Effect on other laws. [Ord. No.
2011-14]
This article shall not be construed to limit or prevent the enforcement of
other laws, codes, ordinances or regulations. In the event of conflict, the
provision setting the highest standard for health and safety shall prevail.
§ 45-304. [Ch. 45, Sec. 1100.4] Definitions.
BUILDING — A structure built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of
people, animals, chattels, or movable property of any kind and which is
permanently affixed to the ground.
DERELICT BUILDING — A building that is:
DIRECTOR OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT — As used herein, shall refer
to the Director of Community Development, or to his or her designee.[Ord.
No. 2017-96]
A. Condemned; or
B. Unoccupied and unsecured for five days or more; or
Unoccupied and unsecured by means other than those normally used
in the design of buildings of similar structure or design for 30 days or
more; this includes buildings whose doors, windows, or other openings
are boarded up; or
C.
Unoccupied and having more than two property maintenance, fire or
building code violations existing for 30 days or more; or
D.
Unoccupied for more than 90 days and during which time an order
has been issued to correct one or more code violations or to abate a
nuisance. [Ord. No. 2011-14]
E.
§ 45-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 45-304
1:2013
OWNER — Any person, agent, operator, firm, corporation, limited liability
company or other entity having a legal or equitable interest in the property,
or holding a mortgage on the property, or recorded in the official records
of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or
otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the
estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate
of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land including the buildings or
structures thereon.
UNOCCUPIED — No person or persons actually, currently conduct a
lawfully licensed business, or lawfully reside or live in any part of the
building as the legal or equitable owner(s) or tenant(s).
§ 45-305. [Ch. 45, Sec. 1100.5 ] Obligation to register derelict
buildings.
A. Any owner of a derelict building as defined in § 45-304 of this Ordinance
shall register such building as a derelict building and submit a derelict
building plan. The derelict building registration and plan shall be filed
with the Department of Community Development, together with a
registration fee of in an amount as set forth in the Schedule of Fees.
Registration of a derelict building shall be valid for a period of one year
from the date of registration. If the building remains derelict at the
expiration of any registration period, the owner shall renew registration
of such building and pay a fee as set forth in the Schedule of Fees. Each
subsequent annual registration for said building shall be assessed a
registration fee as set forth in the Schedule of Fees. All fees provided
for in this section are in addition to any other fees, fines or penalties
provided for by the ordinances of the City of Bloomington, State or
Federal law. [Ord. No. 2018-89]
B. Notification of derelict building status. If the Director of Community
Development or code official designated by the Director determines
that a building is derelict within the meaning of § 45-304 of this
Ordinance, the Director or enforcement official shall provide notice to
the last known owner by letter sent by first class mail requesting the
owner of the building to register the building and submit a derelict
building plan. Such notice shall state the reasons for determination of
derelict building status. If the owner's address cannot be determined
upon due inquiry, notice may be posted upon the building. The owner of
such building shall, within 10 days of notification, register such building
as a derelict building and submit a derelict building plan to the
Department of Community Development. In lieu of registration, the
owner may, within 10 days of notification, remedy the reasons for
determination of derelict building status specified in the notice and
arrange for an inspection by the Department of Community
Development for verification. Notification shall have been deemed to
have been received within four days of the mailing and/or posting of the
notification of derelict building status. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
§ 45-304 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 45-305
1:2014
§ 45-306. [Ch. 45, Sec. 1100.6 ] Required registration information.
The owner registering a derelict building shall supply the following
information:
C. If more than 14 days elapse from the day notice of derelict building
status is mailed and/or posted and the building remains unregistered,
the Director of Community Development may:
(1) Apply through the Legal Department for an administrative search
warrant allowing inspection of the premises to determine the
condition of the property;
(2) Abate any nuisance or City code violations existing on the premises
and place a lien for the cost of such abatement on the property;
(3) Apply to the Circuit Clerk through the Legal Department for a
judgment, injunctive or other appropriate relief. [Ord. No.
2017-96]
A. The common description (street address), legal description and tax
parcel identification number of the premises on which the derelict
building is situated.
B. _____
(1) The names and physical addresses of all owners of the property;
(no post office box address will be acceptable in lieu of required
physical addresses); or
(2) If the property is owned by a corporation, partnership, limited
liability company, land trust or other business entity, the
registering owner or agent must provide the name, physical
address and telephone number of an agent, authorized to accept
service of process and residing in McLean County, Illinois.
C. The name, physical address and telephone number of a person
maintaining a work or residential address in McLean County authorized
to act in control of the property in matters of maintenance and who may
be contacted in case of emergency.
D. The date on which the building became derelict.
E. A derelict building plan, as described in § 45-308 of this Ordinance.
F. The name, street address, mailing address and telephone number of the
person preparing the registration statement and a certification by that
person that the information on said statement is true and correct to the
best of that person's information, knowledge and belief.
G. The person signing the registration form must certify that they are
either the owner of the property or a person acting with direct authority
§ 45-305 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 45-306
1:2015
§ 45-307. [Ch. 45, Sec. 1100.7] Requirements of owners, agents and
other responsible parties.
Owners, agents and other responsible parties are required:
§ 45-308. [Ch. 45, Sec. 1100.8 ] Derelict building plan.
When a derelict building is registered as required herein, the owner or
agent shall submit a derelict building plan. The plan shall contain the
following:
from the owner in matters pertaining to the registration, control and
maintenance of the property.
H. Any registration lacking the information required by this section will
not be considered complete and will not be accepted for purposes of
derelict building registration. An owner who fails to provide the
information required by this section shall be deemed to have failed to
register and be subject to fines as provided in § 45-310 of this article.
I. Any owner required to register a property must report any change of
information required on the registration within 10 days after the
change. Failure to report changes as required by this subsection will be
punishable by a fine as provided in § 45-310 of this article.
J. Statements made on the registration form shall be accepted as prima
facie true and correct in any administrative or court proceeding. [Ord.
No. 2011-14]
A. To register derelict properties as required by this article and to report
any change of information required on the registration within 10 days
after the change;
B. To obtain and maintain general liability insurance in an amount not less
than $300,000 for buildings designed primarily for residential use
containing not more than four dwelling units, and not less than
$1,000,000 for any other building.
C. To maintain properties in compliance with all applicable provisions of
the Bloomington City Code, State and Federal law.
D. To repair and maintain any doors, windows, or other openings and to
secure all openings by conventional methods used in the design of the
building or by methods permitted for new construction of similar type.
E. To place upon the front door of the building, in a legible, weatherproof
format, the name and contact information of a responsible party
maintaining a work or residential address in McLean County who may
be contacted in case of emergency. [Ord. No. 2011-14]
A. A plan of action to repair any doors, windows, or other openings which
are boarded up or otherwise secured by any means other than
§ 45-306 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 45-308
1:2016
§ 45-309. [Ch. 45, Sec. 1100.9 ] Approval of plan.
conventional methods used in the design of the building or permitted
for new construction of similar type.
B. A plan for the continued care, maintenance and upkeep of the premises
and any building, or structure located upon it.
C. A timetable for repair, return to occupancy, sale or demolition of the
building.
D. A specific date for the abatement of any nuisance existing in or on the
premises. [Ord. No. 2011-14]
A. The Director of Community Development shall have discretion to
approve, deny or modify the proposed derelict building plan, subject to
the right to appeal as described in Subsection B of this section. Notice
will be sent to the owner or owner's agent of the approval, rejection or
modification of the plan.
(1) In considering the appropriateness of a derelict building plan, the
following factors shall be considered:
(a) The purposes of this article and the intent of the City Council to
minimize the period of time a building is boarded up or
otherwise derelict.
(b) The effect of the proposed plan on adjoining property.
(c) The general economic conditions of the community.
(d) The cost to implement the proposed plan.
(e) The length of time the building has been derelict.
(f) The presence of any public nuisance on the property as defined
in Chapter 21, § 21-204.
(g) The relative hardship on or gain to the neighborhood or public,
as compared to the hardship or gain of the owner resulting
from approval or modification of the proposed plan.
B. The Director of Community Development shall, upon notice to the
derelict building owner or owner's agent, have the right to modify the
plan by altering the dates of performance or the proposed methods of
action. If the owner of the building objects to the modifications made by
the Director, such owner shall have the right to appeal to the City of
Bloomington Property Maintenance Review Board for final
determination in accordance with the standards set forth in § 45-309A.
Such appeal shall be filed with the Director of Community Development
within 15 days of the date of receipt of the Director's notice of
modification or denial. The notice shall be deemed received four days
§ 45-308 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 45-309
1:2017
§ 45-310. [Ch. 45, Sec. 1100.10 ] Penalties.
§ 45-311. [Ch. 45, Sec. 1100.11 ] Change of ownership. [Ord. No.
2017-96]
The derelict building plan shall remain in effect notwithstanding a change
in ownership. The new owner is required to file a new registration with the
after having been mailed to an address listed as the owner's address on
the building registration form.
C. The Property Maintenance Review Board, after considering the
testimony and evidence presented, shall render its decision on the
owner's appeal of the Director of Community Development's proposed
modifications of the derelict building plan. The Property Maintenance
Review Board shall have the authority to fashion its own derelict
building plan or approve the plan submitted by the owner or the
modified plan submitted by the Director. The decision of the Property
Maintenance Review Board shall be final and constitute the derelict
building plan. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
A. Violation of any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be deemed a
strict liability offense and shall subject the violator to penalties as
provided herein.
B. Failure to register a derelict building within 10 days of notification as
required by this Ordinance shall be punishable as an ordinance
violation with a fine of $50 to $500 per day in addition to any other fees,
fines or penalties provided by law.
C. Any person who provides false information on a registration statement
shall be subject to a fine of not less than $250 nor more than $1,000 for
each false statement made.
D. Failure to comply with the requirements of the derelict building plan as
approved by the Director of Community Development or modified by
the Property Maintenance Board of Review, shall constitute a violation
of this article and shall subject the owner to a fine of from $50 to $500
per day in addition to any other fees, fines or penalties provided by law.
E. Failure to comply with any of the requirements of § 45-307 of this
Ordinance shall subject the owner, agent or other responsible party to a
fine of $50 to $500 per day. Each violation shall be deemed a separate
offense. Each day any violation continues shall also be deemed a
separate offense.
F. The City of Bloomington may file in the Circuit Court of McLean County
to recover unpaid fees, fines and costs associated with the registration
and maintenance of derelict buildings. The City may also file a lien on
the property on which a derelict building is located for unpaid fees,
fines and costs associated with the registration and maintenance of a
derelict building. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
§ 45-309 BLOOMINGTON CODE § 45-311
1:2018
Department of Community Development and supply the name, address and
telephone number of the new owners within 30 days of acquiring title to the
premises.
§ 45-312. [Ch. 45, Sec. 1100.12 ] Removal of derelict building
status. [Ord. No. 2017-96]
In order to obtain removal of a building from the derelict building registry,
the owner or agent for said property shall contact the Department of
Community Development in order to request the change in status and
arrange for inspection of the property to occur prior to occupancy. If, after
inspection, the Department determines the property no longer falls within
the definition of derelict building as defined in § 45-304 of this Ordinance,
the property shall be removed from the registry of derelict buildings.
§ 45-311 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 45-312
1:2019