6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 1/396
PREFACE
This City Code of the City of Clinton, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to and including
ordinance 1474, passed March 5, 2018. Ordinances of the City adopted after said ordinance
supersede the provisions of this City Code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent
therewith. Consult the City office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the Code has
been amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
ORDINANCE NO. 260
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE CITY CODE OF CLINTON, ILLINOIS
BE IT ORDAINED by the mayor and city council of the city of Clinton, Illinois, an Illinois municipal
corporation:
Section 1: From and after the date of passage of this ordinance, the city code of the city of Clinton,
Illinois, prepared by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., containing the compilation of all ordinances of a general
nature together with the changes made to said ordinances, under the direction of the governing body
of the city, shall be accepted in all courts without question as the official code and law of the city as
enacted by the mayor and city council.
Section 2: There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification, the loose-leaf type of
binding together with the continuous supplement service, provided by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., whereby
each newly adopted ordinance of a general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding or
deleting provisions of the official city code is identified by the proper catchline and is inserted in the
proper place in each of the official copies, three (3) copies of which shall be maintained in the office of
the city clerk, certified as to correctness and available for inspection at any and all times that said
office is regularly open.
Section 3: All ordinances of a general nature included in this official city code shall be considered as
a continuation of said ordinance provision and the fact that some provisions have been deliberately
eliminated by the governing body shall not serve to cause any interruption in the continuous
effectiveness of ordinances included in said official city code. All ordinances of a special nature, such
as tax levy ordinances, bond ordinances, franchises, vacating ordinances and annexation ordinances
shall continue in full force and effect unless specifically repealed or amended by a provision of the city
code. Such ordinances are not intended to be included in the official city code.
Section 4: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to change or amend by additions or
deletions, any part or portion of such code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter
or tamper with such code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be
misrepresented thereby.
Any person, firm or corporation violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-4-1 of
the city code of Clinton, Illinois.
Section 5: All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are, to the extent of such conflict,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 2/396
hereby repealed.
Section 6: This ordinance and the code adopted by the same shall be in full force and effect from and
after its passage and approval in accordance with law, as printed and published in book form by order
of the mayor and city council.
I, Rozella D. Wickenhauser, city clerk of the city of Clinton, Illinois do hereby certify that ordinance no. 260 is a
true and correct copy of an ordinance adopted by the city council of the city of Clinton, Illinois at a meeting held
on July 8, 1983 and said ordinance is now in full force and effect and has not been in any way altered, amended,
rescinded or modified.
In witness hereof, I have hereunto set may hand and affixed the seal of this office this 13th day of July 1983.
Title 1
ADMINISTRATIVE
Chapter 1
OFFICIAL CITY CODE
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon adoption by the city council, this city code is hereby declared to be and shall hereafter constitute
the official city code of the city of Clinton. This city code of ordinances shall be known and cited as the
CLINTON CITY CODE, and it is hereby published by authority of the council and shall be kept up to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 3/396
date as provided in section 1-1-3 of this chapter. Any reference to the number of any section
contained herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its appropriate
chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause, relating thereto, as well as to the section
itself, when reference is made to this city code by title in any legal documents. (1983 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
The city code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received without further proof in
all courts and in all administrative tribunals of this state as the ordinances of the city of general and
permanent effect, except the excluded ordinances enumerated in section 1-2-1 of this code. (1983
Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending the city code shall set forth the title, chapter and section number of the
section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory
requirement pertaining to the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this city code. All
such amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the codifiers and the
said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in its proper place in each copy of this city
code. Each such replacement page shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual
copy of the city code. (1983 Code)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATION:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface in any way any section
or any page of this city code in such a manner that the meaning of any phrase or order may be
changed or omitted. Replacement pages may be inserted according to the official instructions when so
authorized by the city council. The clerk shall see that the replacement pages are properly inserted in
the official copies maintained in the office of the clerk. Any person having in his custody an official
copy of the city code shall make every effort to maintain said code in an up to date and efficient
manner. He shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are
delivered to him or made available to him through the office of the city clerk. Said code books, while in
actual possession of officials and other interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the city
and shall be returned to the office of the clerk when directed so to do by order of the city council.
(1983 Code)
Chapter 2
SAVING CLAUSE
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the city passed prior to the adoption of this city code are hereby repealed,
except such as are included in this city code or are by necessary implication herein reserved from
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 4/396
repeal (subject to the saving clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances
relating to boundaries and annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special
rights to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or vacating
streets, alleys or other public places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating
to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the city; and all
special ordinances. (1983 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways, or relating to the
conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this city
code or by virtue of the preceding section, excepting as this city code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case this city code shall be considered as amending such ordinance or ordinances
in respect to such provisions only. (1983 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance whether such former
ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense committed against such former ordinance or
as to any act done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim
arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense or act so
committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred or any right accrued or
claim arising before the new ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall
conform to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable, if any penalty,
forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by
consent of the party affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in
the ordinance making any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as abating any action now pending under or by
virtue of any general ordinance of the city herein repealed, and the provisions of all general
ordinances contained in this code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new
enactment of the same provision; nor shall this chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating,
modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm
or corporation, or as waiving any right of the city under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at
the time of the adoption of this city code. (1983 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this city code or any
part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining
portions of this code, or any part thereof. The city council hereby declares that it would have passed
each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of
the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 5/396
phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (1983 Code)
Chapter 3
DEFINITIONS
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
Whenever any word in any section of this city code importing the plural number is used in describing
or referring to any matters, parties or persons, any single matter, party or person shall be deemed to
be included, although distributive words may not have been used.
When any subject matter, party or person is referred to in this city code by words importing the
singular number only, or the masculine gender, several matters, parties or persons and females as
well as males and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included; provided, that these rules of
construction shall not be applied to any section of this city code which contains any express provision
excluding such construction or where the subject matter or context may be repugnant thereto.
The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the city has been changed in the content of this
city code to "title", "chapter", "section" and/or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational
and clarification purposes only. Such change to the city's ordinances is not meant to amend passage
and effective dates of such original ordinances. (1983 Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code, they shall have such meanings herein
ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another.
CITY: The city of Clinton, county of DeWitt, state of Illinois.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made to a city employee by title only, this shall be construed as
though followed by the words "of the city of Clinton", and shall be taken to mean the employee of this
city having the title mentioned or performing the duties indicated.
FEE: A sum of money charged by the city for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.
MISDEMEANOR: Any offense for which a sentence to a term of imprisonment in other than a
penitentiary for less than one year may be imposed.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the inhabitants of the city; or
any act or thing repugnant to, or creating a hazard to, or having a detrimental effect on, the property of
another person or to the community.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 6/396
OCCUPANT: Applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or any
part of such building or land whether alone or with others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any act required by the
provisions of this code.
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made to a city officer by title only, this shall be construed as
though followed by the words "of the city of Clinton", and shall be taken to mean the officer of this city
having the title mentioned or performing the duties indicated.
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: Applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common,
joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of such building or land.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, government
or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a natural person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods, chattels, effects, evidence
of rights in action and all written instruments by which any pecuniary obligation, right or title to property
is created, acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right
or interest therein.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods,
merchandise, articles or things in small quantities direct to the consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other property.
STREET: Shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public squares, public places
and sidewalks.
TENANT: Applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or any part of
such building or land whether alone or with others.
WHOLESALER: The word "wholesaler" and "wholesale dealer", unless otherwise specifically defined,
shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in quantity to
persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters,
but when the written signature of any person is required by law to any official or public writing or bond
required by law, it shall be in the proper handwriting of such person, or in case he is unable to write,
by his proper mark. (1968 Code, sec. 57-104; amd. 1983 Code)
1-3-3: INTENT:
All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this city code shall be literally
construed in order that the true intent of the mayor and council may be fully carried out. (1968 Code,
sec. 57-105)
1-3-4: CATCHLINES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 7/396
The catchlines of the several sections of this city code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate
the content of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor be
deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions
of any division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any
of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (1983 Code)
Chapter 4
GENERAL PENALTY
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
Whenever in this Code, the doing of any act or omission to do any act constitutes a breach of any
section or provision of this Code, and there shall be no fine or penalty declared for such breach, any
person violating the provision of this Code shall be fined as follows:
(A) Fine Upon Issuance Of Ticket: The fine upon issuance of a ticket shall be one hundred dollars
($100.00).
(B) Court Proceedings: The fine established by the court, upon conviction, shall be not less than two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each
occurrence. (Ord. 1452, 8-7-2017)
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every section of this Code, the same as if it
were a part of each and every separate section. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day such duty or obligation remains unperformed or such act continues, unless otherwise
specifically provided in this Code.
Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a breach of any section or
provision of this Code, and there shall be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the
provisions of this chapter shall apply. (Ord. 1452, 8-7-2017)
1-4-3: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this Code designating the duties of any officer or employee shall be so construed as to
make such officer or employee liable for any fine or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty,
unless the intent of the Council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is
specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (1983 Code)
Chapter 5
EXECUTIVE AND ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 8/396
1-5-1: DISTRIBUTION OF POWERS:
The executive and administrative powers, authority and duties of the municipal government of the city
shall be distributed into five (5) departments, as follows1:
Department of accounts and finances
Department of public affairs
Department of public health and safety
Department of public property
Department of streets and public improvements
(1968 Code, sec. 1-101)
1-5-2: COUNCIL JURISDICTION OVER DEPARTMENTS:
The city council shall determine by ordinance the powers and duties of and to be performed by each
department, and assign them to the appropriate department; shall prescribe the powers and duties of
officers and employees, and may assign employees to one or more of the departments; may require
an officer or employee to perform duties in two (2) or more departments, and may make such other
rules and regulations as may be necessary or proper for the efficient and economical conduct of the
business of the city. (1968 Code, sec. 1-102)
1-5-3: ASSIGNMENT OF DEPARTMENTS; CONTROLLED BY COUNCIL:
(Rep. by Ord. 400, 4-20-1987)
1-5-4: ENFORCEMENT OF RULES AND REGULATIONS:
Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, the superintendent of each department shall make
and enforce such rules and regulations not inconsistent with laws, ordinances or rules and regulations
adopted by the city council, as may be necessary to secure efficient conduct of the service of his
department or the business in charge thereof. (1968 Code, sec. 1-104)
1-5-5: COMMISSIONERS, POWERS:
The commissioner of each respective department shall be and hereby is vested with the right, power
and authority to appoint all heads of departments, officers and employees under his charge, control or
supervision, unless otherwise provided in this code; provided, that all such appointments, except day
laborers and temporary employees, shall be subject to the approval of the council, and no such
appointment shall take effect or be valid without such approval. The commissioner of each respective
department shall be and hereby is vested with the right, power and authority to discharge at all times,
without the approval thereof by the council, any person so appointed by him, whenever, in the
judgment of said commissioner, the efficient conduct of the city's affairs shall demand it, except as
otherwise provided herein. (1968 Code, sec. 1-105)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 9/396
Chapter 6
CITY COUNCIL
1-6-1: COUNCIL MEMBERS, GOVERNING BODY:
The council of the city shall consist of the mayor and four (4) commissioners, and shall be the
governing body of the city. (1968 Code, sec. 2-101)
1-6-2: MEETINGS:
(A) Regular Meetings: Regular meetings of the council shall be held on the first and third Mondays of
each month at the hour of seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. at the council chambers of said council, or
such other place in the city as the council shall designate; provided, however, that if any such
regular meeting shall fall upon New Year's Day, Martin Luther King's birthday observance,
Independence Day or Labor Day, then said regular meeting so falling on said day shall be held on
the day, not a Sunday or holiday, after said day at the time and place aforesaid. (Ord. 839, 12-18-
2000, eff. 1-1-2001)
(B) Special Meetings: Special meetings may be called from time to time by the mayor or by two (2)
commissioners upon giving notice of not less than twenty four (24) hours to all members of the
council. Public notice of meetings shall be given as prescribed in sections 2.02 and 2.03 of "An Act
In Relation To Meetings", approved July 11, 1957, as heretofore or hereafter amended. (Ord. 370,
3-4-1986)
(C) Open Meetings: All meetings shall be held in accordance with the requirements of the open
meetings act of the state of Illinois as now enacted or as hereafter amended1. (Ord. 400, 4-20-
1987)
1-6-3: RULES FOR CONTROL OF COUNCIL:
The following rules shall govern the council in its deliberations:
(A) Disturbances: The council shall convene promptly at the hour fixed for meetings, and during the
session the members of the council must not be disturbed by calls over the telephone, or for
private consultations.
(B) Petitions: All petitions or communications addressed to the council shall as far as possible be
reduced to writing and filed with the clerk of the council, who will report them to the next meeting of
the council, when they will be referred to the proper department for an investigation and report.
(C) Bills And Claims: All bills and claims, including payrolls, shall first be approved by the
commissioner originating the item, and in addition thereto shall be approved by the commissioner
of accounts and finances before they are submitted to the council for allowance.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 10/396
(D) Notice Of Desire To Be Heard: Any person who desires to be heard by the council should notify
the city clerk no later than twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on the day of the council meeting.
(E) Recommendations: All recommendations, suggestions or other matters from the various city
officials shall be first submitted to the commissioner of the department of said official and receive
his approval before the same are read to the council. (1968 Code, sec. 2-104)
(F) Order Of Business: The following shall be the order of business at council meetings:
1. Roll call.
2. Approval of minutes.
3. Bills and payrolls.
4. Petitions and communications.
5. Report from the department of public affairs.
6. Report from the department of streets and public improvements.
7. Report from the department of public property.
8. Report from the department of public health and safety.
9. Report from the department of accounts and finances.
10. Unfinished business.
11. New business.
12. Closed session.
13. Adjournment. (Ord. 1218, 12-20-2010)
(G) Quorum: Three (3) members of the council shall constitute a quorum, and the affirmative vote of
three (3) members shall be necessary to adopt any motion, resolution or ordinance, or pass any
measure, unless a greater number is provided for by law.
(H) Votes: Upon each vote the "yeas" and "nays" shall be called and recorded, and each motion,
resolution or ordinance shall be reduced to writing and read before a vote is taken thereon, and all
the commissioners, including the mayor, present at any meeting shall vote thereon.
(I) President And Vice President: The mayor shall be president of the council and preside at its
meetings. The commissioner of accounts and finances shall be vice president of the council.
(J) Mayor's Duties: The mayor shall have no power to veto any measure, motion, resolution or
ordinance. Every resolution and ordinance passed by the council must be signed by the mayor, or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 11/396
by two (2) commissioners. Every ordinance must be recorded before the same shall be in force.
The mayor shall have the right to vote on all questions coming before the council.
(K) Robert's Rules Of Order: "Robert's Rules Of Order", except when otherwise provided by law, shall
govern on all questions of parliamentary law at the meetings of the council.
(L) Alteration Of Rules: The rules may be altered, amended or temporarily suspended at any time by a
vote of the council.
(M) Committees:
1. The mayor shall appoint such special committees as he may deem necessary or as may be
directed by the council.
2. The mayor shall appoint the members of all committees, in the absence of specific direction by
the council, and shall designate the chairman thereof.
3. Every committee of the council shall consist of three (3) members including the chairman,
unless the city council shall provide otherwise. (1968 Code, sec. 2-104)
1-6-4: RECORDS:
The city clerk shall keep the minutes and records of the council proceedings. (1968 Code, sec. 2-105)
1-6-5: POWERS AND DUTIES:
(A) Generally: The council shall have and exercise all legislative powers, functions and duties
conferred upon the city or its officers. It shall make all orders for the doing of work, or the making
or construction of any improvements, bridges or buildings. It shall levy all taxes, apportion and
appropriate all funds, and audit and allow all bills, accounts, payrolls and claims, and order
payment thereof.
(B) Contracts: It shall make or authorize the making of all contracts, and no contracts shall bind or be
obligatory upon the city unless either made by ordinance or resolution adopted by the council or
reduced to writing and approved by the council, or expressly authorized by an ordinance or
resolution adopted by the council. All contracts and all ordinances and resolutions making
contracts or authorizing the making of contracts shall be drawn by the city attorney or approved
thereby before the same are made or passed2.
(C) Authority Over Commissioners: All commissioners of departments and officers are the agents of
the council only, and all their acts shall be subject to review or approval or revocation by the
council. Every commissioner or officer shall, from time to time as required by law or ordinance, or
when requested by the council, or whenever he shall deem necessary for the good of the public
service, report to the council respecting the business of his department or office or matters
connected therewith.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 12/396
The council may, by ordinance or resolution, assign to a commissioner, officer or employee duties
in respect to the business of any other department, office or employment, and such service shall
be rendered without additional compensation.
(D) Elect Officers: The council shall also elect and have authority over the city clerk, city treasurer and
city attorney. (1968 Code, sec. 2-106; amd. 1983 Code)
1-6-6: ANNUAL AUDIT, PUBLICATION:
At the end of each fiscal year the council shall cause a complete and full examination of all accounts
and books of the city to be made by competent accountants, and shall publish the result of such
examination in the manner provided by law. Each commissioner shall be furnished a complete copy of
said audit. (1968 Code, sec. 2-107)
1-6-7: SALARIES:
The elected officers of the city shall receive compensation annually at the following rates:
Mayor3 $6,600.00 per annum
Commissioners 6,000.00 per annum
The salary of an officer appointed to fill a vacancy in an elective office shall be set by the city council.
(Ord. 605, 2-6-1995)
Chapter 7
MAYOR
1-7-1: DUTIES:
(A) The mayor shall be commissioner of public affairs, and as such shall be superintendent of that
department. He shall be chief executive officer of the city; shall preside over the meetings of the
council, and shall perform such duties as may be required of him by statute or ordinance. He shall
have general supervision and oversight over all departments and offices of the city government.
He shall sign all contracts on behalf of the city and shall have charge of and cause to be prepared
and published all statements and reports required by law or by ordinance or by resolution of the
council.
(B) In the absence or inability of any of the commissioners to act, he shall exercise temporary
supervision over the department assigned to such commissioner.
(C) He shall have supervision and control over the legal department; the public library and the city
hospital; together with all property and apparatus used in said offices and departments. (Ord. 410,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 13/396
7-10-1987; amd. Ord. 725, 5-4-1998)
1-7-2: DESIGNATION OF OFFICERS' DUTIES:
Whenever there is a dispute as to the respective duties or powers of any appointed officer of the city,
this dispute shall be settled by the mayor after consultation with the city attorney; and the mayor shall
have the power to delegate to any appointed officer any duty which is to be performed when no
specific officer has been directed to perform that duty. (1968 Code, sec. 3-103)
1-7-3: ABSENCE OR DISABILITY OF MAYOR:
In the case of a vacancy in the office of mayor or the absence or inability of the mayor, the
commissioner of accounts and finances shall perform the duties of the mayor. (Ord. 400, 4-20-1987)
1-7-4: OATH; BOND:
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the mayor shall take and subscribe the oath or
affirmation prescribed by the constitution1. This oath or affirmation, when subscribed, shall be filed
with the city clerk. Also, the mayor shall execute and deliver a bond payable to the city in the penal
sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), with sureties to be approved by the judge of the circuit court
of DeWitt County, Illinois. Said bond shall be filed in the office of the county clerk of DeWitt County,
Illinois. (1968 Code, sec. 3-105; amd. 1983 Code)
1-7-5: ANNUAL ESTIMATE:
The commissioner of public affairs (mayor) shall prepare and submit to the commissioner of accounts
and finances, before May 1 of each year, an estimate of the whole cost of maintaining his department,
including all subdepartments and activities under his control and supervision, during the succeeding
fiscal year, which estimate shall be in detail, and shall be laid by the commissioner of accounts and
finances before the council at the same time that the annual estimate of the said commissioner of
accounts and finances is laid before the council. (1968 Code, sec. 3-106)
Chapter 8
CITY COMMISSIONERS1
1-8-1: COMMISSIONER OF ACCOUNTS AND FINANCES:
(A) General Powers, Subordinates: The commissioner of accounts and finances shall have general
supervision and control over all matters relating to the finances or revenues of the city, and he shall
have supervision over the activities of all officers, boards and departments insofar as said activities
directly affect the city's finances or revenues.
The city clerk, city treasurer, city collector and their respective offices or departments and all
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 14/396
employees therein, all bookkeepers and accountants are apportioned and assigned to the
department of accounts and finances, and shall be under the direction and supervision of the
commissioner thereof, together with such other employees as are necessary in said department.
(1968 Code, sec. 4-101; amd. 1983 Code)
(B) Bond: Before entering upon the duties of his office, he shall execute a bond payable to the city in
the penal sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), with sureties to be approved by the judge of
the circuit court of DeWitt County, Illinois, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of
his office. The said bond shall be filed in the office of the county clerk of DeWitt County, Illinois.
(1968 Code, sec. 4-102; amd. 1983 Code)
(C) Fiscal Year: The fiscal year of the city shall commence on May 1 in each year. (1968 Code, sec. 4-
105)
(D) Duties In Absence Of Mayor: The commissioner of accounts and finances shall be vice president
of the council, and in the temporary absence of the mayor, or in case of his inability to act, shall
preside over the council and shall perform all the usual duties of the mayor and the head of the
department of public affairs. He shall also be in charge of the maintenance of the city hall except
that portion used by the fire department. (1968 Code, sec. 4-106)
(E) Books, Accounts And Reports:
1. Supervision: He shall prescribe the manner in which books of the several departments and
subdepartments, insofar as they concern the receipt and disbursement of the city's funds, are
kept, in order to establish uniformity therein, and he shall see that these accounts are regularly
and correctly kept. (1968 Code, sec. 4-103)
2. Audit: He shall audit, or cause to be audited, at frequent intervals the accounts of every officer or
employee who does or may receive or disburse money, and shall examine and audit the reports
of the city treasurer, and annual reports of all other officers of the city handling city funds. (1968
Code, sec. 4-104)
(F) Public Service Utilities: The commissioner of accounts and finances shall procure from all persons
or corporations operating public service utilities in the city and cause to be placed on file such
reports as they, by law, ordinance or otherwise, are required to make to the city or any of its
officers, and he shall procure copies of such reports as are made to the state or to any public office
or department, and shall cause the same to be placed on file, and shall collect or cause to be
collected all license fees, franchise taxes, rentals or other monies which may be due or become
due to the city. He shall report to the council any failures to make reports or pay money due to the
city, with such recommendations in relation thereto as he may deem proper. He shall, whenever
the city has authority so to do, cause to be examined the accounts and records of any person or
corporation operating a public service utility in the city and shall report to the council any refusal to
permit such examination. (1968 Code, sec. 4-107)
(G) Purchasing Procedure:
1. Purchasing Agent; Custody Of Deeds: The Commissioner of Accounts and Finances shall be
the fiscal agent of the City and he shall be the purchasing agent, and as such shall have charge
and custody of all deeds, bonds, contracts, mortgages, notes, warrants, vouchers, books and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 15/396
papers belonging to the City, except such as by law or ordinance are directed to be deposited
elsewhere. (1968 Code, sec. 4-108)
2. Printing And Supplies, Requisition For: The Commissioner of Accounts and Finances shall have
charge of and supervision over all printing by or for the City unless otherwise provided by law.
He shall have charge of and supervision over the purchase, care and distribution of all supplies
for all departments, unless otherwise provided by law or ordinance, and all articles or things shall
be ordered or purchased only on a requisition on the Commissioner of Accounts and Finances
signed by the Commissioner for whose department the said article is to be purchased. (1968
Code, sec. 4-109)
3. Authorization: All purchases of goods of the value of two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00) or more shall be approved by a majority of the Commissioners before such
purchase is made or any contract is entered into therefor. (Ord. 1405, 3-21-2016)
(H) Monthly Reports By Officers; Proceedings In Case Of Default: He shall require all officers charged
in any manner with the receipt, collection or disbursement of the City revenues to submit monthly
reports in writing, showing in detail all such receipts, collections and disbursements, and to file the
same in his office; and if any such officer shall neglect to make such report or to adjust his
accounts whenever so required by said Commissioner, and to pay over to the proper officer any
money in his possession belonging to the City, it shall be the duty of the said Commissioner to
cause a written notice to be served on such officer and his sureties demanding a settlement of his
accounts with the City forthwith; and in case of the neglect or refusal of such officer to make such
settlement and pay over such monies for a period of ten (10) days after the service of said notice,
the said Commissioner shall report such officer to the Mayor for his action in the matter; and
proceedings shall be instituted at once against such delinquent officer and his sureties for the
recovery of any money due said City. (1968 Code, sec. 4-111)
(I) Funds Exhausted, Unexpended Balances: (Rep. by Ord. 400, 4-20-1987)
(J) Local Improvements; Record, Validity: Said Commissioner shall keep in the City Clerk's Office a
correct list of all local or public improvements ordered by the City Council and let under contract by
the City; and all contracts and specifications therefor, made by authority of the City Council, or by
any officer or corporation pursuant thereto in relation to such improvements, shall be filed in the
said office, and no such contract shall be valid unless countersigned by the Mayor. (1968 Code,
sec. 4-114)
(K) Attend Tax Sales: The said Commissioner shall be authorized, and it is hereby made his duty, to
attend all sales of real estate in the City made under proceedings in the Circuit Court of DeWitt
County to enforce the collection of any tax or special assessments levied and assessed by
ordinance of the City Council for any public improvement, and to bid at such sales on behalf of the
City. (Ord. 400, 4-20-1987)
1-8-2: COMMISSIONER OF PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY:
(A) General Powers, Subordinates:
1. The Commissioner of Public Health and Safety shall have control over and supervision of the
Fire Chief, the Fire Department2 and all firemen, officers and employees therein; all fire stations,
property and apparatus used in said Fire Department; the Police Department and all officers and
employees therein, together with all property and apparatus used in said Police Department; the
City Jail; Commissioners of Health, and their respective offices and all property and apparatus
used therein; the street corner wastepaper receptacles, billboards, the removal of garbage,
scavengers, and all matters of sanitation; all City parks, and all other parks, playgrounds and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 16/396
pleasure grounds within or belonging to the City, and all animals, birds, reptiles, livestock, plants,
trees and shrubbery contained therein, together with all officers and employees, including
custodians, matrons and park policemen employed in and about said parks and pleasure
grounds or kept or used in connection therewith. (Ord. 410, 7-10-1987)
2. He shall have charge of and supervision over all city cemeteries, and the city sexton3.
3. He shall have charge of and supervision over the improvement, maintenance, lighting and care
of said parks, pleasure grounds and cemeteries and of the buildings therein or thereon.
4. He shall have charge of and supervision over all city property not otherwise assigned by law or
ordinance. (1968 Code, sec. 5-101; amd. 1983 Code)
5. He shall have charge of, and supervision over the parking. (Ord. 725, 5-4-1998)
6. All these departments and subjects are hereby assigned to the department of public health and
safety.
7. He shall have such assistance from the superintendent of public works as may be necessary in
surveying and laying out improvements and receive assistance from other officers and
departments of the city.
8. He shall have charge of all purchases of his said department or the offices or departments
assigned thereto, and he shall exercise supervision over the construction and repair of buildings
assigned to his department, and may, on application, receive assistance therein from other
officers and departments of the city. (1968 Code, sec. 5-101; amd. 1983 Code; Ord. 725, 5-4-
1998)
(B) Bond: Before entering upon the duties of his office, he shall execute a bond payable to the city in
the penal sum of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00), with sureties to be approved by the judge of
the circuit court of DeWitt County, Illinois, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of
his office. The said bond shall be filed in the office of the county clerk of DeWitt County, Illinois.
(1968 Code, sec. 5-102; amd. 1983 Code)
(C) Annual Estimate: The commissioner of public health and safety shall prepare and submit to the
commissioner of accounts and finances, before May 1 of each year an estimate of the whole cost
of maintaining his department, including all subdepartments and activities under his control and
supervision, during the succeeding fiscal year, which estimate shall be in detail, and shall be laid
by the commissioner of accounts and finances before the council at the same time that the annual
estimate of the commissioner of accounts and finances is laid before the council. (1968 Code, sec.
5-103)
1-8-3: COMMISSIONER OF STREETS AND PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
(A) General Powers And Duties, Subordinates:
1. The commissioner of streets and public improvements shall have authority over, and charge of
all public works; the cleaning, sprinkling and repairing of all streets, alleys and public places; the
entire erection, making and reconstruction of all street improvements, paving, curbing,
sidewalks, sewers, bridges, viaducts, subways and other public improvements, and of the
repairs thereof, also striping of parking spaces, street signs, weeds on property owned by the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 17/396
city including streets, alleys and rights of way, unless otherwise provided by law. (Ord. 725, 5-4-
1998)
2. He shall approve the estimates of the superintendent of public works which may be made from
time to time of the cost of such work as the same progresses, and shall recommend to the
council the acceptance of work done or improvements made when completed according to
contract.
3. He shall have charge of enforcing all provisions relative to public service utilities and all persons
or corporations rendering service in the city under any franchise, grant or contract made or
granted by the city or state, and shall report to the council or other proper officer any failure of
said persons or corporations to render service or to observe the requirements or conditions of
the franchise, grant or contract under which such public utility is operated4.
4. The superintendent of public works and his department5, the city yards and all employees
therein, the overseer of streets, the street department and all employees therein, all sidewalk
and sewer work and all officers and employees employed in connection with the work of his
department, and all property and apparatus used therein, shall be under the supervision and
control of the commissioner of streets and public improvements, and hereby are apportioned
and assigned to the department of streets and public improvements. (1968 Code, sec. 6-101;
amd. 1983 Code)
(B) Bond: Before entering upon the duties of his office, he shall execute a bond payable to the city in
the penal sum of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00), with sureties to be approved by the judge of
the circuit court of DeWitt County, Illinois, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of
his office. Said bond shall be filed in the office of the county clerk of DeWitt County, Illinois. (1968
Code, sec. 6-102; amd. 1983 Code)
(C) Annual Estimate: The commissioner of streets and public improvements shall prepare and submit
to the commissioner of accounts and finances, before May 1 of each year, an estimate of the
whole cost of maintaining his department, including all subdepartments and activities under his
control and supervision, during the succeeding fiscal year, which estimate shall be in detail, and
among other things shall contain a statement, as near as can be estimated, of the repairs and
improvements necessary to be undertaken by the city during the succeeding fiscal year the cost of
which is to be paid for out of the general corporate fund, and of the cost of such repairs and
improvements, as near as the same can be ascertained; and also a statement of any necessary or
desired improvements, with the probable expense thereof; and of all unexpended balances, and on
what account; of the appropriations of the preceding year or years, which said statement or report
shall be laid by the commissioner of accounts and finances before the council at the same time
that the annual estimate of the said commissioner of accounts and finances is laid before the
council. (1968 Code, sec. 6-103)
1-8-4: COMMISSIONER OF PUBLIC PROPERTY:
(A) General Powers And Duties, Subordinates: The commissioner of public property shall have charge
of and supervision over the city waterworks, and the superintendent of waterworks. (1968 Code,
sec. 7-101)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 18/396
(B) Bond: Before entering upon the duties of his office, the commissioner of public property shall
execute and deliver a bond in the form prescribed by law, payable to the city, in the penal sum of
three thousand dollars ($3,000.00), with sureties to be approved by the judge of the circuit court of
DeWitt County, Illinois. Said bond shall be filed in the office of the county clerk of DeWitt County,
Illinois. (1968 Code, sec. 7-102; amd. 1983 Code)
(C) Annual Estimate: The commissioner of public property shall prepare and submit to the
commissioner of accounts and finances before May 1 of each year an estimate of the whole cost of
maintaining his department, including all subdepartments and activities under the control and
supervision of the said commissioner of public property, during the succeeding fiscal year, which
estimate shall be in detail and shall be laid by the commissioner of accounts and finances before
the council at the same time that the annual estimate of the said commissioner of accounts and
finances is laid before the council. (1968 Code, sec. 7-103)
Chapter 9
CITY CLERK
1-9-1: ELECTION BY COUNCIL:
There is hereby created the office of city clerk who shall be appointed annually by a majority vote of
the city council at the first meeting of May in each year or as soon thereafter it is practicable. (1968
Code, sec. 8-101)
1-9-2: TERM, SUPERVISION:
The city clerk shall hold his office for the term of one year, and until his successor is elected and has
qualified. His duties shall be such as are prescribed by law or ordinance, and in addition thereto such
other duties as may be imposed upon him from time to time by the council or the commissioner of
accounts and finances. He shall be under the direction and supervision of said commissioner of
accounts and finances. (1968 Code, sec. 8-102)
1-9-3: BOND, OATH:
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the city clerk shall take the oath prescribed for all city
officers, and execute and deliver a bond payable to the city in the penal sum of ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00), with sureties to be approved by the council, conditioned upon the faithful performance of
the duties of his office, which bond shall be filed with the city treasurer. (1968 Code, sec. 8-103)
1-9-4: FEES, PROPERTY OF CITY:
All fees payable by law to the city clerk shall be the property of the city. (1968 Code, sec. 8-104)
1-9-5: CORPORATE SEAL:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 19/396
The city clerk shall keep the corporate seal, to be provided under the direction of the city council, and
with the corporate seal shall attest all instruments and documents required to be so attested. (1968
Code, sec. 8-105)
1-9-6: DUTIES SET FORTH:
(A) Attend Council Meetings: The city clerk shall attend all meetings of the council, shall be clerk of
said council and shall keep a full record of its proceedings in the journal. (1968 Code, sec. 8-106)
(B) Record Of Ordinances: The clerk shall record, in a book to be kept for that purpose, all ordinances
passed by the city council, and at the foot of the record of each ordinance so recorded shall make
a memorandum of the date of the presentment, passage, approval, recording, publication or
posting of such ordinance. (1968 Code, sec. 8-107)
(C) Issue Notices: He shall issue such notices as may be directed by the council, and notify all
persons whose attendance may be required before the council or any committee thereof, and also
shall issue notices of special meetings. (1968 Code, sec. 8-108)
(D) Attest Licenses: He shall attest with the corporate seal all licenses granted by the council under
the ordinances of the city. (1968 Code, sec. 8-109)
(E) Deliver Ordinances, Other Documents Upon Request: He shall, without delay, deliver to the mayor
or any commissioner all resolutions and communications referring to such officers, and also all
ordinances and resolutions under his charge which may be required to be approved or otherwise
acted upon by the mayor or which shall be requested by the mayor or any of the commissioners,
together with all papers for which the same were founded. (1968 Code, sec. 8-110)
(F) Monthly Settlement: He shall pay over monthly to the city treasurer all monies received by him for
the city by or on any account whatever, and shall submit a monthly statement thereof in writing to
the council when requested. (1968 Code, sec. 8-111)
(G) Register Of Warrants, Receipts: The clerk shall keep in a suitable book an accurate list of all
warrants drawn upon the city treasurer. Said books shall show the date, number and amount of
each, and the name of the person in whose favor drawn, and shall take the receipt of every person
for every warrant upon delivery thereof. (1968 Code, sec. 8-112)
(H) Bills And Claims Against City: All bills, claims, demands and accounts against the city shall be filed
in the office of the city clerk. He shall report to the council upon all bills, claims, demands and
accounts before they are acted upon or allowed, unless otherwise provided by law. He shall
register all said bills, claims, demands, accounts, etc., in a book suitable for the purpose, and shall
therein keep a record of the disposition of said bills, claims, demands, accounts, etc.
He may require a statement in writing, under oath, as to any fact, matter or thing concerning the
justness of any such bills, claims, accounts and demands presented against the city. (1968 Code,
sec. 8-113)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 20/396
(I) Warrant For Bill: The clerk shall draw his warrant which shall be signed by the mayor and
countersigned by the city treasurer in due form, upon the city treasurer for all such bills, claims,
accounts, demands, payrolls, etc., allowed by the council. (1968 Code, sec. 8-114)
1-9-7: REGISTRAR OF VITAL STATISTICS:
(A) Clerk To Be Registrar: The city clerk shall be and is hereby made registrar of vital statistics for the
city. (1968 Code, sec. 45-101)
(B) Report: A report of all births, stillbirths and deaths shall be made to the local registrar of vital
statistics, which report shall contain all information required by law. (1968 Code, sec. 45-102)
(C) Record Of Vital Statistics: The registrar shall keep a record showing all births, stillbirths and
deaths occurring within the city, which record shall include the information required to be kept by
statute. (1968 Code, sec. 45-103)
(D) Statutory Rule: The provisions of the statutes relative to vital statistics shall be fully complied with
by the city clerk in connection with vital statistics reports.
The city clerk shall make or cause to be made sufficient copies of all such records so that one
complete set thereof may be retained and kept by the city. (1968 Code, sec. 45-104)
Chapter 10
CITY TREASURER
1-10-1: ELECTION BY COUNCIL:
There is hereby created the office of city treasurer who shall be appointed annually by a majority vote
of the council at the first meeting in May of each year or as soon thereafter as is practicable. (1968
Code, sec. 9-101)
1-10-2: TERM OF OFFICE:
The city treasurer shall hold his office for the term of one year and until his successor is elected and
has qualified. His duties shall be such as are prescribed by law or ordinance, and in addition thereto
such other duties as may be imposed upon him from time to time by the council or the commissioner
of accounts and finances. He shall be under the direction and supervision of the said commissioner of
accounts and finances. (1968 Code, sec. 9-102)
1-10-3: BOND, OATH:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 21/396
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the treasurer shall take the oath prescribed for all city
officers, and shall execute and deliver a bond payable to the city in the penal sum of fifty thousand
dollars ($50,000.00), with sureties to be approved by the council. (1968 Code, sec. 9-103)
1-10-4: CITY DEPOSITORY:
The monies of the city shall be deposited in such places of deposit as may be designated by
ordinance.
All interest paid by any place of deposit upon any balance shall be collected by the treasurer, and by
him shall be reported in his next statement showing such collection and shall be considered and
treated as part of the general fund of the city, subject to use for any legitimate municipal purpose.
(Ord. 264, 8-15-1988)
1-10-5: DUTIES SET FORTH:
(A) Receive Corporate Money, Accounts: The treasurer shall receive all monies belonging to the
corporation and shall keep a separate account of each fund or appropriation, and the debits and
credits belonging thereto. (1968 Code, sec. 9-104)
(B) Monthly Account: He shall render, at the end of each month, and more often if required, an
account to the commissioner of accounts and finances, showing the state of the treasury at the
date of such account and the balance of the money in the treasury. He shall also accompany such
account, with a statement of all monies received in the treasury and on what account, together with
all warrants redeemed and paid by him when requested. (1968 Code, sec. 9-105)
(C) Warrants:
1. Register And Cancel: The treasurer shall keep an accurate register of all warrants redeemed
and paid by him, showing the number, date and amount of each, the fund from which paid, and
the name of the person to whom and where paid, and he shall cancel all warrants as soon as
redeemed by him. (1968 Code, sec. 9-106)
2. Signing, Contents: All warrants drawn upon the treasurer must be signed by the mayor and the
city clerk and countersigned by the treasurer, stating the particular fund to which the same shall
be chargeable and the person to whom payable. No money shall be otherwise paid than upon
such warrant so drawn, excepting as otherwise provided by law. (1968 Code, sec. 9-110)
(D) Special Assessment Funds Kept Separate: All monies received on any special assessment shall
be held by said treasurer as a special fund, to be applied to the payment of the improvement for
which the assessment was made, and said money shall not be used for any other purpose
whatever, unless to reimburse the city for money expended for such improvement out of its general
fund. (1968 Code, sec. 9-107)
(E) Receipts: He shall give every person paying money into the treasury a receipt therefor, specifying
the date of payment, and upon what account paid, and he shall also file copies of such receipts
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 22/396
with the clerk at the date of his monthly reports. (1968 Code, sec. 9-108)
(F) Keep Corporate Monies Separate, Private Use, Penalty: The treasurer shall keep all monies
belonging to the corporation in his hands separate and distinct from his own monies and he hereby
expressly is prohibited from using, either directly or indirectly, the corporation money or warrants in
his custody and keeping for his own use and benefit, or that of any other person whomsoever. Any
violation of this provision shall subject the treasurer to immediate removal from his office by the
council, who hereby are authorized to declare said office vacant, and in which case a successor
shall be elected who shall hold his office for the remainder of the term unexpired of such officer so
removed. (1968 Code, sec. 9-109)
(G) Daily Deposits: The treasurer shall make daily deposits of such sums of money as shall be
received by him from all sources of revenue whatsoever, to his credit as treasurer of the city, in the
bank designated as the city depository as prescribed by section 1-10-4 hereof. (1968 Code, sec. 9-
111)
(H) Annual Account, Publication: The said treasurer shall annually, by September 1, make out and file
with the clerk a full and detailed account of all his receipts and expenditures, and of all his
transactions as such treasurer, during the preceding fiscal year, and shall show in such account
the state of the treasury at the close of the fiscal year. (1968 Code, sec. 9-113)
(I) Books, Contents Of, Open To Examination: He shall open and keep in a neat and methodical
manner a complete set of books, in which, among other things, shall be set forth the appropriations
of the fiscal year for each distinct object and branch of expenditures, and also the receipts from
each and every source of revenue, so far as he can ascertain the same. Said books, and all
contracts, bonds, debts, warrants, vouchers, receipts and other papers kept in his office, shall be
subject to the examination of the mayor and commissioners at all reasonable hours. (1968 Code,
sec. 9-114)
(J) Accounts Of Revenue, Debts, Bonds: The treasurer shall keep a detailed account of the city's
revenue, and of each separate fund, crediting the same with all its receipts or appropriations and
charging it with all warrants drawn thereon; and he shall charge each warrant to the fund or
appropriation against which it is drawn.
He shall also keep an accurate account of all debts due from or owing to the city and shall keep a
book in which he shall enter a correct list of all bonds, notes or other obligations given by or
payable to the city, with the date thereof, the person to whom or by whom payable, and such other
particulars as may be necessary to the full understanding thereof. (1968 Code, sec. 9-115)
(K) Bond Register, Report: Said treasurer shall keep in his office in a book expressly for that purpose,
to be known as the bond register, a full and correct list of all outstanding bonds of the city, showing
the number, amount, time of maturity, rate of interest and place of payment of each bond; and for
what and to whom the same was issued; and when any city bonds are surrendered, cancelled or
paid, said register shall show the fact. In his annual report to the city council, the treasurer shall
describe particularly the bonds sold, exchanged or redeemed during the fiscal year and give an
itemized statement of the expenses thereof. (1968 Code, sec. 9-116)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 23/396
(L) Water And Sewer Rents, Records, Collection: He shall keep a complete record of all monies
turned over to him by any department, and he shall keep a complete record of all of the said
payments made by any department. (1968 Code, sec. 9-117)
Chapter 11
APPOINTIVE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
1-11-1: APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS, EMPLOYEES:
The city council, by majority vote, shall make appointments to fill all appointive offices, and employees
shall be selected by the mayor, in the absence of provisions to the contrary; provided, that full time
members of the police and fire departments shall be subject to their rules and regulations, governing
their appointments1. (1968 Code, sec. 54-101; amd. 1983 Code)
1-11-2: TERMS OF OFFICE, VACANCIES:
Every appointive officer of the city shall hold office for a term of one year or until his successor is
appointed and qualified unless it is otherwise provided by law or ordinance. Employees selected shall
serve so long as their services are desired. (1968 Code, sec. 54-102)
1-11-3: ASSIGNMENT OF DUTIES:
The mayor shall have the power to assign to any appointive officer any duty which is not assigned by
ordinance to some other specific officer, and shall determine disputes or questions relating to the
respective powers or duties of officers. (1968 Code, sec. 54-103)
1-11-4: RECORDS:
All records kept by any officer of the city shall be open to inspection by the mayor or any member of
the council at all reasonable times, whether or not such records are required to be kept by statute or
ordinance of the city. (1968 Code, sec. 54-104)
1-11-5: MONIES RECEIVED:
Every officer of the city shall, at least once every day, turn over all monies received by him in his
official capacity to the city treasurer with a statement which shows the source from which the same
was received. (1968 Code, sec. 54-105)
1-11-6: CITY ATTORNEY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 24/396
(A) Appointment: There is hereby created the office of city attorney. The mayor, with the advice and
consent of the council, shall retain an attorney to act as legal advisor to the city, to be appointed
annually on May 1, or as soon thereafter as possible. (1968 Code, sec. 12-101; amd. 1983 Code)
(B) Duties:
1. Suits And Actions: The city attorney shall prosecute or defend any and all suits or actions at law
or equity to which the city may be a party, or in which it may be interested, or which may be
brought against, or by, any officer of the city on behalf of the city, or in the capacity of such
person as an officer of the city. (1968 Code, sec. 12-102)
2. Advice: The city attorney shall be the legal advisor of the city, and shall render advice on all
legal questions affecting the city, whenever requested so to do by any city official. Upon request
by the mayor or council, he shall reduce such opinion to writing. (1968 Code, sec. 12-103)
3. Drafting Ordinances And Contracts: It shall be the duty of the city attorney to draft or supervise
the phraseology of any contracts, leases or other documents or instruments to which the city
may be a party; and to draft ordinances and resolutions covering any subjects within the powers
of the city2. (1968 Code, sec. 12-104)
1-11-7: HEALTH OFFICER:
(A) Appointment, Term Of Office: There is hereby created the office of health officer. The council shall
appoint a health officer on May 1 of each year or as soon thereafter as possible. (1968 Code, sec.
13-101)
(B) Powers And Duties:
1. Police Powers: The health officer shall have the power of a police officer and conservator of the
peace. He shall see to the enforcement of quarantine. He shall give to the council information and
advice concerning the health of the city, and shall perform such other duties as may be assigned to
him by the council. (1968 Code, sec. 13-102; amd. 1983 Code)
2. Analysis: It shall be the duty of the health officer to make or cause to be made analysis of any
food or drink alleged to be tainted or unwholesome, and to analyze the drinking water of the city
whenever requested so to do by the council. (1968 Code, sec. 13-103)
3. Inspections: The health officer shall assist in the enforcement of all ordinances of the city
relating to the sale or storage of food and drink intended for human consumption, and shall
make or cause to be made such tests and analyses and inspections as may be necessary for
this purpose. (1968 Code, sec. 13-104)
(C) Compensation: The health officer shall be compensated for work performed on a fee basis. (1968
Code, sec. 13-101)
1-11-8: SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 25/396
(A) Office Created; Term: There is hereby created the office of superintendent of public works, who
shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the council. The superintendent of public
works shall be an executive officer of the city, and shall perform his duties as hereinafter set out,
subject to the supervision of the commissioner having authority over and charge of the
departments referred to in this section. All officers and employees assigned to the departments
referred to in this section shall perform their duties subject to the supervision of the superintendent
of public works.
The superintendent of public works shall hold office for a term of one year or until his successor is
appointed and qualified.
(B) Duties:
1. It shall be the duty of the superintendent of public works to personally inspect, or cause to be
inspected, all city connections made to the sewer system and the water supply system of the
city; further, he shall supervise all repairs to and maintenance of public improvements and public
works. He shall supervise the manner of using the streets, alleys, highways, easements and
other places of the city for the erection, construction or installation of utilities as authorized by
the council.
2. He shall provide supervision for landfill activities and the operation of the city's sewage system
and shall supervise coordination of these operations with the environmental protection agency.
3. He shall provide supervision of the city's waterworks operation.
4. He shall provide supervision for the city's cemetery.
5. He shall provide supervision for the city's park system.
6. He shall advise the council and city officials on the engineering matters referred to him, and
shall perform such duties as are provided by law or ordinance, and in addition thereto, such
other duties as from time to time may be imposed upon him by the council. He shall, from time to
time as required by the council, make reports regarding public improvements, repair of streets,
bridges and sidewalks, or such other work as the council may request, and shall make such
suggestions to the city council, regarding the same, as shall in his judgment seem best and
proper.
7. He shall keep accurate maps, plats and records of all public works, lands or property owned by
the city.
8. He shall assist the council in preparing specifications and contract documents for the new
procurement of capital equipment as required by the city.
9. He shall assist the city attorney in the preparation, drafting and drawing of resolutions,
ordinances and contracts for all public or special work and in all litigation regarding public
improvements or in matters wherein the city may be interested, rendering such assistance as
may be required of him by the city attorney.
10. He shall make such investigations, inspections, analyses and reports and shall perform such
duties as may be required of him by the mayor and council in connection with city transportation,
buildings and structures or other administrative functions of the city.
11. He shall attend all council meetings, regular and special, unless excused by the mayor. He will
also attend committee meetings upon request of the mayor or chairman of the individual
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 26/396
committees. He will be given proper notice of all such meetings.
12. He shall maintain a current inventory showing all real and personal property, including excess
and surplus property, for which the city has ownership. Such records will show storage location,
acquisition dates, cost and repair data and such other information as may be appropriate.
(C) Supervision Over Employees: The superintendent of public works shall coordinate and supervise
officers and employees of the city working in the departments referred to in this section. He shall
be responsible for the performance of the duties and actions of the officers and employees during
working hours. The superintendent of public works shall have authority to assign city employees to
different departments as shall be necessary. The superintendent of public works shall not have the
power to appoint or discharge any employee of the city, but may make appropriate reports and
recommendations to the city council.
(D) Reports: The superintendent of public works shall, when required by the mayor and council,
inquire into and report upon any matter pertaining to public works and shall from time to time
communicate to the mayor and council any information or suggestions which he may deem
important in relation thereto. He shall, when required by the mayor and council, report verbally or in
writing to them on all matters under his jurisdiction. (Ord. 228, 1982)
1-11-9: CITY SEXTON3:
(A) Appointment, Term: There is hereby created the office of city sexton, who shall be appointed by
the commissioner of public health and safety, with the approval of the council, on or before June 1,
or as soon thereafter as possible. He shall hold his office for the term of one year, or until his
successor has been appointed and qualified. He shall receive such compensation as may be
provided by ordinance. (1968 Code, sec. 24-101)
(B) Bond, Oath: Before entering upon the duties of his office, he shall take the oath prescribed for all
city officers, and shall execute and deliver a bond payable to the city and the people, in the sum of
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), with sureties to be approved by the council, conditioned upon
the faithful performance of the duties of his office. (1968 Code, sec. 24-103)
(C) Duties:
1. Definition Of General Duties: The sexton shall be under the supervision and control of the
commissioner of public health and safety, and shall perform such duties as are imposed upon
him by law or ordinance, and in addition, such other duties from time to time as he may be
directed to perform by the council or commissioner of public health and safety. (1968 Code, sec.
24-102)
2. Record Of Lots, Penalty: The city sexton shall keep a record in which shall be recorded the
number of every lot heretofore or hereafter surveyed in the cemetery, beginning with the number
one, with columns ruled therein for the name of the purchaser, price sold for, and date of sale.
Columns shall also be ruled for any reappraisal which may hereafter be made. (1968 Code, sec.
24-104; amd. 1983 Code)
3. Charge Of Cemetery4: The city sexton shall take charge of the Woodlawn cemetery and shall
keep the grounds, walks and avenues of the same in good order and condition, and free from
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 27/396
obstructions. He shall enforce all ordinances and regulations of the council respecting said
cemetery, and report violations of the same to the proper officers for prosecution. He shall
prevent the burial of any bodies in any unsold lots, or in a lot of any private individual without his
consent; he shall superintend all burials in the commons, and specify their manner and place,
and by night keep the gates of said cemetery closed and locked, and he shall see that all
soldiers' graves in said cemetery are properly kept and cared for. He shall, under the direction of
the commissioner of public health and safety, cause all bodies buried in any lot without proper
authority to be removed to the commons, and all persons making or causing such unlawful
interment shall be liable to the city for all costs and expenses of such removal. (1968 Code, sec.
24-105; amd. 1983 Code)
4. Records And Reports:
(a) Generally: It shall be the duty of the city sexton, and also any other sexton or person in
charge of any burying grounds of the city, to keep books of records, to be furnished by the city,
in which shall be recorded the name, age, sex, nationality and date of death of every person
interred in the cemetery or burying ground for which said record is kept, and also the number
of the lot where the person is buried, and at the end of the year, to make a report to the
commissioner of public health and safety, embracing all of the above particulars, and covering
the entire year for which such report is made. (1968 Code, sec. 24-106)
(b) Number Of Interments: On or before the first day of each month, he should make out and
furnish to the said commissioner of public health and safety a report in writing showing the
number of interments made in said cemetery the preceding month, with the name, sex, race,
the date of death, disease or cause of death, and wherein practicable, the age, occupation,
nationality and residence of the deceased. (1968 Code, sec. 24-109)
(c) Account And Report Of Fees: The said sexton shall report to the city clerk the amount of his
collections and turn over to the said clerk all monies collected at least once every month.
(1968 Code, sec. 24-110)
5. Repair Of Buildings: The city sexton shall, under the direction of the commissioner of public
health and safety, keep in good repair the fences or enclosures around said cemetery, and all
vaults and buildings therein belonging to the city. (1968 Code, sec. 24-108)
1-11-10: ADMINISTRATIVE ASSISTANT TO THE COUNCIL:
(A) Office Created; Appointment: There is hereby created the position of administrative assistant to
the council, an administrative position of the city. The administrative assistant to the council shall
be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council.
(B) Term Of Office: The administrative assistant shall serve for no set term. In the event that the city
council shall determine that it no longer desires the service of the then acting administrative
assistant, or that the council desires to discontinue the office of administrative assistant, the city
council shall give the then acting administrative assistant ninety (90) days' notice of said
determination, and no action to discontinue, without cause, the services of the administrative
assistant or to discontinue the office of administrative assistant will take place prior to ninety (90)
days from the date of said notice. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to require ninety (90)
days' notice prior to proceedings to discharge said administrative assistant for cause.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 28/396
(C) Hours Of Work; Salary: The administrative assistant to the council shall receive such salary as is
set from time to time by the city council. It shall be a full time paid position of the city.
(D) Duties: The administrative assistant to the council shall perform such duties as are assigned to the
administrative assistant by the council. The council shall not delegate to the administrative
assistant any voting power, any appointing power, or any authority to hire or discharge employees
of the city. The purpose of the administrative assistant to the council is to do research, to do
surveys, recommendations and reports to the council, and such other duties as shall be assigned
by the council.
(E) Reports: The administrative assistant to the council shall communicate and transmit his
recommendations and reports to the mayor, or to whom the mayor directs, and to the council
member having control and supervision over the department involved. (Ord. 250, 10-17-1983)
Chapter 12
POLICE DEPARTMENT
1-12-1: CREATION OF DEPARTMENT:
There is hereby created an executive department of the municipal government of the city to be known
as the police department, which shall be under the supervision of the commissioner of public health
and safety, and shall embrace one chief of police, one deputy chief of police, and such sergeants and
police officers as may, from time to time, be fixed by the council. All buildings, equipment and vehicles
assigned to the police department shall also be under the supervision of the commissioner. (Ord.
1267, 5-7-2012)
1-12-2: CHIEF OF POLICE:
(A) Appointment: There is hereby created the office of chief of police who shall be appointed by the
mayor, with the approval of the council. The chief of police may be removed or discharged by the
city council upon the filing with the city council of the reasons for such removal or discharge, which
removal or discharge shall not become effective unless confirmed by a majority vote of the city
council.
The chief of police shall be chief of the police department and shall perform such duties as are
imposed upon him by law or ordinance and in addition thereto such other duties as may be
assigned to him, from time to time, by the council or by the commissioner of public affairs.
(B) Bond And Oath: Before entering upon the duties of his office, the chief of police shall take the oath
prescribed for all city officers, and enter into bond in the penal sum of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) with good and sufficient surety to be approved by the council, conditioned upon the
faithful performance and discharge of his duties in such office. He shall receive such salary and
compensation as the council by ordinance may direct. (Ord. 250, 1983)
1-12-2-1: DEPUTY CHIEF OF POLICE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 29/396
There is hereby created the office of deputy chief of police. The deputy chief of police shall be
appointed by the chief of the police department. The deputy chief of police position shall be an exempt
rank immediately below that of the chief of police. The deputy chief may be appointed from any rank of
sworn, full time officers of the city, but must have at least five (5) years of full time service as a police
officer in the department. The deputy chief shall serve at the discretion of the chief of police and, if
removed from the position shall revert to the rank held immediately prior to appointment to deputy
chief of police. (Ord. 1267, 5-7-2012)
1-12-3: CHAIN OF COMMAND:
(A) The chief of police shall be the head of the police department and his authority shall be
subordinate only to the city council and the commissioner of public health and safety.
(B) The deputy chief of police shall be the next ranking officer of the department, and shall have the
authority to direct and issue orders to all employees of the department holding the rank of captain
or any lower rank. The authority of the deputy chief of police shall be subordinate only to the chief
of police and all of the chief's superiors. The deputy chief of police will be in charge of the
department in the absence of the chief of police.
(C) The sergeants shall be the next ranking officers of the department. Their authority shall be
subordinate only to the deputy chief of police, the chief of police and all of their superiors. The
senior sergeant will be in charge of the department in the absence of the deputy chief of police and
the chief of police. In the absence of the senior sergeant, the deputy chief of police and the chief of
police, the second sergeant shall be in charge of the department. All disciplinary reports and
evaluation reports shall be passed up the chain of command when received by them.
(D) The police officer shall be the entry rank for members of the department and the senior police
officer will be the shift commander in the absence of any other ranking officer. (Ord. 1267, 5-7-
2012)
1-12-4: DIVISIONS:
There shall be two (2) major divisions of the department, the detective and the patrol divisions.
(A) The detective division will conduct all follow up investigations of the department. This division shall
also act as internal affairs division for the department when necessary. The division will be headed
by the chief of police, or whoever he shall designate. This division shall be a nonuniformed
division.
(B) The patrol division shall act as initial investigatory and fill the area of law enforcement which
serves to suppress violations of the law by observation. This division shall be headed by the chief
of police, or whomever he shall designate. This shall be a uniformed division. (Ord. 250, 1983)
1-12-5: RULES, REGULATIONS AND PROCEDURES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 30/396
The chief of the police department is hereby authorized to draft rules, regulations and procedures that
he deems necessary and advisable for the efficient and orderly operation of the police department,
which said rules shall become effective upon approval by the city council. (Ord. 353, 8-5-1985)
1-12-6: RESIDENCE REQUIREMENTS:
(A) All police officers of the city shall reside within five (5) miles of the geographical center of the city.
(B) Newly hired police officers shall establish their residency within five (5) miles of the city within
three (3) months of their date of employment.
(C) City police officers residing outside the corporate limits of the city upon the date of enactment of
this section shall not be required to establish residence within five (5) miles of the city. (Ord. 557,
11-2-1992)
Chapter 13
FIRE DEPARTMENT
1-13-1: FIRE DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED, SUPERVISION:
There is hereby established an executive department of the city government which shall be known as
the Clinton fire department. The fire department shall be under the supervision and control of the
commissioner of public health and safety, and shall consist of one fire chief, two (2) assistant fire
chiefs, and such other officers and employees as the city council may, from time to time, provide.
(Ord. 390, 1-5-1987)
1-13-2: FIRE CHIEF:
(A) Appointment, Term: There is hereby created the office of fire chief of the city. The fire chief shall be
appointed annually by the commissioner of public health and safety, with the approval of the
council, on May 1 or as soon thereafter as may be possible. He shall hold his office for the term of
one year or until his successor is appointed and has qualified. (1968 Code, sec. 11-102; amd.
1983 Code)
(B) Superintendent Of Buildings: The fire chief shall be ex officio superintendent of buildings. He shall
perform such duties as are prescribed for him by law or ordinance, and in addition thereto such
other duties as from time to time may be imposed upon him by the council or the commissioner of
public health and safety. (1968 Code, sec. 11-103; amd. 1983 Code)
(C) Bond, Oath: Before entering upon the duties of his office, he shall take the oath prescribed by law
for all city officers, and shall execute and deliver a bond payable to the city, in the penal sum of five
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 31/396
hundred dollars ($500.00), with sureties to be approved by the council, conditioned upon the
faithful performance of the duties of his office. (1968 Code, sec. 11-104)
(D) Duties:
1. Supervision Over Department, Equipment: The fire chief shall have the control, subject to the
order and direction of the council, of the fire department and all fire apparatus belonging to the
city. (1968 Code, sec. 11-109; amd. 1983 Code)
2. Records: The fire chief shall keep or cause to be kept a record of all activities of the department
and of all fires occurring in the city, with information as to their cause and the estimated damage
done, and shall transmit an annual record to the public health officer. (1968 Code, sec. 11-111;
amd. 1983 Code)
1-13-3: ASSISTANT FIRE CHIEFS:
(A) Appointment: There shall be two (2) assistant fire chiefs for the city. Each shall be appointed
annually by the commissioner of public health and safety, with the approval of the council on May
1, or as soon thereafter as possible.
(B) Bond, Oath: Before entering upon the duties of the office, each shall take the oath prescribed by
law for all city officers and shall execute a bond payable to the city in the penal sum of two hundred
dollars ($200.00), with sureties to be approved by the council conditioned upon the faithful
performance of the duties of the office.
(C) Power And Authority: The assistant fire chiefs shall be second in command of the fire department,
in subordination to the fire chief, and in case of the absence or disability of the fire chief, shall
possess all the powers and perform all the duties of the fire chief. The duties and authority of each
assistant shall be set forth by the fire chief. (Ord. 141, 6-5-1978; amd. 1983 Code)
1-13-4: PART TIME OR VOLUNTEER FIREMEN:
Part time or volunteer firemen shall be appointed as set forth in the rules and regulations of the Clinton
volunteer fire department. (Ord. 944, 7-7-2003)
1-13-5: COMMAND AT FIRES:
In case of fire, the fire chief and his assistants shall rank in the order named and the officer of the
highest rank at the fire shall take command of the fire department and direct the management thereof
for the suppression of the fire, in the best manner possible; and when it may become necessary for
the protection of other property and to prevent the spread of the conflagration, the officer in command
may cause buildings to be removed, torn down or destroyed in the best manner possible. (1968 Code,
sec. 11-110; amd. 1983 Code)
1-13-6: DUTIES OF DEPARTMENT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 32/396
(A) Generally: It shall be the function and duty of the fire department and every member thereof to
extinguish accidental or destructive fires and to prevent the occurrence or spread of such fires.
(1968 Code, sec. 11-112)
(B) Obedience To Orders: Every fireman in attendance at a fire shall obey the orders of the officer in
command at such fire. (1968 Code, sec. 11-113)
(C) Enforcement Of Provisions: It shall be the duty of all members of the fire department to see that
the provisions of this code relating to the fire department and its work are enforced, and to that end
all such members are hereby vested with the usual power and authority of police officers. (1968
Code, sec. 11-115)
1-13-7: FEES FOR OUTSIDE CALLS:
(Rep. by Ord. 400, 4-20-1987)
1-13-8: ENTERING FIREHOUSE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter the fire department station or any place where equipment
and apparatus of the fire department are stored, at any time except on business pertaining to the fire
department or other city business, except with the written authority of the fire chief. (1968 Code, sec.
11-116; amd. 1983 Code)
1-13-9: RULES, REGULATIONS AND PROCEDURES:
The chief of the fire department or the commissioner of public health and safety are authorized to draft
rules, regulations and procedures that they deem necessary and advisable for the efficient and orderly
operation of the fire department which said rules shall become effective upon approval by the city
council. (Ord. 390, 1-5-1987)
1-13-10: ALCOHOL AND DRUG USE:
(A) It shall be the stated policy of the fire department that no member may participate in any
department incident under the influence of alcohol or drugs.
(B) Any firefighter who is or has been drinking alcoholic beverages will be considered out of service for
any emergency.
(C) No firefighter who is or has been drinking alcoholic beverages will be allowed to drive a vehicle or
respond to the station with his/her blue light in response to any fire department service incident.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 33/396
(D) No firefighter will attempt to drive any department vehicle when he/she has been drinking alcoholic
beverages. (Ord. 710, 11-17-1997)
Chapter 14
STATE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES ETHICS ACT
1-14-1: ADOPTION:
The regulations of section 5-151 and article 102 of the state officials and employees ethics act, 5
Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/1-1 et seq. (hereinafter referred to as the "act" in this chapter) are
hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the officers and employees of the city to the
extent required by 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5. (Ord. 980, 10-4-2004)
1-14-2: SOLICITATION OR ACCEPTANCE OF GIFTS PROHIBITED:
The solicitation or acceptance of gifts prohibited to be solicited or accepted under the act, by any
officer or any employee of the city, is hereby prohibited. (Ord. 980, 10-4-2004)
1-14-3: OFFERING OR MAKING OF GIFTS PROHIBITED:
The offering or making of gifts prohibited to be offered or made to an officer or employee of the city
under the act, is hereby prohibited. (Ord. 980, 10-4-2004)
1-14-4: PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITIES:
The participation in political activities prohibited under the act, by any officer or employee of the city, is
hereby prohibited. (Ord. 980, 10-4-2004)
1-14-5: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the terms "officer" and "employee" shall be defined as set forth in 5
Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5(c). (Ord. 980, 10-4-2004)
1-14-6: PENALTIES:
The penalties for violations of this chapter shall be the same as those penalties set forth in 5 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 430/50-5 for similar violations of the act. (Ord. 980, 10-4-2004)
1-14-7: MORE RESTRICTIVE PROVISIONS PREVAIL:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 34/396
This chapter does not repeal or otherwise amend or modify any existing ordinances or policies which
regulate the conduct of city officers and employees. To the extent that any such existing ordinances or
policies are less restrictive than this chapter, however, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail in
accordance with the provisions of 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5(a). (Ord. 980, 10-4-2004)
1-14-8: AMENDMENTS:
Any amendment to the act that becomes effective after the date of this chapter shall be incorporated
into this chapter by reference and shall be applicable to the solicitation, acceptance, offering and
making of gifts and to prohibited political activities. However, any amendment that makes its
provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated into this chapter by
reference without formal action by the corporate authorities of the city. (Ord. 980, 10-4-2004)
1-14-9: DECLARATION OF UNCONSTITUTIONALITY:
If the Illinois supreme court declares the act unconstitutional in its entirety, then this chapter shall be
repealed as of the date that the Illinois supreme court's decision becomes final and not subject to any
further appeals or rehearings. This chapter shall be deemed repealed without further action by the
corporate authorities of the city if the act is found unconstitutional by the Illinois supreme court. (Ord.
980, 10-4-2004)
1-14-10: SEVERABILITY:
If the Illinois supreme court declares part of the act unconstitutional but upholds the constitutionality of
the remainder of the act, or does not address the remainder of the act, then the remainder of the act
as adopted by this chapter shall remain in full force and effect; however, that part of this chapter
relating to the part of the act found unconstitutional shall be deemed repealed without further action by
the corporate authorities of the city. (Ord. 980, 10-4-2004)
Chapter 15
CODE HEARING DEPARTMENT
1-15-1: ESTABLISHED; FUNCTION:
The city council hereby adopts division 2.2 of article 1 of the Illinois municipal code and establishes a
code hearing department of the city. The function of the code hearing department is to expedite the
prosecution and correction of code violations in the manner set forth in division 2.2 of article 1 of the
Illinois municipal code1. (Ord. 796, 11-1-1999)
1-15-2: VIOLATIONS SUBJECT TO ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION:
The code hearing department may adjudicate any violation of a municipal ordinance except for: a)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 35/396
building code violations that must be adjudicated pursuant to division 31.1 of article 11 of the Illinois
municipal code, and b) any offense under the Illinois vehicle code or similar offense that is a traffic
regulation governing the movement of vehicles and except for any reportable offense under section 6-
204 of the Illinois vehicle code. (Ord. 796, 11-1-1999)
1-15-3: HEARING PROCEDURES NOT EXCLUSIVE:
The creation hereby of a code hearing department does not preclude the city from using any other
methods to enforce the provisions of this code. (Ord. 796, 11-1-1999)
1-15-4: CONDUCT OF PROCEEDINGS:
Administrative hearings conducted by the code hearing department shall be in accordance with the
provisions of division 2.2 of article 1 of the Illinois municipal code2. All provisions of division 2.2 of
article 1 of the Illinois municipal code and any subsequent amendments thereto are expressly ratified
and confirmed as the provisions of this chapter as if fully set out at length herein. (Ord. 796, 11-1-
1999)
1-15-5: HEARING OFFICER:
The city attorney is hereby appointed and designated as hearing officer of the code hearing
department. (Ord. 796, 11-1-1999)
Chapter 16
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS
AND RESPONSIBILITY
1-16-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as, and may be cited as, the LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED
TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITY ORDINANCE. (Ord. 842, 3-19-2001)
1-16-2: SCOPE:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the city's procedures in connection with all of the city's
locally imposed and administered taxes. (Ord. 842, 3-19-2001)
1-16-3: DEFINITIONS:
Certain words or terms herein shall have the meanings ascribed to them as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 36/396
ACT: The "local government taxpayers' bill of rights act".
CITY: The city of Clinton, Illinois.
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: Mayor and city council.
LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR: The city treasurer is charged with the administration and collection of
the locally imposed and administered taxes, including staff, employees or agents to the extent they
are authorized by the local tax administrator to act in the local tax administrator's stead. The local tax
administrator shall have the authority to implement the terms of this chapter to give full effect to this
chapter. The exercise of such authority by the local tax administrator shall not be inconsistent with this
chapter and the act.
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX OR TAX: Each tax imposed by the city that is
collected or administered by the city, not an agency or department of the state. It does not include any
taxes imposed upon real property under the property tax code or fees collected by the city other than
infrastructure maintenance fees.
NOTICE: Each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice or communication in connection
with each of the city's locally imposed and administered taxes.
TAX ORDINANCE: Each ordinance adopted by the city that imposes any locally imposed and
administered tax.
TAXPAYER: Any person required to pay any locally imposed and administered tax and generally
includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of such tax is placed and with respect to
consumer taxes includes the business or entity required to collect and pay the locally imposed and
administered tax to the city. (Ord. 842, 3-19-2001)
1-16-4: NOTICES:
Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given, the notice is to be in writing,
mailed not less than seven (7) calendar days prior to the day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or
other scheduled act of the local tax administrator. The notice shall be sent by the local tax
administrator as follows:
(A) First class or express mail, or overnight mail, addressed to the persons concerned at the person's
last known address; or
(B) Personal service or delivery. (Ord. 842, 3-19-2001)
1-16-5: LATE PAYMENT:
Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to the city pursuant to any tax
ordinance shall be considered late, unless it is: a) physically received by the city on or before the due
date; or b) received in an envelope or other container displaying a valid, readable U.S. postmark dated
on or before the due date, properly addressed to the city, with adequate postage prepaid. (Ord. 842,
3-19-2001)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 37/396
1-16-6: PAYMENT:
Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in the following order: a) first to
the tax due for the applicable period; b) second to the interest due for the applicable period; and c)
third to the penalty for the applicable period. (Ord. 842, 3-19-2001)
1-16-7: CERTAIN CREDITS AND REFUNDS:
(A) The city shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid without written protest at the time of
payment in the event that a locally imposed and administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or
unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer shall not be deemed to
have paid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts upon which to protest
the taxes at the time of payment or if the taxpayer paid the taxes under duress.
(B) The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund shall be four (4) years after the end of the
calendar year in which payment in error was made. The city shall not grant a credit or refund of
locally imposed and administered taxes, interest, or penalties to a person who has not paid the
amounts directly to the city.
(C) The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and administered taxes, interest or
penalties paid in error shall be as follows:
1. The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator in writing a claim for credit or refund
together with a statement specifying:
(a) The name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to the claim;
(b) The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax subject to the claim;
(c) The date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the canceled check or receipt for the
payment;
(d) The taxpayer's recalculation, accompanied by an amended or revised tax return, in
connection with the claim; and
(e) A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the claim to be applied to the
amount of tax, interest and penalties overpaid, and, as applicable, related interest on the
amount overpaid; provided, however, that there shall be no refund and only a credit given in
the event the taxpayer owes any monies to the city.
2. Within ten (10) days of the receipt by the local tax administrator of any claim for a refund or
credit, the local tax administrator shall either:
(a) Grant the claim; or
(b) Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement as to the reason for the denial
or the partial grant and denial.
3. In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in part, a claim for refund or credit, the
amount of the grant for refund or credit shall bear interest at the rate of five percent (5%) per
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 38/396
annum, based on a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days and the number of days elapsed,
from the date of the overpayment to the date of mailing of a refund check or the grant of a credit.
(Ord. 842, 3-19-2001)
1-16-8: AUDIT PROCEDURE:
Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any local administered tax shall comply with the notice
requirements of this chapter.
(A) Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:
1. The tax;
2. The time period of the audit; and
3. A brief description of the books and records to be made available for the auditor.
(B) Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and if the date and time selected by
the local tax administrator is not agreeable to the taxpayer, another date and time may be
requested by the taxpayer within thirty (30) days after the originally designated audit and during
normal business hours.
(C) The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit conducted. The audit shall be
conducted not less than seven (7) days nor more than thirty (30) days from the date the notice is
given, unless the taxpayer and the local tax administrator agreed to some other convenient time. In
the event the taxpayer is unable to comply with the audit on the date in question, the taxpayer may
request another date within the thirty (30) days, approved in writing, that is convenient to the
taxpayer and the local tax administrator.
(D) Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the taxpayer's business or activities,
including original source documents and books of entry denoting the transactions which had given
rise or may have given rise to any tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be kept in
the English language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by the city.
(E) It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make available its books and records for
inspection by the city. If the taxpayer or tax collector fails to provide the documents necessary for
audit within the time provided, the local tax administrator may issue a tax determination and
assessment based on the tax administrator's determination of the best estimate of the taxpayer's
tax liability.
(F) If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally imposed and administered tax
as a result of the audit, written notice of the amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer
within thirty (30) days of the city's determination of the amount of overpayment.
(G) In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect local government entity, the local tax
administrator shall notify the local governmental entity imposing such tax. (Ord. 842, 3-19-2001)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 39/396
1-16-9: APPEAL:
(A) The local tax administrator shall send written notice to a taxpayer upon the local tax administrator's
issuance of a protestable notice of tax due, a bill, a claim denial, or a notice of claim reduction
regarding any tax. The notice shall include the following information:
1. The reason for the assessment;
2. The amount of the tax liability proposed;
3. The procedure for appealing the assessment; and
4. The obligations of the city during the audit, appeal, refund and collection process.
(B) A taxpayer who receives written notice from the local tax administrator of a determination of tax
due or assessment may file with the local tax administrator a written protest and petition for
hearing, setting forth the basis of the taxpayer's request for a hearing. The written protest and
petition for hearing must be filed with the local tax administrator within forty five (45) days of receipt
of the written notice of the tax determination and assessment.
(C) If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed, the local tax administrator shall fix the time
and place for hearing and shall give written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled
for a date within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the written protest and petition for hearing, unless
the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties.
(D) If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed within the forty five (45) day period, the tax
determination, audit or assessment shall become a final bill due and owing without further notice.
(E) Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full payment of the contested tax
liability along with interest accrued as of the due date of the tax, the local tax administrator may
reopen or extend the time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing. In no event shall the
time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing be reopened or extended for more than
ninety (90) days after the expiration of the forty five (45) day period. (Ord. 842, 3-19-2001)
1-16-10: HEARING:
(A) Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely written protest and petition for hearing
under section 1-16-9 of this chapter, the local tax administrator shall conduct a hearing regarding
any appeal.
(B) No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance is absolutely necessary to
protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack of preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any
continuance granted shall not exceed fourteen (14) days.
(C) At the hearing the local tax administrator shall preside and shall hear testimony and accept any
evidence relevant to the tax determination, audit or assessment. The strict rules of evidence
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 40/396
applicable to judicial proceedings shall not apply.
(D) At the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax administrator shall make a written determination on
the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing. The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided
with a copy of the written decision. (Ord. 842, 3-19-2001)
1-16-11: INTEREST AND PENALTIES:
In the event a determination has been made that a tax is due and owing, through audit, assessment or
other bill sent, the tax must be paid within the time frame otherwise indicated.
(A) Interest: The city hereby provides for the amount of interest to be assessed on a late payment,
underpayment, or nonpayment of the tax, to be one and one-half percent (11/2%) of the tax due for
each month or part thereof until the tax is paid in full.
(B) Late Filing And Payment Penalties: If a tax return is not filed within the time and manner provided
by the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing penalty of five percent (5%) of the amount of tax
required to be shown as due on a return shall be imposed; and a late payment penalty of five
percent (5%) of the tax due shall be imposed. If no return is filed within the time or manner
provided by the controlling tax ordinance and prior to the city issuing a notice of tax delinquency or
notice of tax liability, then a failure to file penalty shall be assessed equal to twenty five percent
(25%) of the total tax due for the applicable reporting period for which the return was required to be
filed. A late filing or payment penalty shall not apply if a failure to file penalty is imposed by the
controlling ordinance. (Ord. 842, 3-19-2001)
1-16-12: ABATEMENT:
The local tax administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate any late filing penalty, late
payment penalty or failure to file penalty if the local tax administrator shall determine reasonable
cause exists for delay or failure to make a filing. (Ord. 842, 3-19-2001)
1-16-13: INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS:
The city may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for the payment of taxes under the
controlling tax ordinance. The local tax administrator may not cancel any installment contract so
entered, unless the taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the local
tax administrator that the payment is thirty (30) days delinquent, the taxpayer shall have fourteen (14)
working days to cure any delinquency. If the taxpayer fails to cure the delinquency within the fourteen
(14) day period or fails to demonstrate good faith in restructuring the installment contract with the local
administrator, the installment contract shall be canceled without further notice to the taxpayer. (Ord.
842, 3-19-2001)
1-16-14: STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 41/396
The city, through the local tax administrator, shall review all tax returns in a prompt and timely manner
and inform taxpayers of any amounts due and owing. The taxpayer shall have forty five (45) days after
receiving notice of the reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund or provide any tax still due
and owing.
(A) No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than four (4) years after the end of the
calendar year for which the return for the applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in
which the return for the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.
(B) If any tax return is not filed or if during any four (4) year period for which a notice of tax
determination or assessment may be issued by the city, the tax paid was less than seventy five
percent (75%) of the tax due, the statute of limitations shall be six (6) years after the end of the
calendar year in which return for the applicable period was due or end of the calendar year in
which the return for the applicable period was filed.
(C) No statute of limitations shall apply if a fraudulent tax return was filed by the taxpayer. (Ord. 842,
3-19-2001)
1-16-15: VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE:
For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has not received a written notice of
an audit, investigation, or assessment from the local tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an
application with the local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A taxpayer filing a
voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of tax due, along with interest of one
percent (1%) per month, for all periods prior to the filing of the application but not more than four (4)
years before the date of filing the application. A taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure application
may not be liable for any additional tax, interest, or penalty for any period before the date the
application was filed. However, if the taxpayer incorrectly determined and underpaid the amount of tax
due, the taxpayer is liable for the underpaid tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid tax,
unless the underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the taxpayer, in which case the
application shall be deemed invalid and void. The payment of tax and interest must be made no later
than ninety (90) days after the filing of the voluntary disclosure application or the date agreed to by the
local tax administrator. However, any additional amounts owed as a result of an underpayment of tax
and interest previously paid under this section must be paid within ninety (90) days after a final
determination and the exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed to
by the local tax administrator, whichever is longer. (Ord. 842, 3-19-2001)
1-16-16: PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES:
Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or standard publishing
requirements. The posting of a tax ordinance on the internet shall satisfy the publication requirements.
Copies of all tax ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request at the city clerk's
office. (Ord. 842, 3-19-2001)
1-16-17: INTERNAL REVIEW PROCEDURE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 42/396
The local tax administrator shall establish an internal review procedure regarding any liens filed
against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes. Upon a determination by the local tax administrator that the
lien is valid, the lien shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is determined to be improper, the
local tax administrator shall:
(A) Timely remove the lien at the city's expense;
(B) Correct the taxpayer's credit record; and
(C) Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien. (Ord. 842, 3-19-2001)
1-16-18: APPLICATION:
This chapter shall be liberally construed and administered to supplement all of the city's tax
ordinances. To the extent that any tax ordinance is in conflict with or inconsistent with this chapter, this
chapter shall be controlling. (Ord. 842, 3-19-2001)
1-16-19: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, paragraph or provision of this chapter shall be held to be invalid or unenforceable for
any reason, the invalidity or unenforceability of such section, paragraph or provision shall not affect
any of the remaining provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 842, 3-19-2001)
1-16-20: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall be in full force and effect, after passage, approval and publication as required by
law. (Ord. 842, 3-19-2001)
Chapter 17
ELECTRONIC ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS
1-17-1: RULES STATEMENT:
It is the decision of the city of Clinton, Illinois, that any member of the city council may attend any open
or closed meeting of the city of Clinton, Illinois, via electronic means (such as by telephone, video or
internet connection), provided that such attendance is in compliance with these rules and any
applicable laws. (Ord. 1093, 10-1-2007)
1-17-2: PREREQUISITES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 43/396
A member of the city council may attend a meeting electronically if the member meets the following
conditions:
(A) The member should notify the city clerk within twenty four (24) hours before the meeting unless
impractical, so that necessary communication equipment can be arranged. Inability to make the
necessary technical arrangements will result in a denial of a request for remote attendance.
(B) The member must assert one of the following three (3) reasons why he or she is unable to
physically attend the meeting:
1. The member cannot attend because of personal illness or disability; or
2. The member cannot attend because of employment purposes or the business of the city of
Clinton; or
3. The member cannot attend because of a family or other emergency. (Ord. 1093, 10-1-2007)
1-17-3: AUTHORIZATION TO PARTICIPATE:
(A) The city clerk, after receiving the electronic attendance request, shall inform the corporate
authority of the request for electronic attendance.
(B) After establishing that a quorum is physically present at a meeting where a member of the city
council desires to attend electronically, the presiding officer shall state that: 1) a notice was
received by the city clerk in accordance with these rules, and 2) the requesting member will be
authorized to attend the meeting electronically unless a motion objecting to the member's
electronic attendance is made, seconded and approved by four-fifths (4/5) of the members of the
city council physically present at the meeting. If no such motion is made and seconded, or if any
such motion fails to achieve the required vote by the members of the city council physically present
at the meeting, then the request by the member to attend the meeting electronically shall be
deemed approved by the city council and the presiding officer shall declare the requesting member
present. After the declaration by the presiding officer, the question of a member's electronic
attendance may not be reconsidered. (Ord. 1093, 10-1-2007)
1-17-4: ADEQUATE EQUIPMENT REQUIRED:
A member participating electronically and other members of the city council must be able to
communicate effectively, and members of the audience must be able to hear all communications at
the meeting site. Before allowing any electronic attendance at any meeting, the city council shall
provide equipment adequate to accomplish this objective at the meeting site. (Ord. 1093, 10-1-2007)
1-17-5: MINUTES:
Any member attending electronically shall be considered an off site attendee and counted as present
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 44/396
electronically for that meeting. The meeting minutes shall also reflect and state specifically whether
each member is physically present or present by electronic means. (Ord. 1093, 10-1-2007)
1-17-6: RIGHTS OF REMOTE MEMBER:
A member permitted to attend electronically will be able to express his or her comments during the
meeting and participate in the same capacity as those members physically present, subject to all
general meeting guidelines and procedures previously adopted and adhered to. The member
attending electronically shall be heard, considered, and counted as to any vote taken. Accordingly, the
name of any member attending electronically shall be called during any vote taken, and his or her vote
counted and recorded by the city clerk and placed in the minutes for the corresponding meeting. A
member attending electronically may leave a meeting and return as in the case of any member,
providing the member attending electronically shall announce his or her leaving and returning. A
member attending electronically shall not preside over the meeting. The mayor of the city of Clinton
shall continue to vote last on any council vote even if attending the meeting electronically. (Ord. 1093,
10-1-2007)
Title 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Chapter 1
EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER AGENCY
2-1-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is hereby created the Clinton emergency services and disaster agency to prevent, minimize,
repair, and alleviate injury or damage resulting from disaster caused by enemy attack, sabotage, or
other hostile action, or from natural or manmade disaster, in accordance with the "Illinois emergency
services and disaster act of 1975"1.
This ESDA shall consist of the coordinator and such additional members as may be selected by the
coordinator. (Ord. 139, 5-1-1978)
2-1-2: COORDINATOR:
The coordinator of the Clinton ESDA shall be appointed by the mayor, with the consent of the council,
and shall serve until removed by same.
The coordinator shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration, training and
operation of the ESDA, subject to the direction and control of the mayor as provided by statute.
In the event of the absence, resignation, death or inability to serve as the coordinator, the mayor or
any person designated by him, and the council, shall be and act as coordinator until a new
appointment is made as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 139, 5-1-1978)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 45/396
2-1-3: FUNCTIONS:
The Clinton ESDA shall perform such ESDA functions within the city as shall be prescribed in and by
the state ESDA plan and program prepared by the governor, and such orders, rules and regulations
as may be promulgated by the governor, and in addition shall perform such duties outside the
corporate limits as may be required pursuant to any mutual aid agreement with any other political
subdivision, municipality, or quasi-municipality entered into as provided by "the state ESDA act of
1975". (Ord. 139, 5-1-1978)
2-1-4: SERVICE AS MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM:
All or any members of the Clinton ESDA organization may be designated as members of a mobile
support team created by the director of the state ESDA as provided by law.
The leader of such mobile support team shall be designated by the coordinator of the Clinton ESDA
organization.
Any member of a mobile support team who is a Clinton employee or officer, while serving on call to
duty by the governor, or the state director, shall receive the compensation and have the powers,
duties, rights, and immunities incident to such employment or office. Any such member who is not a
paid officer or employee of the city, while so serving, shall receive from the state reasonable
compensation as provided by law. (Ord. 139, 5-1-1978)
2-1-5: AGREEMENTS WITH OTHER POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS:
The coordinator of ESDA may negotiate mutual aid agreements with other cities or political
subdivisions of the state, but no such agreement shall be effective until it has been approved by the
mayor and city council, and by the state director of ESDA. (Ord. 139, 5-1-1978)
2-1-6: EMERGENCY ACTION:
If the governor proclaims that a disaster emergency exists in the event of actual enemy attack upon
the United States or the occurrence within the state of Illinois of a major disaster resulting from enemy
sabotage or other hostile action, or from manmade or natural disaster, it shall be the duty of the
Clinton ESDA to cooperate fully with the state ESDA and with the governor in the exercise of
emergency powers as provided by law. (Ord. 139, 5-1-1978)
2-1-7: COMPENSATION:
Members of the ESDA who are paid employees or officers of the city, if called for training by the state
director of ESDA, shall receive for the time spent in such training the same rate of pay as is attached
to the position held; members who are not such city employees or officers shall receive for such
training time such compensation as may be established by the mayor. (Ord. 139, 5-1-1978)
2-1-8: REIMBURSEMENT BY STATE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 46/396
The city treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund, any reimbursement by the state to
the city for expenses incident to training members of the ESDA as prescribed by the state director of
ESDA, compensation for services and expenses of members of a mobile support team while serving
outside the city in response to a call by the governor or state director of ESDA, as provided by law,
and any other reimbursement made by the state incident to ESDA activities as provided by law. (Ord.
139, 5-1-1978)
2-1-9: PURCHASES AND EXPENDITURES:
The city council may, on recommendation of the city coordinator of ESDA, authorize any purchase or
contracts necessary to place the city in a position to combat effectively any disaster resulting from the
explosion of any nuclear or other bomb or missile, and to protect the public health and safety, protect
property, and provide emergency assistance to victims in the case of such disaster, or from manmade
or natural disaster. (Ord. 139, 5-1-1978)
In the event of enemy caused or other disaster, the Clinton coordinator of ESDA is authorized, on
behalf of the city, to procure such services, supplies, equipment or material as may be necessary for
such purposes or formalities normally prescribed by the law pertaining to city contracts or obligations,
as authorized by "the state ESDA act of 1975". (Ord. 400, 4-20-1987)
2-1-10: OATH:
Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the Clinton ESDA organization shall, before
entering upon his duties, subscribe to the following oath, which shall be filed with the coordinator:
I, , do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and defend and bear true faith and allegiance to
the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the territory,
institutions and facilities thereof, both public and private, against all enemies, foreign and domestic;
that I take this obligation freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will
well and faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter. And I do further swear (or
affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I nor have I been a member of any political party or organization
that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this State by force or
violence; and that during such time as I am affiliated with the Clinton ESDA organization, I will not
advocate nor become a member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of
the government of the United States or of this State by force or violence.
(Ord. 139, 5-1-1978)
2-1-11: OFFICE:
The mayor is authorized to designate space in a city building, or elsewhere, as may be provided for by
the mayor for the Clinton ESDA as its office. (Ord. 139, 5-1-1978)
2-1-12: APPROPRIATION; LEVY OF TAXES:
The city council may make an appropriation for ESDA purposes in the manner provided by law, and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 47/396
may levy in addition for ESDA purposes only, a tax not to exceed five cents ($0.05) per one hundred
dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value of all taxable property in addition to all other taxes, as
provided by "the state ESDA act of 1975"; provided however, that the amount collectable under such
levy shall in no event exceed twenty five cents ($0.25) per capita. (Ord. 139, 5-1-1978)
Chapter 2
BOARD OF LIBRARY DIRECTORS
2-2-1: ESTABLISHMENT, TERMS:
There shall be a board of library directors for the city as provided by law. The board shall consist of
nine (9) directors to be appointed by the mayor and with the advice and consent of the council, and
not more than one director shall be a member of the council. Such library directors shall serve three
(3) year terms, staggered so that three (3) terms expire each year, as provided by law. (1968 Code,
secs. 16-102, 16-103)
2-2-2: ORGANIZATION:
The library directors shall select a president and secretary as provided by statute, and shall meet at
such times as the library board may determine. (1968 Code, sec. 16-104)
2-2-3: DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS:
The library board shall have charge of the operation of the city library1 and of the expenditures of all
library funds. Each year it shall file a report with the council containing, among other things, an
itemized statement of the expenses anticipated for the coming year, as required by law. (1968 Code,
sec. 16-105)
2-2-4: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The board of library directors shall have the power to make any reasonable rules and regulations
governing the use of the library and library facilities. (1968 Code, sec. 16-106; amd. 1983 Code)
Chapter 3
BOARD OF HOSPITAL DIRECTORS
2-3-1: BOARD OF DIRECTORS:
The Board of Directors shall consist of five (5) members who shall hold office for five (5) years from
their appointment, and until their successors are appointed and have qualified. The said Directors
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 48/396
shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council, on or before July 1st of each
year. (Ord. 1442, 3-20-2017)
2-3-2: TERM OF OFFICE, REMOVAL:
The Board of Hospital Directors respectively shall hold office for three (3) years from their
appointment, and until their successors are appointed and have qualified. Said terms shall be
staggered so that three (3) terms expire each year. The Mayor, by and with the consent of the Council,
may remove any Director for misconduct or neglect of duty. (1968 Code, sec. 17-104)
2-3-3: VACANCIES FILLED, COMPENSATION:
Vacancies in the Board of Directors occasioned by removals, resignation or otherwise shall be
reported to the Council and be filled in like manner as original appointments. No Director shall receive
any compensation as such. (1968 Code, sec. 17-105)
2-3-4: OATH:
The Board of Hospital Directors shall, before entering upon the duties of their office, severally take
and subscribe the oath prescribed by law for City officers. (1968 Code, sec. 17-106)
2-3-5: ORGANIZATION, POWERS, FUNDS:
The Board of Hospital Directors shall, immediately after appointment, meet and organize by the
election of one of their number President and by the election of such other officers as they may deem
necessary. They shall make and adopt such bylaws, rules and regulations for their own guidance and
for the government of the hospital1 as may be expedient, not inconsistent with the laws of the State of
Illinois or of the ordinances of the City.
The Directors shall have the exclusive control of expenditure of all monies collected to the credit of the
Hospital Fund, and of the construction of any hospital building and of the supervision, care and
custody of the grounds, rooms or buildings constructed, leased or set apart for that purpose; provided,
that all monies received for such hospital shall be deposited in the treasury of the City to the credit of
the Hospital Fund, and shall be kept separate and apart from other monies of the City, and drawn
upon by the proper officers of the City only upon properly authenticated vouchers of said board.
Said board shall have the power to appoint a competent and suitable Superintendent for said hospital,
and all necessary nurses, and to fix their compensation, and shall also have power to remove such
appointees; and shall, in general, carry out the spirit and intent of this chapter in establishing and
maintaining a City hospital, including the charges made to the patients therein, always subject to such
reasonable rules and regulations as the Hospital Board may adopt in order to render the use of said
hospital of the greatest benefit to the greatest number; and the said board may exclude from said
hospital any and all persons who shall wilfully violate such rules.
Said board may extend the privileges and use of said hospital to persons residing outside of the City
in this State upon such terms and conditions as said board may from time to time by its regulations
prescribe. (1968 Code, sec. 17-107)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 49/396
2-3-6: MONTHLY REPORT:
The Board of Hospital Directors shall make, on the first of each month, a report to the City Council
stating the conditions of their trust, the various sums of money received from the hospital and from all
other sources, and how much monies have been expended, and for what purposes and such other
information and suggestions as they may deem of general interest.
In the performance of their duties as such Directors, they shall be governed by the laws of the State of
Illinois as they now are in effect or may be hereafter changed, and in accordance with the ordinances
or resolutions of the Council as are now in effect or may be hereafter changed or enacted, and all
proceedings of said board shall be under the supervision and control of the Commissioner of Public
Affairs. (1968 Code, sec. 17-108)
Chapter 4
BOARD OF CEMETERY MANAGERS
2-4-1: CREATION, APPOINTMENT:
There is hereby created a board of managers for the municipal cemeteries of the city1. The mayor of
the city is hereby directed, with the advice and consent of the city council, to appoint a board of
managers of three (3) persons, to receive and hold money, funds and property in perpetual trust for
the cemeteries of the city. (1968 Code, secs. 20-101, 20-102)
2-4-2: TERM OF OFFICE:
The members of the board of cemetery managers shall hold office for a period of three (3) years and
until their successors are appointed; however, the term of office of all members shall not expire at the
same time. The mayor, in appointing the first board of managers, shall appoint one member of said
board for a period of one year; the second member of said board for a period of two (2) years, and the
third member of said board for a period of three (3) years, and upon the expiration of the term of each
of said members, his successor shall be appointed for a period of three (3) years. (1968 Code, sec.
20-103)
2-4-3: TREASURER:
The treasurer of said cemetery board of managers need not be a member of said board, but shall
execute a bond to the people of the state of Illinois for the use of said board of managers, in the penal
sum of not less than double the value of said money or funds coming into his hands as such treasurer,
and said bond to be in such form and with security as may be prescribed and approved by the city
council, to be approved and preserved in the same manner as the bond of the treasurer of the city2.
(1968 Code, sec. 20-104)
2-4-4: GIFTS, DEVISES AND BEQUESTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 50/396
Any person whomsoever is hereby authorized and empowered to give, donate, devise or bequeath
any sum of money, not less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), or any funds, securities or
property of any kind, the value of which shall not be less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), to
city of Clinton cemetery fund in perpetual trust, for the maintenance, care, repair, upkeep or
ornamentation of Woodlawn cemetery, or any lot or grave in said cemetery, specified in the instrument
making such gift, donation, devise or bequest. The city shall have the right to convert said property
into money, and shall invest the proceeds thereof, and the money so given, donated and bequeathed
to it in such manner as trustees have the right to invest money, according to state statutes. The
principal of such trust funds shall be kept intact, and perpetually invested and the income thereof shall
be perpetually applied for purposes specified in the instrument making such gifts, donations, devises
or bequests, and for no other purpose. Any gift, devise or bequest given pursuant to this section shall
be under the supervision of the commissioner of public health and safety. (1968 Code, sec. 20-105;
amd. 1983 Code)
2-4-5: RECORDS:
The clerk of the board of cemetery managers and the treasurer of said board shall keep a permanent
record of the proceedings of the said board, and shall make a report in writing, under oath, to the city
council, annually, which report is to be approved and preserved by the city council. (1968 Code, sec.
20-106)
Footnote 1: See title 7, chapter 1 of this code.
Footnote 2: See section 1-10-3 of this code.
Chapter 5
BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS
2-5-1: APPOINTMENT, TERM OF OFFICE:
There is hereby created a board of fire and police commissioners. The mayor, with the consent of the
city council, shall appoint a board of fire and police commissioners. This board shall consist of three
(3) members, whose terms of office shall be three (3) years and until their respective successors are
appointed and have qualified, except as provided in state statute. No such appointment, however,
shall be made by the mayor within thirty (30) days before the expiration of his term of office. (1968
Code, sec. 18-101)
The mayor, by and with the approval of the city council, shall on the first appointments to said board,
appoint one of the members to serve until the end of the then current municipal year, another to serve
until the end of the municipal year next ensuing, and the third to serve until the end of the municipal
year second next ensuing. But every member shall serve until his successor is appointed and has
qualified. (1968 Code, sec. 18-102)
2-5-2: QUALIFICATIONS, OATH, BOND, REMOVAL:
The members of the board shall be considered officers of the municipality, and shall file an oath and a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 51/396
fidelity bond in such amount as may be required by the governing body of the municipality.
No person holding an office under a municipality, shall be a member of the board of fire and police
commissioners or the secretary thereof. The acceptance of any such office by a member of the board
shall be treated as a resignation of his office as a member of the board or the secretary thereof. No
person shall be appointed a member of the board of fire and police commissioners who is related,
either by blood or marriage up to the degree of first cousin to any elected official of such municipality.
No more than two (2) members of the board shall belong to the same political party existing in such
municipality at the time of such appointments and as defined in section 10-2 of the election code. If
only one or no political party exists in such municipality at the time of such appointments then state or
national political party affiliations shall be considered in making such appointments. Party affiliation
shall be determined by affidavit of the person appointed as a member of the board.
Members shall not be subject to removal, except for cause, upon written charges, and after an
opportunity to be heard within thirty (30) days in his or their own defense, before a regular meeting of
the governing body of the municipality for which they have been appointed. A majority vote of the
elected members of such governing body shall be required to remove any such member from office.
(Ord. 409, 7-20-1987)
2-5-3: BOARD MEMBERSHIP, DISQUALIFICATIONS:
(Rep. by Ord. 409, 7-20-1987)
2-5-4: SECRETARY OF BOARD, DUTIES:
The board of fire and police commissioners may employ a secretary, or may designate one of its own
members to act as secretary. The secretary: a) shall keep the minutes of the board's proceedings; b)
shall be the custodian of all papers pertaining to the business of the board; c) shall keep a record of all
examinations held; and d) shall perform all other duties the board prescribes. (1968 Code, sec. 18-
113)
2-5-5: RETAINING SERVICES OF AN ATTORNEY:
The board shall be authorized to hire an attorney and pay him reasonable compensation. (1968 Code,
sec. 18-115; amd. 1983 Code)
2-5-6: RULES, PUBLICATION:
The board of fire and police commissioners shall make rules: a) to carry out the purpose of this
chapter; and b) for appointments and removals in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The
board, from time to time, may make changes in these rules.
All the rules and changes therein shall be printed immediately for distribution. The board shall give
notice: a) of the places where the printed rules may be obtained; and b) of the date, not less than ten
(10) days subsequent to the time of publication, when the rules or changes therein shall go into
operation. This notice shall be published in one or more newspapers published in the city, or, if no
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 52/396
newspaper is published therein, then in one or more newspapers with a general circulation within the
city. (1968 Code, sec. 18-105)
2-5-7: EXAMINATIONS BY BOARD:
(A) Examine Candidates: The board of fire and police commissioners shall conduct an examination for
the offices of the police and fire departments, for those candidates selected by the council. All
appointments to each department, other than that of the lowest rank, and the chiefs of the various
departments shall be from the rank next below that to which the appointment is made. (1968 Code,
sec. 18-104)
(B) Examine Applicants: All applicants for a position in either the fire or police departments of the city
shall be under thirty five (35) years of age and shall be subjected to examination, which shall be
public, competitive, and free to all electors of the city, subject to reasonable limitations as to
residence, health, habits and moral character; provided, that the foregoing age limitation shall not
apply in the case of any person having previous employment status as a policeman or fireman in a
regularly constituted police or fire department of any municipality. The examinations shall be
practical in their character and shall relate to those matters which will fairly test the persons
examined as to their relative capacity to discharge the duties of the positions to which they seek
appointment. The examinations shall include tests of physical qualifications and health. No
applicant, however, shall be examined concerning his political or religious opinions or affiliations.
The examinations shall be conducted by the board of fire and police commissioners of the
municipality. (1968 Code, sec. 18-106)
(C) Exemption From Examination: Any member of the fire or police departments of the city, who has
held a position in the fire or police departments for not less than two (2) years prior to the effective
date hereof, shall become a member of the classified service of the fire or police departments
respectively, in the position held by him for one year immediately prior to the effective date hereof
or the adoption of said act or ordinance by the city, without examination. (1968 Code, sec. 18-106-
1)
(D) Publication Of Notice Of Examinations: Notice of the time and place of every examination shall be
given by the board by a publication at least two (2) weeks preceding the examination, in one or
more newspapers published in the city. (1968 Code, sec. 18-107)
2-5-8: VETERANS PREFERENCE FOR EMPLOYMENT:
The provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/10-2.1-8 are hereby adopted by reference. Three (3)
copies of such provisions shall be and remain on file in the office of the city clerk. (1983 Code)
2-5-9: ELIGIBLE LIST:
The board of fire and police commissioners shall prepare and keep a register of persons whose
general average standing, upon examination, is not less than the minimum fixed by the rules of the
board, and who are otherwise eligible. These persons shall take rank upon the register as candidates
in the order of their relative excellence as determined by examination. (1968 Code, sec. 18-108)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 53/396
2-5-10: PROMOTIONS ACCORDING TO MERIT AND SENIORITY:
The board of fire and police commissioners, by its rules, shall provide for promotion in the fire and
police departments on the basis of ascertained merit and seniority in service and examination, and
shall provide in all cases, where it is practicable, that vacancies shall be filled by promotion. All
examinations for promotion shall be competitive among such members of the next lower rank as
desire to submit themselves to examination. All promotions shall be made from the three (3) having
the highest rating. The method of examination and the rules governing examinations for promotion
shall be the same as provided for applicants for original appointment. (1968 Code, sec. 18-109)
2-5-11: TEMPORARY APPOINTMENTS:
In order to prevent a stoppage of public business, to meet extraordinary exigencies, or to prevent
material impairment of either the police or fire departments, the board of fire and police commissioners
may make temporary appointments, to remain in force until regular appointments may be made under
the provisions of this chapter, but never to exceed six (6) months. (1968 Code, sec. 18-110)
2-5-12: REMOVAL OR DISCHARGE, PROCEDURE:
(A) Except as hereinafter provided, no officer or member of the fire or police departments subject to
this chapter, who has held the position for more than one year prior to the effective date hereof, or
who has been appointed under the rules and examination provided for by this chapter, or was
appointed under or held his position more than one year prior to the adoption of division 2.1 of
chapter 65, article 10 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes regarding boards of fire and police
commissioners, shall be removed or discharged except for cause, upon written charges, and after
an opportunity to be heard in his own defense. These charges shall be investigated by the board of
fire and police commissioners, and in case an officer or member is found guilty, the board may
remove or discharge him, or may suspend any officer pending this investigation, but not to exceed
thirty (30) days at any one time. In the conduct of this investigation, each member of the board
shall have power to administer oaths and affirmations, and the board shall have power to secure
by its subpoena both the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of books and
papers relevant to the investigation. (1968 Code, sec. 18-111; amd. 1983 Code)
(B) The age for retirement of policemen or firemen in the service of the city, upon the effective date
hereof, is sixty five (65) years; but a city may continue to employ a policeman or fireman over the
age of sixty five (65) at its discretion on a full time or part time basis.
(C) All officers and members of either the fire or police department of the city holding their positions by
virtue of one of the methods specified in subsection (A) of this section, are city officers and shall be
entitled to the protection afforded by this chapter.
(D) The provisions of the "administrative review act1" approved May 8, 1945, and all amendments and
modifications thereof, and the rules adopted pursuant thereto, shall apply to and govern all
proceedings for the judicial review of final administrative decisions of the board of fire and police
commissioners hereunder. The term "administrative decision" is defined as in section 1 of said
"administrative review act". (1968 Code, sec. 18-111)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 54/396
2-5-13: ANNUAL REPORT:
Annually, on the first Monday of June, the board of fire and police commissioners shall submit to the
mayor a report of its activities, and of the rules in force and the practical effect thereof. In this report
the board may make suggestions which the board believes would result in greater efficiency in the fire
or police departments. The mayor shall transmit the report to the city council. (1968 Code, sec. 18-
112)
Footnote 1: 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.
Chapter 6
FIREMEN'S PENSION BOARD
2-6-1: CREATION, MEMBERSHIP:
There is hereby created a firemen's pension board for the city. The board of trustees of the firemen's
pension fund shall consist of the following members:
Chief officer of the fire department
City clerk
City treasurer
Mayor
(1968 Code, secs. 21-101, 21-103)
2-6-2: PENSION FUND ESTABLISHED, DEPOSITS:
There shall be a firemen's pension fund established in the city, as is provided by statute1. (1968 Code,
sec. 21-103)
There shall be deposited in the pension fund the sums required by law, which shall include:
(A) Seven and three-fourths percent (7.75%) per month deducted from the salary of the active
firemen.
(B) All rewards made to the fire department.
(C) And in addition thereto, the proceeds of such tax as may be levied for the firemen's pension fund.
(1968 Code, sec. 21-104; amd. 1983 Code)
Footnote 1: 40 ILCS 5/4-101 et seq.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 55/396
Chapter 7
POLICEMEN'S PENSION BOARD
2-7-1: CREATION, MEMBERSHIP:
There is hereby created a policemen's pension board for the city. The board of trustees of the police
pension fund shall consist of five (5) members, two (2) appointed by the mayor and two (2) elected by
the members of the police department, and one elected by the beneficiaries of the pension fund. The
elections shall be held on the third Monday in May, and the term of each member shall be two (2)
years. The pension board shall meet at least quarterly as provided by law, and shall hold such
additional meetings as may be called by the president of the pension board. (1968 Code, secs. 22-
101, 22-103)
2-7-2: FUND ESTABLISHED, DEPOSITS:
There shall be a police pension fund established in the city, as provided by law. (1968 Code, sec. 22-
102)
There shall be deposited in the pension fund the sums required by law, which shall include:
(A) Eight and one-half percent (8.5%) per month deducted from the salary of each member of the
police force.
(B) The proceeds of an annual tax levy extended pursuant to chapter 40, section 5/3-125 of the Illinois
Compiled Statutes.
(C) Rewards turned over to the pension fund.
All of the above shall be contributed to the pension fund as required by statute1. (1968 Code, sec. 22-
104; amd. 1983 Code)
Chapter 8
PLANNING COMMISSION
2-8-1: PURPOSE:
In order that adequate provisions be made for the preparation of a comprehensive city plan for the
guidance, direction and control of the growth and development or redevelopment of the city and
contiguous territory not more than one and one-half (11/2) miles beyond the corporate limits and not
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 56/396
included in any municipality, a planning commission is hereby created under authority of state
statute1. (Ord. 107, 8-1975)
2-8-2: MEMBERSHIP:
The planning commission shall consist of five (5) members, citizens of the city, appointed by the
mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council, on the basis of their particular fitness for their
duty on said planning commission. The mayor may, in addition, appoint five (5) ex officio members to
the planning commission for terms coterminous with the terms of their elected or appointed office.
Said members shall not enjoy voting privileges. (Ord. 107, 8-1975; amd. 1983 Code)
2-8-3: TERM OF OFFICE:
Of the five (5) members, two (2) shall serve for a period of one year, two (2) for a period of two (2)
years and one for a period of three (3) years, etc. Thereafter, such members shall serve for a period of
three (3) years. Vacancies shall be filled by appointments for unexpired terms only. All members of the
commission shall serve without compensation, except that, if the council deems it advisable, they may
receive such compensation as may be fixed from time to time by the said city council and provided for
in the appropriation ordinances. (Ord. 107, 8-1975)
2-8-4: ORGANIZATION PROCEDURE:
Immediately following their appointment the members of the planning commission shall meet,
organize, elect such officers as it may deem necessary, and adopt and later change or alter rules and
regulations of organization and procedure consistent with the city ordinances and state laws. The
commission shall keep written records of its proceedings, which shall be open at all times to public
inspection. The commission shall also file an annual report with the mayor and city council setting
forth its transactions and recommendations. (Ord. 107, 8-1975)
2-8-5: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The planning commission shall have the following powers and duties2:
(A) To prepare and recommend to the city council a comprehensive plan for the present and future
development or redevelopment of the city and contiguous unincorporated territory not more than
one and one-half (11/2) miles beyond the corporate limits of the city and not included in any other
municipality. Such plan may be adopted in whole or in separate geographical or functional parts,
each of which, when adopted shall be the official comprehensive plan, or part thereof, of Clinton.
Such plan shall be advisory except as to such part thereof as has been implemented by
ordinances duly enacted by the city council. All requirements for public hearing, filing of notice of
adoption with the county recorder of deeds and filing of said plan and ordinances with the city clerk
shall be complied with as provided for by law. To provide for the health, safety, comfort and
convenience of the inhabitants of the city and contiguous territory, such plan or plans shall
establish reasonable standards of design for subdivision and for resubdivision of unimproved land
and of areas subject to redevelopment in respect to public improvements as herein defined and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 57/396
shall establish reasonable requirements governing the location, width, course and surfacing of
public streets and highways, alleys, ways for public service facilities, curbs, gutters, sidewalks,
streetlights, parks, playgrounds, school grounds, size of lots to be used for residential purposes,
storm water drainage, water supply and distribution, sanitary sewers and sewage collection and
treatment. The requirements specified herein shall become regulatory only when adopted by
ordinance.
(B) To designate land suitable for annexation to the city and the recommended zoning classification for
such land upon annexation.
(C) To recommend to the city council from time to time, such changes in the comprehensive plan, or
any part thereof, as may be deemed necessary.
(D) To prepare and recommend to the city council, from time to time, plans and/or recommendations
for specific improvements in pursuance of the official comprehensive plan.
(E) To give aid to the officials of the city charged with the direction of projects for improvements
embraced within the official plan, or parts thereof, to further the making of such improvements and
generally to promote the realization of the official comprehensive plan.
(F) To arrange and conduct any form of publicity relative to its activities for the general purpose of
public understanding.
(G) To cooperate with regional planning commissions and other agencies or groups to further the local
planning program and to assure harmonious and integrated planning for the area.
(H) To exercise such other powers germane to the powers granted under authority of state statute.
(Ord. 107, 8-1975)
2-8-6: LAND SUBDIVISION OR RESUBDIVISION; OFFICIAL MAP:
At any time or times, before or after the formal adoption of the official comprehensive plan by the
corporate authorities, an official map may be designated by ordinance, which map may consist of the
whole area included within the official comprehensive plan, or one or more separate geographical or
functional parts, and may include all or any part of the contiguous unincorporated area within one and
one-half (11/2) miles from the corporate limits of the city. All requirements for public hearing, filing of
notice of adoption with the county recorder of deeds, and filing of said plan and ordinances, including
the official map, with the municipal clerk shall be complied with as provided for by law. No map or plat
of any subdivision or resubdivision presented for record affecting land within the corporate limits of the
city, or within contiguous territory which is not more than one and one-half (11/2) miles beyond the
corporate limits shall be entitled to record or shall be valid unless the subdivision shown thereon
provides for standards of design, and standards governing streets, alleys, public ways, ways for public
service facilities, streetlights, public grounds, size of lots to be used for residential purposes, storm
and flood water runoff channels and basins, water supply and distribution, sanitary sewers and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 58/396
sewage collection and treatment in conformity with the applicable requirements of the city ordinances,
including the official map. (Ord. 107, 8-1975)
2-8-7: IMPROVEMENTS:
The city clerk shall furnish the planning commission, for its consideration, a copy of all ordinances,
plans and data relative to public improvements of any nature. The planning commission may report in
relation thereto, if it deems a report necessary or advisable, for the consideration of the city council.
(Ord. 107, 8-1975)
2-8-8: EXPENDITURES:
The planning commission may, at the discretion of the city council, employ a paid secretary or staff, or
both, whose salaries, wages and other necessary expenses shall be provided for by the city council
from the public funds. If said planning commission shall deem it advisable to secure technical advice
or services, it may be done upon authority from the city council and appropriations by the city council
made therefor. (Ord. 107, 8-1975)
Chapter 9
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
2-9-1: BOARD ESTABLISHED; MEMBERSHIP:
The zoning board of appeals of the city is established in accordance with Illinois law. Said board shall
consist of seven (7) members, all of whom shall reside within the city. Each board member shall be
appointed by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council. One of the members so
appointed shall be named as chairman at the time of his appointment. Each board member shall
receive for his services such compensation, if any, as is determined from time to time by the city
council. (Ord. 159, 6-4-1979, eff. 8-1-1979)
2-9-2: TERM OF OFFICE, VACANCIES:
Each board member shall hold office for five (5) years from the date of his appointment, and until his
successor has been selected and qualified; provided, however, that the initial appointees to the board
shall serve respectively for the following terms: one for one year, one for two (2) years, one for three
(3) years, one for four (4) years, one for five (5) years, one for six (6) years, and one for seven (7)
years. With the advice and consent of the city council, the mayor may remove any member of the
board of appeals for cause, after a public hearing. Vacancies on the board shall be filled for the
unexpired term of the member whose place has become vacant in the same manner as provided for
the appointment of new members. (Ord. 159, 6-4-1979, eff. 8-1-1979; amd. Ord. 201, 7-6-1981)
2-9-3: MEETINGS, QUORUM:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 59/396
All meetings of the board of appeals shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such times as the
board may determine. All board meetings shall be open to the public. The board may adopt their own
rules of meeting procedures consistent with this chapter and the applicable Illinois statutes. The board
may select such officers as they deem necessary. The chairman, or in his absence the acting
chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. Four (4) members of the
board shall constitute a quorum, and the affirmative vote of at least four (4) members shall be
necessary to authorize any board action. (Ord. 159, 6-4-1979)
2-9-4: RECORDS:
The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings and examinations. These minutes shall indicate the
absence of any member, the vote or abstention of each member on each question, and any official
action taken. A copy of every rule, variance, order or decision of the board shall be filed immediately in
the board's office, and shall be a public record. (Ord. 159, 6-4-1979, eff. 8-1-1979)
Title 3
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
LICENSES AND PERMITS
3-1-1: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE OR PERMIT:
Applications for all licenses and permits required by ordinance shall be made in writing to the city clerk
in the absence of provision to the contrary. Each application shall state the name of the applicant, the
permit or license desired, the location to be used, if any, the time covered and the fee to be paid, and
each application shall contain such additional information as may be needed for the proper guidance
of the city officials in the issuing of the permit or license applied for. (1968 Code, sec. 32-101)
3-1-2: PERSON SUBJECT TO LICENSE:
Whenever in this code a license is required for the maintenance, operation or conduct of any business
or establishment, or for doing business or engaging in any activity or occupation, any person or
corporation shall be subject to the requirement if by himself or through an agent, employee or partner,
he holds himself forth as being engaged in the business or occupation, or solicits patronage therefor,
actively or passively, or performs or attempts to perform any part of such business or occupation in the
city. (1968 Code, sec. 32-102)
3-1-3: FORMS:
Forms for all licenses and permits and applications therefor shall be prepared and kept on file by the
city clerk. (1968 Code, sec. 32-103)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 60/396
3-1-4: SIGNATURES:
Each license or permit issued shall bear the signatures of the mayor and the city clerk in the absence
of any provision to the contrary. (1968 Code, sec. 32-104)
3-1-5: INVESTIGATIONS:
Upon receipt of an application for a license or permit where ordinances of the city necessitate an
investigation or inspection, before the issuance of such permit or license, the city clerk shall refer such
application to the proper officer for making such investigation within forty eight (48) hours of the time
of such receipt. The officer charged with the duty of making the investigation or inspection shall make
a report thereon, favorable or otherwise, within ten (10) days after receiving the application or a copy
thereof. The health officer shall make or cause to be made an inspection in regard to such licenses in
the connection of the care and handling of food and the prevention of nuisances and the spread of
disease, for the protection of health; and the building inspector shall make or cause to be made any
such inspections relative to the construction of buildings or other structures. All other investigations,
except where otherwise provided, shall be made by the chief of police or by some other officer
designated by the mayor. (1968 Code, sec. 32-105)
3-1-6: FEES:
In the absence of provision to the contrary all fees and charges for licenses or permits shall be paid in
advance at the time application thereof is made to the city clerk. When an applicant has not engaged
in the business until after the expiration of part of the current license year, the license fee shall be
prorated by quarters and the fee paid for each quarter or fraction thereof during which the business
has been or will be conducted. Except as otherwise provided, all license fees shall become a part of
the corporate fund. (1968 Code, sec. 32-106)
3-1-7: TERMINATION OF LICENSES:
All annual licenses shall terminate on April 30, where no provision to the contrary is made.
The city clerk shall mail to all licensees of the city a statement of the time of expiration of the license
held by the licensee, if an annual, three (3) weeks prior to the date of such expiration. Provided, that a
failure to send out such notice, or the failure of the licensee to receive it shall not excuse the licensee
from a failure to obtain a new license, or a renewal thereof, nor shall it be a defense in an action for
operation without a license. (1968 Code, sec. 32-107)
3-1-8: BUILDING AND PREMISES:
No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business, and no permit shall be issued for anything,
or act, if the premises and building to be used for the purpose do not fully comply with the
requirements of the city. No such license or permit shall be issued for the conduct of any business or
performance of any act which would involve a violation of the zoning regulations of the city1. (1968
Code, sec. 32-108)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 61/396
3-1-9: CHANGE OF LOCATION:
The location of any licensed business or occupation, or of any permitted act, may be changed,
provided ten (10) days' notice thereof is given to the city clerk, in the absence of any provision to the
contrary; provided, that the building, zoning and frontage consent requirements of this code are
complied with. (1968 Code, sec. 32-109)
3-1-10: FRONTAGE CONSENTS:
Whenever the consent of adjoining or neighboring owners is required as a prerequisite to the conduct
of any business or occupation, or the location of any establishment, such consents must be obtained
by securing the necessary signatures to a written consent petition; such petition shall be filed with the
city clerk when signed.
Consents once given and filed shall not be withdrawn; and such petitions need not be renewed for the
continuous conduct of the same business whether by the same proprietor or not.
It shall be unlawful to forge any name to such a petition or to falsely represent that the names thereon
have been properly placed thereon if such is not the fact.
Each consent when filed shall be accompanied by the affidavit of the person securing the signatures
that each signature appearing therein was properly secured and written on, and that the petition
contains the necessary number of signatures required by ordinance.
The frontage consent requirements contained in this code shall not be construed to amend or change
any zoning ordinance provision of the city; and no such provision shall be construed as permitting the
erection of a structure or building, or the conduct of a business or the commission of any act
prohibited by any zoning ordinance of the city. (1968 Code, sec. 32-111)
3-1-11: NUISANCES:
No business, licensed or not, shall be so conducted or operated as to amount to a nuisance in fact.
(1968 Code, sec. 32-112)
3-1-12: INSPECTIONS:
Whenever inspections of the premises used for or in connection with the operation of a licensed
business or occupation are provided for or required by ordinance, or are reasonably necessary to
secure compliance with any ordinance provision or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of
the licensee, or the person in charge of the premises to be inspected, to admit thereto for the purpose
of making the inspection any officer or employee of the city who is authorized or directed to make
such inspection at any reasonable time that admission is requested.
Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is reasonably necessary to secure conformance
with any ordinance provision or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee of the
city whose business is governed by such provision to give to any authorized officer or employee of the
city requesting the same, material or commodity for such analysis upon request.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 62/396
In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the mayor shall revoke the license of any
licensed proprietor of any licensed business in the city who refuses to permit any such officer or
employee who is authorized to make such inspection or take such sample to make the inspection, or
take an adequate sample of the said commodity, or who interferes with such officer or employee while
in the performance of his duty in making such inspection. Provided, that no license shall be revoked
for such cause, unless written demand is made upon the licensee or person in charge of the premises,
in the name of the city, stating that such inspection or sample is desired, at the time it is sought to
make the inspection or obtain the sample. (1968 Code, sec. 32-113)
3-1-13: REVOCATION OF LICENSE OR PERMIT:
Any license or permit for a limited time may be revoked by the mayor at any time during the life of
such license or permit for any violation by the licensee or permittee of the ordinance provisions
relating to the license or permit, the subject matter of the license or permit, or to the premises
occupied; such revocation may be in addition to any fine imposed. (1968 Code, sec. 32-114)
3-1-14: POSTING LICENSE:
It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business in the city to keep his license posted
in a prominent place on the premises used for such business at all times. (1968 Code, sec. 32-115)
3-1-15: VEHICLE TAG:
Whenever the number of vehicles used is the basis of a license fee, the city clerk shall furnish such
licensee with a tag or sticker which shall be posted in a conspicuous place on each such vehicle while
it is in use. (1968 Code, sec. 32-116)
Chapter 2
AMUSEMENTS
3-2-1: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this chapter, except as to licensing and fees, shall apply to all public shows,
theatricals, circuses and other amusements in the City, whether specifically licensed in another
chapter of this Code or not. (1968 Code, sec. 33-101)
3-2-2: LICENSE REQUIRED, FEES:
It shall be unlawful to conduct or operate any amusement which is open to the public and for
admittance to which a fee is charged, without having first secured a license therefor; provided, that the
provisions of this section shall not be held to apply to those amusements which are specifically
licensed by any other ordinance of the City.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 63/396
Applications for such licenses shall be made to the Clerk and shall comply with all of the general
provisions of this Code relating to such application. For such licenses the following fees shall be paid:
Menageries $25.00
Carnivals 50.00
Exhibitions of inanimate objects 10.00
Other amusements 10.00
(1968 Code, sec. 33-102; amd. 1983 Code)
3-2-3: STREET SHOWS:
No permit shall be granted or given for any carnival, exhibition, show or other amusement to be given
on any public street or sidewalk or in such place that the only main accommodation for the public or
the audience will be in a public place, except on order of the City Council. (1968 Code, sec. 33-103)
3-2-4: ATHLETIC EXHIBITIONS:
It shall be unlawful to conduct, operate or exhibit any race between persons, animals or vehicles, or
any baseball games, boxing or wrestling matches or any other athletic contest or exhibition for
admission to which a fee is charged, without having first procured a license therefor.
The proprietor of such exhibition shall submit to the clerk a statement, verified under oath, of the gross
receipts of each such game, contest or race, within one week after such exhibition. At the same time
the proprietor or person exhibiting or operating such exhibition shall pay to the clerk a sum equal to
three percent (3%) of the gross receipts.
Sufficient members of the police department shall be admitted free of charge to all such exhibitions for
the purpose of preserving and maintaining order, and the clerk may post a person or any number of
persons at the box office of each such performance, and may examine all the books pertaining to such
performance showing or tending to show the gross receipts. (1968 Code, sec. 33-104)
3-2-5: ORDER, CROWDING:
The audience of any amusement, show or theatrical must be orderly and quiet at all times, and it shall
be unlawful for any person attending such amusement, show or theatrical to create a disturbance in
the audience.
It shall be unlawful to permit or gather such a crowd to witness any such amusement or show as to
create a dangerous condition because of fire or other risks. (1968 Code, sec. 33-106)
3-2-6: INSPECTIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 64/396
It shall be the duty of the chief of police and the fire chief to see that every exhibition, amusement,
theatrical or other public show or amusement is inspected by a member of the police and fire
departments, and to ensure conformity with the provisions concerning such amusements. (1968 Code,
sec. 33-107; amd. 1983 Code)
3-2-7: INDECENT SHOWS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to present, exhibit conduct or take part in any indecent show,
theatrical, play, motion picture, exhibition or other form of public amusement or show. (1968 Code,
sec. 33-108)
3-2-8: RIOTS:
It shall be unlawful to present any public amusement or show of any kind which tends to or is
calculated to cause or promote any riot or disturbance. (1968 Code, sec. 33-110)
3-2-9: SMOKING:
It shall be unlawful to smoke or carry a lighted cigar, cigarette or pipe on or beneath the stage or in a
dressing room of any building used as an assembly hall with seating accommodations for more than
one hundred (100) persons or in which theatricals, shows, amusements, lectures or other
entertainments are offered, presented, operated or exhibited. (1968 Code, sec. 33-111)
3-2-10: SIGNS:
It shall be the duty of the owner of such premises or of the occupant in charge, to provide and place
printed signs on which the words "No Smoking" shall appear in letters at least four inches (4") high, in
conspicuous places, at least two (2) signs being upon the stage or in the wings thereof and one in
each dressing room. (1968 Code, sec. 33-112)
3-2-11: EXIT LIGHTS:
It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant in charge of any building or hall used as an assembly hall
with accommodations for one hundred (100) persons or more in which theatricals, shows,
amusements, lectures and other entertainment is offered, operated or presented, to provide and place
a sign, on which the word "EXIT" shall appear in letters at least six inches (6") high, over every door or
other opening from such hall to every means of egress therefrom, and a light shall be provided with a
red globe and placed at or over such sign, which light shall be kept burning during the entire period
that the hall is open to the public and until the audience has left the hall. (1968 Code, sec. 33-113)
3-2-12: CIRCUSES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 65/396
(A) License Required: No person shall conduct or operate a circus in the city without having first
obtained a license as is provided in this chapter. (1968 Code, sec. 35-101)
(B) Application: The applications for such licenses shall be made to the city clerk and shall specify the
place in or on which the circus is to be conducted. (1968 Code, sec. 35-102)
(C) Fees:
1. Circus: The license fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) per day for each license. (1968 Code, sec.
36-103; amd. 1983 Code)
2. Sideshows And Concessions: The license fee for such sideshows and concessions operated in
connection with a circus shall be five dollars ($5.00) per day. (1968 Code, sec. 35-104)
(D) Provisions Obeyed: It shall be the duty of every person licensed under this section to obey the
provisions of this chapter and all other city ordinances relating to circuses or the premises
occupied thereby. (1968 Code, sec. 35-105)
(E) Inspection: It shall be the duty of the chief of police and the fire chief to see that inspections, as
provided for in this chapter, shall be made of all circuses, circus performances and of the premises
used. (1968 Code, sec. 35-106; amd. 1983 Code)
(F) Parades, Bond: It shall be unlawful to conduct any parade connected with a circus in or on any
public street, alley or other public way or place in the city, unless a permit therefor is first obtained
from the Chief of Police. Such permit shall specify the route to be followed, and shall be
accompanied by a bond in the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), conditioned to indemnify
the City for any loss, damage or liability incurred or caused by the conduct of such parade. (1968
Code, sec. 36-107)
3-2-13: COIN OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES:
3-2-13-1: DEFINITIONS:
COIN OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE: Any machine or device, which upon insertion of a coin,
slug, token, plate, disk or similar object, may be operated by the public generally by manipulating
special equipment whereby a score is established, the object of which is to secure a special number
or numbers or a total score, whether a prize is offered or not. The term "coin-operated amusement
device" does not include a video gaming terminal as defined in the Video Gaming Act1, or any device
that awards credits and contains a circuit, meter, or switch capable of moving and recording the
removal of credits when the award of credits is dependent upon chance.
OPERATOR: Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or association who sets up for the operation
by another or leases or distributes for the purposes of operation by another, any device as herein
defined, whether such setting up for operation, leasing or distributing be for a fixed charge or rental, or
upon the basis for a division of income derived from such device, or otherwise.
PROPRIETOR: Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association or club, who, as owner, lessee
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 66/396
or proprietor has under his or its control, any establishment, place or premises, or portion of any place
or premises in or at which such device, as is herein defined, is placed or kept for use or play, or on
exhibition for the purpose of use or play. (Ord. 229, 1982; amd. Ord. 1277, 9-4-2012)
3-2-13-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in the business of an "operator" or "proprietor" of coin operated amusement
devices, as the terms are defined, without first having obtained the proper license therefor. (Ord. 229,
1982)
3-2-13-3: PROPRIETOR'S LICENSE FEE:
The license fee for each "proprietor" or "operator" as herein defined shall be two hundred dollars
($200.00) per year; provided, however, only one license fee shall be required, and that by the
proprietor, if the proprietor is other than the owner of the devices, or by the operator/proprietor in the
event the proprietor is also the owner. All said license fees shall be payable annually in advance;
provided, that where application is made after the expiration of any portion of any license year, a
license may be issued for the remainder thereof upon payment of a proportionate part of the annual
fee. In no case shall any portion of said license fee be repaid to the licensee. The proprietor's license
fee shall be paid annually on January 1 of each year. Any person engaged in the business of an
operator or proprietor of coin operated amusement devices, and using four (4) or less machines, shall
not be required to obtain a proprietor's license. (Ord. 229, 1982; amd. Ord. 438, 8-1-1988; Ord. 1097,
12-3-2007)
3-2-13-4: MACHINE LICENSE FEE:
Every proprietor shall obtain, in addition to a proprietor's license, prior to setting up or making
available to the public, a license for each machine or device, as herein defined. The license shall be
forty dollars ($40.00) per year for each machine or device, as herein defined, set up or made available
for operation. All license fees shall be payable annually on January 1 of each year, in advance;
provided, that where application is made after the expiration of any portion of any license year, a
license may be issued for the remainder thereof upon payment of a proportionate part of the annual
fee. In no case shall any portion of said license fee be refunded to the licensee. The machine or
device licenses shall be incorporated and made a part of the proprietor's license issued in accordance
herewith. (Ord. 229, 1982; amd. Ord. 1097, 12-3-2007)
3-2-13-5: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; ISSUANCE:
Application for licenses hereunder shall be filed in writing with the City Clerk, on a form to be provided
by the City, and shall specify:
(A) The name and address of the applicant and if a firm, corporation, partnership or association, the
principal officers thereof and their addresses.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 67/396
(B) The address of the premises where the licensed device or devices are to be operated, together
with the character of the business as carried on at such place.
(C) The trade name and general description of the device or devices to be licensed, the name of the
manufacturer and the serial number and, if the applicant is the proprietor, the number of devices to
be licensed.
(D) The names and addresses of the operator of the devices, if other than the proprietor.
The proper license fee shall accompany such application. Application for license hereunder shall
be first referred by the City Clerk to the Chief of Police who shall make an investigation as deemed
necessary. When the Chief of Police has completed the investigation, he will send written
recommendations to the City Council. If the Chief of Police's investigative report recommends that
certain conditions be placed on the issuance of the license, the City Council is authorized to issue
the license subject to such conditions as shall be necessary. If the application is approved by the
City Council, the license shall be issued by the Clerk and the Clerk shall transmit the fee to the City
Treasurer. If the license is denied, the fee shall be returned to the applicant. Once a proprietor's
license has been issued, the Mayor and City Clerk are hereby authorized to issue machine
licenses without further action of the City Council. All licenses under this chapter shall expire on
December 31 following their issuance. The proprietor's license shall be posted in a conspicuous
place in the establishment of the licensee. The Clerk shall also furnish and there shall be
prominently displayed on and affixed to each device a serially numbered license sticker for each
device. Such license shall be nonassignable and nontransferable, and in the case of a proprietor
shall only apply to the premises for which such license is issued. No more than one device shall be
operated under one license. (Ord. 896, 7-8-2002)
3-2-13-6: INCREASING NUMBER OF DEVICES:
In the event a proprietor licensed under the provisions of this section desires, after the expiration of
any portion of any license year, to increase the number of devices to be used or played, or exhibited
for use or play in his establishment, he shall surrender his license to the City Clerk who shall issue a
new license showing the number of devices licensed thereunder, and upon payment of the proper
proprietor's license fee plus the proper license fee together with the proper proportionate fee for each
additional machine or device. (Ord. 229, 1982)
3-2-13-7: EVIDENCE OF OWNERSHIP FILED WITH CLERK:
Any proprietor who owns such device or devices at the time this section becomes effective shall file
with the City Clerk evidence of such ownership prior to the issuance of a license; and any proprietor
purchasing a device or devices after the effective date hereof, shall file with the City Clerk evidence of
ownership thereof before exhibiting or placing such device or devices for use or play. (Ord. 229, 1982)
3-2-13-8: GAMBLING DEVICES:
Nothing in this section shall in any way be construed to authorize, license or permit any gambling
devices, or mechanism that has been judicially determined to be a gambling device, or in any way
contrary to law, or that may be contrary to any future laws of the State of Illinois. (Ord. 229, 1982)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 68/396
3-2-13-9: REGULATIONS:
(A) No person holding a proprietor's license shall permit persons under eighteen (18) years of age to
play or operate any coin operated amusement device between the hours of eight thirty o'clock
(8:30) A.M. and three o'clock (3:00) P.M. on school days between September 1 and June 15. The
provisions of this section shall not apply where the person under eighteen (18) years of age is
accompanied by his parent or legal guardian.
(B) No person holding a proprietor's license or machine license shall allow or permit any rowdy or
disorderly conduct by the patrons of said premises and shall not knowingly allow any gambling
between patrons while on the premises.
(C) All premises where coin operated amusement devices are located shall be kept in a clean, neat
and orderly condition, and said machines shall be positioned so that their operation is open to clear
public view.
(D) The licensee under this section shall permit, at any reasonable time, any officer or employee of the
City who is authorized and directed to make inspections, to be admitted to the premises and to
observe such methods of operation for the purpose of making inspections necessary to secure
compliance with any provision of this section or to detect violations thereof.
In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the Mayor may revoke the license of any
licensee who refuses to permit any such officer or employee to make such inspection or who
interferes with such officer or employee while in the performance of his duty in making such
inspections. (Ord. 229, 1982)
(E) No proprietor's license shall be issued to the owner of a Class B liquor license or to the owner of
any premises that has been issued a Class B liquor license. (Ord. 1155, 2-2-2009)
3-2-13-10: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
The Mayor shall have the power to revoke or suspend any license issued hereunder for the violation
of any of the provisions of this section 3-2-13 subject to notice given and hearing conducted by the
Mayor. (Ord. 229, 1982)
3-2-14: VIDEO GAMING DEVICES:
3-2-14-1: DEFINITIONS:
The terms "video gaming terminal", "licensed establishment", "licensed fraternal establishment",
"licensed veterans establishment" and "licensed truck stop establishment" shall have the same
definition as under the Illinois Video Gaming Act2. (Ord. 1278, 9-4-2012)
3-2-14-2: INSPECTION OF PREMISES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 69/396
Every place where a video gaming terminal is kept shall be subject to inspection by the Chief of Police
or his authorized agents at any time the Chief of Police or his agents may deem it necessary to
inspect the premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, resist, oppose or attempt to hinder,
resist or oppose the Chief of Police or his respective agents in the course of such inspection. (Ord.
1278, 9-4-2012)
3-2-14-3: LOCAL LICENSE REQUIRED FOR STATE LICENSED ESTABLISHMENT:
No person, partnership, limited liability company, or corporation shall install, keep, maintain, use, or
permit the installation, keeping, maintenance or use upon his/her/its premises of any video gaming
terminal unless a valid license issued under this section 3-2-14 for the gaming establishment is in
effect. (Ord. 1278, 9-4-2012)
3-2-14-4: RESTRICTIONS:
(Rep. by Ord. 1386, 11-16-2015)
3-2-14-5: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Applications for the license required by this section 3-2-14 shall be filed in writing with the City Clerk
on a form to be provided by the City, and shall contain the following information:
(A) The name, address, age and date of birth of the owner of the video gaming terminal and of the
"owner", whether a person, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or nonprofit
organization of the establishment where the video gaming terminal shall be located.
(B) Prior convictions of the owner of the video gaming terminal and the owner or officers of the
establishment, if any.
(C) The place where the video gaming terminal is to be displayed or operated and the business
conducted at that place.
(D) A description of the video gaming terminal to be covered by the license as well as how many
terminals will be located in the establishment.
(E) Evidence that licenses have been issued by the Illinois Gaming Board to the owner of the video
gaming terminal and the owner of the establishment. (Ord. 1278, 9-4-2012)
3-2-14-6: EXPIRATION OF LICENSE:
Licenses issued pursuant to this section 3-2-14 shall terminate the same date as the State license
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 70/396
issued by the Illinois Gaming Board. (Ord. 1278, 9-4-2012)
3-2-14-7: DISPLAY:
Licenses required by this section 3-2-14 shall be prominently displayed next to the video gaming
terminal. (Ord. 1278, 9-4-2012)
3-2-14-8: FEES:
The annual fee for each video gaming terminal shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00) payable upon the
issuance of the license and request for license sticker, payable annually thereafter on January 1 of
each year, in advance.
No portion of the above fees is refundable or proratable. (Ord. 1278, 9-4-2012)
3-2-14-9: LOCATION RESTRICTION:
No license shall be issued to a licensed establishment, licensed truck stop establishment, licensed
fraternal establishment or licensed veterans establishment that is located within one hundred feet
(100') of a school or a place of worship under the Religious Corporation Act. The location restrictions
in this section do not apply if a school or a place of worship moves to or is established within the
restricted area after a licensed establishment, licensed truck stop establishment, licensed fraternal
establishment, or licensed veterans establishment becomes licensed by the Video Gaming Board3.
(Ord. 1278, 9-4-2012)
3-2-14-10: HOURS OF OPERATION:
No video gaming terminal licensed under the Video Gaming Act may be played except during the
hours of sale for the consumption of alcoholic beverages at the licensed establishment, licensed
fraternal establishment, or licensed veterans establishment according to the class of local liquor
license issued. (Ord. 1278, 9-4-2012)
3-2-14-11: PROHIBITIONS OF PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF TWENTY ONE
YEARS:
No licensee shall cause or permit any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to use or play a
video gaming terminal. Any licensee who knowingly permits a person under the age of twenty one (21)
years to use or play a video gaming terminal is guilty of a business offense and shall be fined an
amount not to exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00)4. (Ord. 1278, 9-4-2012)
3-2-14-12: LOCATION OF TERMINALS:
Video gaming terminals must be located in an area restricted to persons over twenty one (21) years of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 71/396
age, the entrance to which is within the view of at least one employee, who is over twenty one (21)
years of age, of the establishment in which they are located. The placement of video gaming terminals
in licensed establishments, licensed truck stop establishments, licensed fraternal establishments, and
licensed veterans establishments shall be subject to the rules promulgated by the Illinois Gaming
Board pursuant to the Illinois Administrative Procedure Act5. (Ord. 1278, 9-4-2012)
3-2-14-13: TERMINAL OPERATOR LICENSE:
No person, partnership, limited liability company or corporation shall deliver video gaming terminals
within the City for use by any other person or entity for gain or profit from the operation thereof unless
a terminal operator license issued by the State of Illinois Gaming Board has been presented to the
City of Clinton. (Ord. 1278, 9-4-2012)
3-2-14-14: REVOCATION:
The Mayor, at any time, may notify any licensee under this section within five (5) business days of any
charge of a violation of any of the provisions of this section 3-2-14 in connection with the operation of
any video gaming terminal. After a hearing presided over by the Mayor, the Mayor may order the
revocation of the license upon a finding that the violation has occurred, and the license shall
thereupon be terminated. (Ord. 1278, 9-4-2012)
3-2-14-15: GAMBLING:
Nothing in this section 3-2-14 shall in any way be construed to authorize, license or permit gambling in
any other form, other than that allowed in this section 3-2-14 and authorized under the Video Gaming
Act of 2009. (Ord. 1278, 9-4-2012)
Chapter 3
LIQUOR REGULATIONS
3-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
The words and phrases used in this chapter which are defined in 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-3
through 5/1-3.29 shall have the same meanings as in said sections defined. (Ord. 407, 6-15-1987)
3-3-2: LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER:
The Mayor of the City shall be the Local Liquor Control Commissioner and the person charged with
the administration of the appropriate provisions of the Illinois Liquor Control Act, this chapter, and such
other ordinances and resolutions relating to alcoholic liquor as may be enacted by the City Council. He
shall be compensated at the rate of six hundred dollars ($600.00) per annum for performance of this
duty. (Ord. 407, 6-15-1987)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 72/396
3-3-3: DEPUTY LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER:
The Local Liquor Control Commissioner may appoint a person to assist him in the exercise of the
powers and performance of the duties provided for the Local Liquor Control Commissioner in the
Illinois Local Control Act and this chapter. The term of appointment for the Deputy Local Liquor Control
Commissioner shall not exceed one year. The Deputy Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall
receive such compensation as may be fixed from time to time by the City Council. (Ord. 407, 6-15-
1987)
3-3-4: LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER; POWERS, FUNCTIONS,
DUTIES:
The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall have the following powers, functions and duties with
respect to licenses:
(A) To grant and/or suspend for not more than thirty (30) days or revoke for cause all local licenses
issued to persons for premises within his jurisdiction;
(B) To enter or to authorize any law enforcing officer to enter at any time upon any premises licensed
hereunder to determine whether any of the provisions of this chapter or any rules or regulations
adopted by him or by the State Commission have been or are being violated and, at such time, to
examine said premises of said licensee in connection therewith;
(C) To notify the Secretary of State where a club incorporated under the General Not For Profit
Corporation Act, or a foreign corporation functioning as a club in this State under a certificate of
authority issued under that Act, has violated this chapter by selling or offering for sale at retail
alcoholic liquors without a retailer's license;
(D) To receive complaints from any citizen within his jurisdiction that any of the provisions of this
chapter, or any rules or regulations adopted pursuant hereto, have been or are being violated and
to act upon such complaints in the manner hereinafter provided;
(E) To receive local license fees and pay the same forthwith to the City, Village, Town or County
Treasurer as the case may be;
(F) To levy fines in accordance with section 7-5 of the Illinois Liquor Control Act. (Ord. 407, 6-15-1987)
3-3-5: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED, EXCEPTIONS:
No person, employee, servant or agent shall bottle, blend, sell, barter, transport, deliver, furnish, store
or possess any alcoholic or intoxicating liquor or beverages in the City except as provided in this
chapter.
Provided, however, nothing herein contained shall prevent the possession and transportation of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 73/396
alcoholic liquor for the personal use of the possessor, his family and guests, nor prevent the making of
wine, cider or other alcoholic liquor by a person from fruits, vegetables or grains, or the products
thereof, by simple fermentation and without distillation, if it is made solely for the use of the maker, his
family and his guests, as permitted by the laws of the State; and provided further, that nothing
contained in this chapter shall prevent any duly licensed practicing physician or dentist from
possessing or using alcoholic liquor in the strict practice of such profession of the possessor thereof,
or any hospital or other institution caring for sick and diseased persons, from possession and using
alcoholic liquors for the treatment of bona fide patients of such hospital or other institution; and
provided further, that any drugstore employing a licensed pharmacist may possess and use alcoholic
liquors in the concoction of prescriptions of duly licensed physicians, subject to the regulations and
license provided in this chapter; and provided further, that the possession and dispensation of wine by
an authorized representative of any church for the purpose of conducting any bona fide rite or
religious ceremony conducted by such church shall not be prohibited by this chapter. This chapter
shall not apply to any beverages containing less than one-half of one percentum (0.5%) of alcoholic
content. (Ord. 407, 6-15-1987)
3-3-6: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall offer for sale, sell, distribute, exchange, barter, solicit or receive orders for, keep or
expose for sale, or furnish any alcoholic liquor, beer or wine without having an appropriate liquor
license, or in violation of the terms of such license, or in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 407, 6-15-1987)
3-3-7: CLASSIFICATION AND FEES:
The kinds of licenses that may be issued and the annual fees to be paid therefor are as follows:
(A) Retail Licenses:
1. Class A: Class A licenses shall permit the retail sale, by the drink only and not by the package,
of beer, wine or alcoholic liquors. Such retail sales shall be made on the premises specified in
such license for consumption on the same premises. The annual fee for such license shall be
one thousand four hundred dollars ($1,400.00), if paid annually; seven hundred ten dollars
($710.00), per payment, if paid semiannually; and three hundred seventy five dollars ($375.00),
per payment, if paid quarterly.
2. Class B: Class B licenses shall be granted to restaurants and shall permit the retail sale, by the
drink only and not by the package, of beer, wine or alcoholic liquors on the licensed premises
only, provided that the holder of the Class B license shall have in operation, during the entire
term of the license at the licensed premises, a full service kitchen, as determined by the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner and that the retail sale of food shall account for no less than fifty
percent (50%) of all sales made upon the licensed premises. Alcoholic liquors shall be sold,
served and consumed only with and in conjunction with the sale of food for consumption in the
public dining room on the premises, except that alcoholic liquors may also be sold and
consumed in adjacent rooms used to accommodate persons waiting to be seated in the public
dining room. If the Local Liquor Control Commissioner determines that a Class B license holder
does not meet the requirements for holding a Class B license, the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner shall reissue the license as a Class A license, unless the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner finds that the Class B license was obtained using intentional misrepresentations
regarding the nature of the licensee's business, in which case, the license may be revoked. A
license reissued as a Class A license pursuant to this section, shall be in addition to the number
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 74/396
of Class A licenses authorized to be issued under section 3-3-9 of this chapter. Initial holders of
a Class B license shall submit income statements and other financial documentation on a timely
basis deemed sufficient to maintain eligibility for this classification. All requested income records
will be in a form acceptable to the Local Liquor Commissioner and shall show income from all
sources generated upon the licensed premises. Thereafter, holders of a Class B license shall
annually, prior to license renewal, submit income statements in a form acceptable to the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner, showing income from all sources generated upon the licensed
premises. The Local Liquor Control Commissioner, or his agent, shall have access to books and
records of the license holder's premises to determine compliance with this subsection. The
annual fee for a Class B liquor license shall be nine hundred fifty dollars ($950.00), if paid
annually; four hundred eighty five dollars ($485.00), per payment, if paid semiannually; and two
hundred sixty two dollars fifty cents ($262.50), per payment, if paid quarterly.
3. Class C: Class C licenses shall permit the retail sale, by the drink only and not by the package,
of beer, wine or alcoholic liquors by clubs and shall be issued only to clubs. Such retail sales
shall be made on the premises specified in the license for consumption on the same premises.
No Class C licensee shall sell or furnish in any way beer, wine or alcoholic liquors to any person
unless such person is a member in good standing or a guest accompanied by a member in good
standing and unless such guest has first signed a guest register provided by the licensee. The
annual fee for a Class C license shall be seven hundred dollars ($700.00), if paid annually; three
hundred sixty dollars ($360.00), per payment, if paid semiannually; and one hundred eighty five
dollars ($185.00), per payment, if paid quarterly.
4. Class P: Class P licenses shall permit the retail sale, by the package only and not by the drink,
of beer, wine or alcoholic liquors in the original unopened container for consumption off the
premises specified in such license. The annual fee for a Class P license shall be one thousand
two hundred dollars ($1,200.00), if paid annually; six hundred ten dollars ($610.00), per
payment, if paid semiannually; and three hundred twenty five dollars ($325.00), per payment, if
paid quarterly. (Ord. 1339, 5-5-2014)
5. Class BG: Class BG licenses shall permit the retail sale, by the drink only and not by the
package, of beer, wine or alcoholic liquors on the licensed premises only, provided that the
holder of a Class BG license shall have in operation, during the entire term of the license at the
licensed premises, a full service kitchen or grill, as determined by the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner, and that the retail sales of food items shall account for at least thirty five percent
(35%) of all sales (not including video gaming revenue) made upon the licensed premises. If the
Local Liquor Control Commissioner determines that a Class BG license holder does not meet
the requirements for holding a Class BG license, the Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall
reissue the license as a Class A license, unless the Local Liquor Control Commissioner finds
that the Class BG license was obtained using intentional misrepresentations regarding the
nature of the licensee's business, in which case the license may be revoked. Initial holders of a
Class BG license shall submit income statements and other financial documentation on a time
basis deemed sufficient to maintain eligibility for this classification. All requested income records
will be in a form acceptable to the Local Liquor Commissioner and shall show income from all
sources generated upon the licensed premises. Thereafter, holders of a Class BG license shall
annually, prior to license renewal, submit income statements in a form acceptable to the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner showing income from all sources generated upon the licensed
premises. The Local Liquor Control Commissioner or his agent shall have access to books and
records of the license holder's premises to determine compliance with this subsection.
The annual fee for a Class BG liquor license shall be one thousand six hundred dollars
($1,600.00), if paid annually; eight hundred ten dollars ($810.00), per payment, if paid
semiannually; and four hundred twelve dollars fifty cents ($412.50), per payment, if paid
quarterly. (Ord. 1345, 10-6-2014)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 75/396
6. Class PW: Class PW licenses shall permit the retail sale, by the package only and not by the
drink, of wine in the original unopened container for consumption off the premises specified in
such license. The annual fee for a Class PW license shall be three hundred dollars ($300.00),
payable annually. A Class PW license will not be issued to a licensee who possesses another
license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1339, 5-5-2014)
7. Class BH: Class BH (banquet hall) licenses shall permit the retail sale, by drink only and not by
the package, of beer, wine or alcoholic liquors on the licensed premises in conjunction with
meals. The banquet hall is a building used for the service of food and beverages to groups of
persons attending for planned events or occasions, such as weddings, funerals, birthday parties,
graduation parties, confirmation parties, religious events, political functions and other like lawful
events or occasions, and for which the building is not open for the general service of food and
beverages to the public at large. Class BH licenses shall only be issued to the building owner or
tenant.
All Class BH licensees shall provide the Liquor Control Commissioner a report of the date, the
type of event and food, the caterer to be used, the amount in attendance and security
information, if needed, and whether any part of the event will include use of an outdoor space.
This report shall be provided not less than five (5) days prior to the event.
The annual fee for a Class BH license shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00) if paid annually;
two hundred sixty dollars ($260.00), per payment, if paid semi-annually; and one hundred thirty
five dollars ($135.00), per payment, if paid quarterly. (Ord. 1345, 10-6-2014)
8. Class HM: Class HM (hotel/motel license) licenses shall permit the retail sale of alcoholic liquor
by hotels or motels for consumption on the premises where sold. Class HM license permits
"mini-bars" in private rooms, catering on premises, cash bars at private rental parties, room
service, and restaurants. The annual fee for a Class HM liquor license shall be nine hundred fifty
dollars ($950.00), if paid annually; four hundred eighty five dollars ($485.00), per payment, if
paid semi-annually; and two hundred sixty two dollars fifty cents ($262.50), per payment if paid
quarterly.
9. Class SE: Class SE (special events license) licenses shall authorize the retail sale of beer and
wine at a special event including but not limited to festivals, music concerts, public
performances, public events, and sporting or athletic events as specified in the license. City
ordinance providing that alcoholic liquor cannot be consumed on public property shall not apply
to any public property specifically designated in the SE license. The following shall apply to
Class SE licenses:
(a) Class SE licenses may be issued only to licensees holding other classifications of licenses in
the City of Clinton.
(b) A licensee shall provide a certificate of general liability insurance with a combined limits of
not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), along with the required certificate of dram
shop insurance. Each such certificate of insurance shall show the City of Clinton, Illinois, as an
additional insured.
(c) An application for an SE license must be filed with the City Clerk at least thirty (30) days prior
to the special event.
(d) When the special event is to be held outdoors, the licensee shall use only paper or plastic
products to serve alcoholic liquor or food, and will provide security around the area designated
in the license in such a manner as to prevent alcoholic liquor being possessed by minors or be
removed from the designated area by patrons, invitees or attendees of the special event.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 76/396
(e) The licensee shall be required to participate in a meeting with the City of Clinton Police Chief,
or his designee, and the Local Liquor Control Commissioner, and the City Administrator to
review the physical layout of the site for the event and the designated area, to address the
perimeter and all other safety issues including but not limited to the following:
(1) Sale of alcoholic liquor;
(2) Identification check;
(3) Traffic control;
(4) Vehicular parking;
(5) Pedestrian control; and
(6) Site and vicinity cleanup.
If the City Police Chief determines that the special event will require attendance of City
police officers, the licensee shall reimburse the City for the cost of providing police officers
at the designated area.
(f) A Class SE licensee is responsible for removal of all refuse, litter, debris, garbage and the like
from the designated property by nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. of the following morning. Any
licensee who fails to remove refuse, litter, debris, garbage and the like shall be liable to the
City for City services provided in performing such removal and cleanup.
(g) The fee for the issuance of a Class SE license shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00), at the
time of the issuance of the license. (Ord. 1386, 11-16-2015)
10. Class BP: Class BP (brew pub) licenses shall permit the retail sale of alcoholic liquor by a brew
pub as defined by the Illinois Liquor Control Act of 19341. The annual fee for a Class BP license
shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) if paid annually; five hundred ten dollars ($510.00) per
payment if paid semi-annually; and two hundred seventy five dollars ($275.00) per payment if
paid quarterly. (Ord. 1437, 2-6-2017)
11. Class MT: Class MT (movie theater) licenses shall permit the retail sale by the drink only and
not by the package, of beer, wine or alcoholic liquors for consumption only on the licensed
premises of, and in conjunction with, the operation of a cinema or movie theater venue. For
purposes of this license, a movie theater shall be any building or other structure, kept, used,
maintained, advertised and held out to the public to be a place used to host indoor showings of
motion pictures, and that sells food, concessions, snacks and soft drinks. In order to be licensed
as a movie theater, the facility shall host a minimum of five hundred (500) movie showings in any
calendar year and shall be open at least five (5) days a week. The annual fee for a Class MT
license shall be seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), if paid annually; three hundred eighty five
dollars ($385.00), per payment, if paid semiannually; and two hundred dollars ($200.00), per
payment, if paid quarterly. Class MT licenses shall be subject to the following terms, conditions
and limitations:
(a) Alcoholic liquor may only be served by persons who have completed a certified alcohol
awareness training course (BASSET) and sales shall be limited to patrons who:
(1) Are attending a movie or other event being offered on the premises;
(2) Have proven they are of drinking age by appropriate State identification, and;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 77/396
(3) Have displayed a tamper proof wrist band that is valid only for the date that it is issued and
applied by an agent of the licensee who has verified the patron's age.
(b) Alcoholic beverages shall be sold and served only from the main concession area located in
the lobby of the movie theater. No alcoholic beverages may be sold or served within a movie
theater auditorium.
(c) No more than two (2) alcoholic beverage drinks may be sold to any patron during any one
transaction.
(d) The containers in which alcoholic liquors are served must be of a different color, size and
design than those in which non-alcoholic beverages are served.
(e) No alcoholic beverages shall be sold or served unless the movie theater is actually open for
the showing of movies. Under no circumstances may alcoholic beverages be served more
than one hour prior to the advertised showing time of the first movie to be shown on any day;
and under no circumstances shall any alcoholic beverages be served beyond the time
limitation in accordance with section 3-3-15 of this chapter, or the conclusion of the last movie,
whichever first occurs. The food and concession component of the business must be in
operation during the hours of sale and service of alcoholic beverages.
(f) Alcoholic beverages shall not be removed from the building or other structure on the licensed
premises, and signs prohibiting the removal of alcoholic beverages shall be prominently
posted at all exits to the theater.
(g) The licensee shall be responsible if any alcohol is consumed by any minor at any location
within or on the movie theater premises whether the alcohol was purchased at the movie
theater or not.
(h) Alcoholic beverages shall not be sold or served to patrons entering, attending or viewing a
"G" rated movie. (Ord. 1455, 10-16-2017)
(B) Special Retail Licenses:
1. Class TX: (Rep. by Ord. 1339, 5-5-2014)
2. Class T-1: Class T-1 licenses shall only be issued to a licensee already holding a CTR
(caterer's) license and shall permit the retail sale, by the drink only and not by the package, of
beer, wine or alcoholic liquors for private events in connection with the catering and sale of
prepared food for service at the location of the catered event. For purposes of this license, the
location of the catered event shall be deemed the licensed premises. This license permits the
caterer to offer the retail sale of alcohol commonly known as a cash bar for a catered event.
There is no local fee for this license, but the licensee must acquire an Illinois State retailer's
license and produce evidence of the same to the Local Liquor Commissioner.
3. Class T-2: Class T-2 licenses are temporary in nature, shall only be issued to a licensee already
holding a CTR (caterer's) license, and shall permit the retail sale, by the drink only, and not by
the package, of beer, wine or alcoholic liquors for a public event in connection with the catering
and sale of prepared food for service, excluding the serving of snacks as the primary meal, at
the location of the catered event. For purposes of this license, the location of the catered event
shall be deemed the licensed premises. The public event can be a contracted event or an event
sponsored by the licensed caterer. The total amount of licenses issued to any one caterer within
one calendar year will be no more than twenty four (24), including on site and off site events.
Class T-2 licenses must be applied for five (5) business days prior to the issuance of said
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 78/396
license. The fee for a Class T-2 license shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00). In addition to
compliance with other requirements for the licensed premises in this chapter, a Class T-2 license
shall additionally comply with the requirements of the Class CTR (caterer's) license.
4. Class T-3: Class T-3 licenses are temporary in nature, shall only be issued to a licensee already
holding a Class C (club) license and shall permit the retail sale, by the drink only, and not by the
package, of beer, wine or alcoholic liquors for a public event held on the licensed premises at
which also a prepared meal, excluding the serving of snacks as the primary meal, is offered,
whether contracted with the licensed club or an outside provider. Class T-3 licenses must be
applied for, five (5) business days prior to the issuance of said license. The fee for a Class T-3
license shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00).
(C) Caterer's License:
1. Class CTR: Class CTR (caterer's) licenses shall permit the holder to serve, by the drink only and
not by the package, beer, wine, or alcoholic liquors as an incidental part of a contracted food
service that serves prepared meals which excludes the serving of snacks as the primary meal.
For purposes of the regulations of this chapter, the location of the catered event shall be deemed
the licensed premises, whether on or off site and whether the location is licensed or unlicensed.
In addition to compliance with other requirements for the licensed premises in this chapter, a
Class CTR licensee shall meet and operate in compliance with the following requirements:
(a) All Class CTR licensees shall provide to the Liquor Control Commissioner a written list of
catered events including locations and hours not less than five (5) days prior to each catered
event.
(b) All licensees shall submit proof of dramshop insurance and comprehensive general liability
insurance.
(c) No Class CTR licensees shall serve beer, wine, or alcoholic liquors at a single location for
more than five (5) consecutive twenty four (24) hour periods.
(d) All Class CTR licensees shall provide the Local Liquor Control Commissioner a written
description and diagram showing security measures to be implemented at the location of a
catered event which shall be subject to review and approval of the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner.
The annual license fee for a Class CTR license shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00)
provided, however, that an applicant may elect to pay a license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) per
catering event. (Ord. 1274, 6-18-2012)
(D) Class CM: Class CM (craft manufacturers) licenses shall permit the retail sale of alcoholic liquor
as permitted by the Illinois Liquor Control Act of 19342 by holders of a Class 1 brewer, Class 2
brewer, craft distiller, and limited wine manufacturer licenses. The annual fee for a Class CM
license shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00) if paid annually; two hundred sixty dollars ($260.00)
per payment if paid semi-annually; and one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per payment if paid
quarterly. (Ord. 1437, 2-6-2017)
3-3-8: LICENSE TERM:
All licenses shall run from July 1 to July 1 following the date of issuance, and said license fee shall be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 79/396
reduced in proportion to the full calendar months which have expired in the license year prior to the
issuance of the license. No license shall be renewed until the licensee has submitted a renewal
application in writing on forms provided by the City. (Ord. 905, 10-7-2002; Ord. 912, 11-4-2002)
3-3-9: NUMBER OF LICENSES:
The total number of licenses issued and enforced at any one time and in any one year shall not
exceed the following: (Ord. 1308, 3-4-2013)
Class Number Of Licenses
A No limitation
B No limitation
C No limitation
P No limitation
BG No limitation
PW No limitation
BH No limitation
HM No limitation
SE No limitation
BP No limitation
MT No limitation
CTR No limitation
CM No limitation
(Ord. 1437, 2-6-2017; amd. Ord. 1455, 10-16-2017)
The City Council may, in its discretion, limit the number of licenses to be issued in any classification.
(Ord. 1455, 10-16-2017)
3-3-10: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Applications for liquor licenses shall be made to the local liquor control commissioner, in writing, on
forms approved by the city council. The applicant shall, at the time of the application, file a
nonrefundable filing fee in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) by certified check, cashier's
check, bank money order, personal money order or postal money order. No application filing fee shall
be required of those applicants seeking a TX license or seeking renewal of an existing license. (Ord.
407, 6-15-1987)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 80/396
3-3-11: LICENSE NONTRANSFERABLE:
No license issued under this chapter shall be assignable, and a licensee shall permit the sale of such
alcoholic liquor as he is licensed to sell only on the premises described in the application and license.
Such location may be changed only upon written permit to make such change issued by the mayor
and no change of location shall be permitted unless the proposed new location is a proper one for the
retail sale of alcoholic liquor under the laws of the state and the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 407,
6-15-1987)
3-3-12: ISSUANCE PROHIBITED, CERTAIN PERSONS:
No license of any kind shall be issued to:
(A) A person who is not a resident of the city;
(B) A person who is not of good moral character and reputation in the community of the city;
(C) A person who is not a citizen of the United States;
(D) A person who has been convicted of a felony under the laws of the state;
(E) A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or misdemeanor opposed to
decency and morality;
(F) A person who has been convicted of being the keeper or is keeping a house of ill fame;
(G) A person whose license issued under this chapter has been revoked, or whose license issued by
the state covering the same subject matter has been revoked for cause, or who has been
convicted of a violation of the law for the sale, possession and transportation of alcoholic liquor or
beverages covered herein;
(H) A person who at the time of application for renewal of any license issued hereunder would not be
eligible for such license upon a first application;
(I) A partnership or copartnership, unless all of the members of such copartnership shall be qualified
to obtain a license;
(J) A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any stockholder or stockholders owning
in the aggregate more than five percent (5%) of the capital stock of such corporation, would not be
eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than citizenship and residence within
the political subdivision;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 81/396
(K) A corporation, unless it is incorporated in Illinois, or unless it is a foreign corporation which is
qualified under the Illinois business corporation act to transact business in Illinois;
(L) A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent, unless such manager or
agent possesses the same qualifications required by the licensee;
(M) A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state law concerning the
manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor subsequent to the passage of the act of the
state permitting the selling and licensing of such sales, or shall have forfeited a bond to appear in
court to answer charges for any such violation;
(N) A person who does not own the premises for which a license is sought, or does not have a lease
thereon for the full period for which the license is to be issued;
(O) Any law enforcing public official, mayor or member of the city council, any member of a city board,
and no such official shall be interested in any way either directly or indirectly in the manufacture,
sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor;
(P) A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be operated by the licensee;
(Q) A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as proscribed by any of subsections (a)
(3) through (a)(10) of section 28-1 of, or as proscribed by section 28-3 of, the criminal code of
1961, approved July 28, 1961, as heretofore or hereafter amended, or as proscribed by a statute
replaced by any of the aforesaid statutory provisions;
(R) Any persons to whom a federal gaming device stamp or a federal wagering stamp has been
issued as follows:
1. A person to whom a federal gaming device stamp or a federal wagering stamp has been issued
by the federal government for the current tax period;
2. A copartnership to which a federal gaming device stamp or a federal wagering stamp has been
issued by the federal government for the current tax period, or if any of the partners have been
issued a federal gaming device stamp or federal wagering stamp by the federal government for
the current tax period;
3. A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any stockholder owning in the
aggregate more than twenty percent (20%) of the stock of such corporation has been issued a
federal gaming device stamp or a federal wagering stamp for the current tax period;
4. Any premises for which a federal gaming device stamp or a federal wagering stamp has been
issued by the federal government for the current tax period;
(S) Any person under the age of twenty one (21) years;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 82/396
(T) Any person having a place of business or location within the territory prohibited by the zoning
locations herein prescribed; (Ord. 407, 6-15-1987)
(U) Any person convicted of violating any provision of the cannabis control act3 of the state of Illinois,
the Illinois controlled substances act4, the drug paraphernalia control act5 of the state of Illinois, or
any other statute, law or regulation or ordinance, whether federal, state or local, pertaining to the
possession, use, control, sale or distribution of cannabis, any controlled substance or drug
paraphernalia as defined in the above identified acts, whether said conviction is a misdemeanor or
a felony conviction. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "conviction" shall include, in
addition to a formal conviction entered as a result of a finding of guilty after a jury or bench trial or
after a plea of guilty, or any other disposition, including, but not limited to, court supervision,
conditional discharge, or other similar disposition, not resulting in the entry of a formal conviction,
provided such disposition was made as a result of a finding by the court having jurisdiction over the
criminal proceeding, as the result of a bench or jury trial, a plea of guilty, a stipulation of facts, or a
plea of no contest, that a violation of any of the foregoing laws occurred, even if no formal
conviction was entered upon the charges;
(V) Any person that is more than thirty (30) days delinquent in complying with a child support order
issued by any court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 905, 10-7-2002; Ord. 912, 11-4-2002)
3-3-13: LOCATION RESTRICTION:
No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor within one hundred feet (100') of
any church, school, hospital, home for aged or indigent persons or for veterans, their wives or
children, or any military or naval station; provided, that this prohibition shall not apply to hotels offering
restaurant service, regularly organized clubs, or to restaurants, food shops or other places where the
sale of alcoholic liquors is not the principal business carried on; nor to the renewal of a license for the
sale at retail of alcoholic liquor on premises within one hundred feet (100') of any church or school
where such church or school has been established within such one hundred feet (100') since the
issuance of the original license. In the case of a church, the distance of one hundred feet (100') shall
be measured to the nearest part of any building used for worship services or educational programs
and not to property boundaries. (Ord. 407, 6-15-1987)
3-3-14: BOND REQUIRED:
No license shall be issued under this chapter until a bond has been given, executed by a responsible
surety company authorized to do business in the state, payable to the city or people of the state for
the use of the city, in the penal sum of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) conditioned for the faithful
observance of this chapter and the laws of the state and to pay all fines and costs assessed against
him under the provisions of this chapter, pertaining to the sale, possession or distribution of alcoholic
liquors or spirits, beer or wine. (Ord. 407, 6-15-1987)
3-3-15: HOURS OF SALE:
(A) Beverages, alcoholic liquor or spirits, beer or wine, covered by this chapter may be sold Monday
through Saturday during the following hours: from six o'clock (6:00) A.M. until one o'clock (1:00)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 83/396
A.M. Additionally licensees holding a Class A, B, BG, C, MT, P, CTR, PW, BH, HM, BP or CM
license may sell beverages, alcoholic liquor or spirits, beer or wine, on Sunday from twelve o'clock
(12:00) noon until twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight.
(B) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (A) of this section, it shall be lawful for the holder of a
Class A, B, BG, C, CTR, BH, MT, HM, BP or CM license to continue sales of alcoholic liquor
through two o'clock (2:00) A.M. on January 1st of each year.
(C) Except for those premises covered by a Class P, PW, B, MT or HM license, all premises on which
alcoholic liquor, beer or wine is sold, must be vacated by the public within thirty (30) minutes of the
time specified in this section for the cessation of selling of alcoholic liquors. Any license holder
having employees or contractors, including musicians, on the premises at any time after the time
specified in this section for the cessation of selling alcoholic liquors, shall keep a written list of any
such persons on the premises. In no event shall any alcoholic liquor remain on any table or bar
more than thirty (30) minutes after the time specified in this section for the cessation of the selling
of alcoholic liquors. Any licensee engaged in other business activities on the premises who shall
be open for business during any time that the sale of alcoholic liquors, spirits, beer or wine is
prohibited, must keep all alcoholic liquor, spirits, beer or wine physically segregated or covered
with draping or other suitable material during the hours that the sale of liquor is prohibited. (Ord.
1455, 10-16-2017)
3-3-16: ACCESS TO OTHER PORTIONS OF PREMISES:
Except in the case of hotels, no alcoholic liquor shall be sold at retail upon any premises which has
any access which leads from such premises to any other portion of the same building or structure
used for dwelling or lodging purposes and which is permitted to be used or kept accessible for use by
the public. This provision shall not prevent any connection between such premises and such other
portion of the building or structure which is used only by the licensee, his family and personal guests.
(Ord. 407, 6-15-1987)
3-3-17: EMPLOYEES:
(A) No licensee holding a Class A license shall employ any person under the age of twenty one (21)
years.
(B) No licensee holding any license other than a Class A license shall employ any person under the
age of nineteen (19) years to sell or serve wine or beer, nor anyone under the age of twenty one
(21) years to be employed as a bartender in the preparation of hard liquors, except that a person of
nineteen (19) years or older may serve such liquor to tables beyond the bar or place of
preparation. No licensee shall permit an employee under the age of twenty one (21) years to sell or
serve wine or beer, or alcoholic liquor unless there shall be on the premises a manager or
supervisor who has attained the age of twenty one (21) years. (Ord. 905, 10-7-2002; Ord. 912, 11-
4-2002)
3-3-18: SALES TO CERTAIN PERSONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 84/396
No licensee nor any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee
shall sell, give, or deliver alcoholic liquor to any intoxicated person or to any person known by him or
her to be under legal disability or in need of mental treatment. (Ord. 905, 10-7-2002; Ord. 912, 11-4-
2002)
3-3-19: SALES ON CREDIT:
(Rep. by Ord. 1339, 5-5-2014)
3-3-20: PROHIBITIONS OF PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF TWENTY ONE YEARS:
(A) Sales To Persons Under The Age Of Twenty One Years:
1. Sales Prohibited: No licensee, and no agent of any licensee, shall sell, give or deliver any
alcoholic liquor to any person under the age of twenty one (21) years.
2. Secondary Transfer Prohibited: No person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic
liquor, shall sell, give or deliver such alcoholic liquor to any person under the age of twenty one
(21) years. (Ord. 905, 10-7-2002; Ord. 912, 11-4-2002)
3. Identification Required:
(a) Before making a sale or delivery of alcoholic liquor, a licensee or any agent of a licensee
shall demand adequate written evidence of age. (Ord. 1123, 4-21-2008)
(b) For the purpose of preventing a violation of this subsection, any licensee, and any agent of a
licensee, may refuse to sell alcoholic liquor to any individual who is unable to produce
adequate written evidence of identity and age.
4. Warning Required: Every licensee shall display at all times, in a prominent and conspicuous
place located within the licensed premises, a written warning reading substantially as follows
and shall be no less than eight and one-half inches by eleven inches (81/2" x 11") in size with
type no smaller than thirty six (36) points:
Warning to persons under 21: You are subject to a fine under the City of Clinton, Illinois
Municipal Code, if you purchase alcoholic liquor or if you misrepresent your age for the purpose
of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor. Fine amounts are $100.00 for a first violation,
$150.00 for a second violation, and $200.00 for any violation after two violations.
(B) Consumption, Purchase And Possession Prohibited: No person under the age of twenty one (21)
years shall consume alcoholic liquor, purchase alcoholic liquor, accept a gift of alcoholic liquor, or
have alcoholic liquor in his or her possession.
(C) False Identification Prohibited:
1. Misrepresentation Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one
(21) years to misrepresent his or her age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic
liquor. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to present or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 85/396
offer to any licensee, or to the agent of any licensee, any written, printed, or photostatic evidence
of identity or age that is false, fraudulent or is not his or her own for the purpose of ordering,
purchasing, attempting to purchase, or otherwise procuring or attempting to procure alcoholic
liquor. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to have in his or
her possession any false or fraudulent written, printed, or photostatic evidence of identity or age.
2. Transfer And Alteration Of Identification Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person under the
age of twenty one (21) years to transfer, alter or deface any written, printed or photostatic
evidence of identity or age or to obtain any written, printed or photostatic evidence of identity or
age by means of false or fraudulent information.
3. Conveyance Of False Identification Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give or
furnish to any other person, any false or fraudulent written, printed or photostatic evidence of
identity or age. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give, or furnish to any other person,
any evidence of identity or age with the knowledge or intent that such evidence will be used to
circumvent the provisions of this chapter.
(D) Persons Under The Age Of Twenty One Years On The Licensed Premises:
1. Class A Licensee: It shall be unlawful for any licensee holding a Class A license, or agent of
such licensee, to permit any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to be or remain in
any room or compartment within the room or place in which the licensed premises is located;
provided, however, that this subsection (D)1 shall not apply to:
(a) Any person under the age of twenty one (21) years who is on or in a segregated portion of
the licensed premises during special events of a nature where persons under the age of
twenty one (21) years would reasonably be expected to be in attendance, provided, however,
that in such situations, persons under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be accompanied by
his or her parent or legal guardian;
(b) For purposes of this subsection (D)1, the term "segregated area" shall be a room or
compartment within the licensed premises separated by a floor to ceiling partition separating
said area from that portion of the licensed premises containing the bar. For purposes of this
subsection (D)1, the term "bar" shall mean a counter designed with seating or standing areas
for three (3) or more persons, attended by a person who regularly delivers alcoholic liquor to
patrons, for consumption at the counter. The local liquor control commissioner shall
specifically approve any segregated area of the class A licensed premises to be utilized by
persons under the age of twenty one (21) years.
2. Class BG Licensee: It shall be unlawful for any licensee holding a class BG license, or agent of
such licensee, to permit any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to be or remain in
any room or compartment within the room or place in which the licensed premises is located;
provided, however, that this subsection (D)2 shall not apply to: (Ord. 905, 10-7-2002; Ord. 912,
11-4-2002)
(a) Any person under the age of twenty one (21) years who is on or in the licensed premises
during the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to nine o'clock (9:00) P.M., Monday through
Saturday, provided, however, that such persons under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be
accompanied by his or her parent or legal guardian. (Ord. 1154, 2-2-2009)
3. Class C Licensee: It shall be unlawful for any licensee holding a class C license, or agent of
such licensee, to permit any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to be or remain in
any room or compartment within the room or place in which the licensed premises is located;
provided, however, that this subsection (D)3 shall not apply to:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 86/396
(a) Any person under the age of twenty one (21) years who is on or in the licensed premises
during special events of a nature where persons under the age of twenty one (21) years would
reasonably be expected to be in attendance, provided, however, that in such situations,
persons under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be accompanied by his or her parent or
legal guardian;
(b) Any person under the age of twenty one (21) years who is on or in the licensed premises at
any times that would not be subject to the provisions of subsection (D)3(a) of this section,
provided, however, that such person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall be
accompanied by his or her parent or legal guardian and shall not remain on the premises past
nine o'clock (9:00) P.M.;
(c) Employees of licensee as specified in section 3-3-17 of this chapter;
(d) Any person under the age of twenty one (21) years who is on or in the licensed premises
during any event being held by a nationally or internationally recognized service club.
4. Notice Of Special Events: Any licensee holding a class A license or class C license that will be
conducting a special event where persons under the age of twenty one (21) years may be on the
premises, shall notify the chief of police at least seven (7) days in advance of said special event,
which said notice will describe the special event, give the date and time of the special event, and
give an approximate number of persons attending said special event.
(E) Persons Under The Age Of Twenty One Years At Bar: No person under the age of twenty one (21)
years shall be allowed to sit or stand at the bar of any licensed premises, except in a class C
licensed premises or a bowling center when ordering food or nonalcoholic beverage items at the
area of the bar designated solely for said purpose by persons under the age of twenty one (21)
years. For purposes of this subsection, the term "bar" shall mean a counter, designed with seating
or standing areas for three (3) or more persons, attended by a person who regularly delivers
alcoholic liquor to patrons, for consumption at such counter. The local liquor control commissioner
shall specifically approve any segregated area of a bar to be utilized by persons under the age of
twenty one (21) years for the purpose of nonalcoholic beverages and food items.
(F) Parental Responsibility: It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to intentionally or knowingly
permit any person under the age of twenty one (21) years for whom the parent or guardian is
responsible, to violate any provision of this section. (Ord. 905, 10-7-2002; Ord. 912, 11-4-2002)
3-3-21: LIQUOR IN VEHICLES:
No person shall, within the city, suffer or permit any bottle, container or utensil containing intoxicating
liquor to be located in, upon or attached to any motor vehicle, upon any public street or alley in the city
unless the seal and wrapper originally placed upon said bottle, container, etc., is unbroken and in the
condition that the purchase was originally made. (Ord. 407, 6-15-1987)
3-3-22: CONDUCT ON PREMISES:
No licensee shall permit any illegal or disorderly conduct or immoral practices under the licensed
premises. (Ord. 407, 6-15-1987)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 87/396
3-3-23: POSTING LICENSE:
Any license issued under this chapter shall be posted in a conspicuous place on said premises
operating under said license, and any state or federal license governing said subject matter shall
likewise be posted. (Ord. 407, 6-15-1987; amd. Ord. 852, 5-21-2001)
3-3-24: INSPECTION OF PREMISES:
The local liquor control commissioner, chief of police of the city, or any city police officer may at any
reasonable time inspect the premises of a licensee to secure compliance of any provision of this
chapter. It shall be the duty of the licensee, or the person in charge of the premises to be inspected to
admit thereto, for the purpose of making such inspection at any reasonable time that admission is
requested, any authorized officer of the city.
In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the local liquor control commissioner may
revoke the license of any licensee who refuses to permit any such officer who is authorized to make
such inspection, or who interferes with such officer while in the performance of his duty in making
such inspection. (Ord. 407, 6-15-1987; amd. Ord. 852, 5-21-2001)
3-3-25: PRODUCT SAMPLING:
A licensee may conduct product sampling for consumption at the licensed premises. Up to three (3)
samples, consisting of no more than: a) one-fourth (1/4) ounce of distilled spirits; b) one ounce of wine;
or c) two (2) ounces of beer, may be served to a consumer in one day. (Ord. 905, 10-7-2002; Ord.
912, 11-4-2002)
3-3-26: SALE OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR AT RETAIL OUTSIDE LICENSED
IMPROVEMENTS:
A licensee may sell alcoholic liquor at retail in an area outside of the building or other structure where
the sale of alcoholic liquor is permitted provided:
(A) Licensee with sidewalk cafe permit: The licensee has a valid sidewalk cafe permit and the sale of
alcoholic liquor is limited to the sidewalk cafe permit area.
(B) Licensee without sidewalk cafe permit:
1. The permanent outside service area shall be contiguous to the building or other structure where
the sale of alcoholic liquor is permitted, shall contain a seating capacity that is not greater than
the seating capacity of the building or other structure where the sale of alcoholic liquor is
permitted, and shall extend only to the public right of way line.
2. The permanent outside service area shall be screened or fenced in such a manner that access
to and egress from such outside area, except for fire and other emergency purposes, shall only
be through the building or other structure where the sale of alcoholic liquor is permitted.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 88/396
Any licensee desiring to provide outside service shall submit the plans and specifications
therefor to the local liquor control commissioner who may impose such conditions as are
reasonable and proper under the circumstances in connection with the issuance of permission to
sell alcoholic liquor at retail in an outside area. A licensee with a cafe permit shall maintain
dramshop insurance in an amount deemed acceptable by the city, said insurance to show the
city as an additional insured. (Ord. 1195, 6-14-2010)
3-3-27: FINES AND PENALTIES:
(A) License Holder: Any license holder violating any provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the
penalties, including fines, revocation or suspension of local license by the local liquor control
commissioner as set forth in section 7-5 of the liquor control act6 of 1934.
(B) Violations By Other Than Licensee: Any persons other than the licensee violating any provision of
this chapter, shall be fined as follows:
1. Fine Upon Issuance Of Ticket: It shall be the duty of a duly appointed agent of the city to issue
tickets to all persons who violate the provisions of this chapter. Any person violating any
provision of this chapter shall be fined one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation of said
provision; one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for a second violation of said provision; and two
hundred dollars ($200.00) for any violation of said provision after two (2) violations.
2. Court Proceedings: Any person violating any provisions of this chapter more than three (3) times
may be taken to court and a fine established by the court, upon conviction, between the limits of
two hundred dollars ($200.00) and five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each occurrence. (Ord.
905, 10-7-2002; Ord. 912, 11-4-2002)
Chapter 4
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, ITINERANT MERCHANTS
3-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
ITINERANT MERCHANT: Any person engaging temporarily in a retail or wholesale sale of goods,
wares or merchandise, in any place within the city of Clinton, and who, for the purpose of conducting
such business, occupies any lot, building, room or structure of any kind. The term shall not apply to
any person operating a store or stand at any fair or festival declared exempt from the provisions of this
chapter by the city council.
Any merchant engaging or intending to engage in business as a merchant in the city of Clinton,
Illinois for a period of time not exceeding one hundred (100) days shall be considered as an
itinerant merchant; provided however, that peddlers shall not be considered itinerant merchants.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 89/396
PEDDLER: Any person who sells or offers for sale, barters, or exchanges any farm produce,
vegetables, dairy products, meat, fish, foods of any kind or other goods, wares or merchandise of any
kind, at retail while traveling from place to place in, along and upon the streets, alleys, sidewalks or
other public places within the city, without a permanent or fixed place of business, whether to regular
customers or not, making delivery of said goods at the time of sale, regardless of whether or not such
person collects payment at the time of sale.
PERSON: Includes any corporation, or partnership, or two (2) or more persons having a joint or
common interest.
SOLICITOR: Any person who engages in one or more of the following activities within the city of
Clinton, Illinois:
(A) Seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, services
of any kind, character or description whatever, for any kind of consideration whatever.
(B) Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application or purchase of insurance of any type,
kind or character.
(C) Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals, newspapers and every other
type or kind of publication.
(D) Seeking to obtain gifts or contributions of money, clothing or any other valuable thing for the
support or benefit of any charitable or nonprofit association, organization, corporation or project.
(Ord. 366, 3-4-1986)
3-4-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of peddler, itinerant merchant or solicitor
in the city without having first obtained a license therefor as provided herein. (Ord. 366, 3-4-1986)
3-4-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Applicants for a license under this chapter must file with the city clerk a sworn application in writing on
a form to be furnished by said city clerk, which form shall give the following information:
(A) Name of applicant and his current resident address.
(B) Social security number.
(C) Business address, if other than resident address.
(D) Age of applicant and date and place of birth.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 90/396
(E) A photograph of the applicant taken within sixty (60) days immediately prior to the date for filing of
the application, which picture shall show the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and
distinct manner.
(F) If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the vehicle, together with the license number and other
means of identification.
(G) A description of the nature of the business for which the license is being applied.
(H) A statement as to whether or not any license issued to an applicant under this chapter has ever
been revoked, suspended or cancelled.
(I) A statement as to whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of the violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter or the ordinance of any other municipality regulating soliciting, peddling
or itinerant merchant.
(J) Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of the commission of a felony.
(K) The length of time for which the right to do business in the city is desired. (Ord. 366, 3-4-1986)
3-4-4: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT:
Upon receipt of the application, the chief of police shall make an investigation of the applicant's
business responsibility and moral character for the protection of the public welfare and safety. If the
applicant's character and business responsibility is not good, the chief of police shall endorse on such
application his disapproval and his reasons therefor and return the same to the city clerk, who shall
notify the applicant that his application is disapproved, and no permit or license will be issued. Any
person aggrieved by the action of the chief of police or city clerk and the denial of the application for
license shall have the right to appeal to the city council at their next regular meeting after the
grievance occurs.
If, as a result of the investigation of the applicant, the applicant's character and business responsibility
is found to be good, the chief of police shall endorse on the application his approval and shall transmit
it to the city clerk. (Ord. 366, 3-4-1986)
3-4-5: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
Upon receipt by the city clerk of the application for license, which has been approved by the chief of
police, the city clerk, upon payment of the proper license fee, shall issue the requested license, deliver
said license to the applicant; provided, however, that no license shall issue to any applicant who has
been convicted of the commission of a felony under the laws of the state of Illinois or any other state
or federal law of the United States within five (5) years of the date of the application; nor to any person
who has been convicted of the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter; nor to any person
whose certificate of registration issued hereunder has previously been revoked as herein provided.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 91/396
The license issued hereunder shall state the expiration date thereof. (Ord. 366, 3-4-1986)
3-4-6: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
Any person receiving a license hereunder shall prominently display said license on his person at all
times when engaged in business in the city. (Ord. 366, 3-4-1986)
3-4-7: RESTRICTION ON HOURS, LOCATIONS:
It shall be unlawful to engage in soliciting or peddling prior to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or after seven
o'clock (7:00) P.M. of any weekday or at any time on a Sunday or on a national holiday.
It shall be unlawful for itinerant merchants to conduct their business upon public streets or alleys in the
city. (Ord. 366, 3-4-1986)
3-4-8: LICENSE FEES:
The following fees shall apply to any license issued pursuant to this chapter:
(A) Peddler's License: The following fees shall apply to peddlers:
1. For the use of a cart, wagon, auto or any other vehicle, for each cart:
Yearly license $75.00
Monthly license 30.00
2. For peddlers not using any vehicle:
Yearly license $60.00
Monthly license 24.00
(B) Itinerant Merchants: The fee for an itinerant merchant's license shall be as follows:
Monthly license $150.00
Daily license 40.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 92/396
(C) Solicitor's License: The following fee shall apply to solicitors:
Yearly license $60.00
Monthly license 24.00
(Ord. 1401, 12-7-2015)
3-4-9: EXEMPTIONS:
The preceding provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following:
(A) Prior Invitation: Any person who, for the purpose of selling or taking orders for the sale of
merchandise or services, has been previously invited by the occupant of a residence to call
thereon.
(B) Farmers: Any person whose principal occupation is that of a farmer, who sells the products of his
own farm, vineyard, orchard or garden, provided he does not obstruct streets, sidewalks or other
public places or solicit in any public park, unless with the city council approval.
(C) Newspaper Vendors: Any person who, on behalf of the publisher of any newspaper of general
circulation within the city solicits to sell such newspapers.
(D) Garage Sales: Any person who, outside their usual employment, conducts a casual sale of
tangible personal property on private property, which sale is advertised by any means whereby the
public at large is or can be made aware of said sale; provided however, that any person conducting
a garage sale or similar casual sale more than four (4) times within a twelve (12) month period or
more than four (4) consecutive calendar days at any occurrence shall not be exempted from the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 366, 3-4-1986)
3-4-10: FESTIVALS AND FAIRS:
The city council may from time to time enact rules and regulations establishing the procedure and
requirements for declaring festivals and fairs to be exempt from the provisions of this chapter. (Ord.
366, 3-4-1986)
3-4-11: SOLICITATION OF CITY EMPLOYEES:
It shall be unlawful for anyone to engage in soliciting, for any purpose, or for anyone to distribute
literature to city employees during the employees' working hours. (Ord. 366, 3-4-1986)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 93/396
Chapter 5
JUNK DEALERS
3-5-1: LICENSE REQUIRED, FEE:
It shall be unlawful to operate or carry on the business of junk dealer or keep a junk shop, store or
place for the purchase or sale of junk, rags, old rope, paper or baggings, oil, iron, brass, copper or
empty bottles, without having obtained a license therefor as is herein provided. (1968 Code, sec. 38-
101)
The fee to be paid for such license shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) annually. (1968 Code, sec.
38-103; amd. 1983 Code)
3-5-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Applications for such licenses shall be made in conformance with the provisions of chapter 1 of this
title relating to licenses. (1968 Code, sec. 38-102)
3-5-3: STOLEN GOODS:
Every dealer in junk who shall receive or be in possession of any goods, articles or things which may
have been lost or stolen, or who may believe that such property is stolen, shall, upon demand,
produce such article or thing to any member of the police department asking to examine the same.
(1968 Code, sec. 38-104; amd. 1983 Code)
3-5-4: VEHICLES:
Each vehicle used by a junk dealer in the conduct of his business shall bear thereon in legible
characters the name and address of the owner and proprietor thereof. (1968 Code, sec. 38-105)
3-5-5: JUNKYARDS:
It shall be unlawful to keep or store any junk, as mentioned in section 3-5-1 of this chapter, or to
establish or maintain any junkyard in the city unless the written consent of the owner of a majority of
the property within a radius of three hundred feet (300') from the premises to be so used is first
obtained and filed in accordance with the provisions of section 3-1-10 of this title relating to frontage
consents. (1968 Code, sec. 38-106)
Chapter 6
GARBAGE COLLECTORS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 94/396
3-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
ASHES: The waste product of combustion of any material.
CUSTOMER: Any tenant, lessee or occupant of every dwelling, tenement house, lodging house, hotel,
restaurant, boarding house, or other person who hires a "hauler" as defined herein for the purpose of
regularly collecting garbage.
GARBAGE: "Kitchen and household garbage", "ashes" and "other refuse matter" as hereinbefore
defined.
HAULER: A person licensed under this chapter to haul "kitchen and household garbage", "ashes",
"garbage" or "other refuse", as defined in this section.
KITCHEN AND HOUSEHOLD GARBAGE: Any, all and every accumulation of vegetable matter, liquid
or solid, that is received from kitchens and households, and also any, all and every decayed matter
such as vegetables and fruits.
OTHER REFUSE: Sweepings, papers, tin cans, dirt or other accumulations not giving off noxious
odors.
VEHICLE: Any automobile, truck or any vessel, vehicle or wagon used to transport "garbage" or "other
refuse" as defined in this section. (1968 Code, sec. 41-101)
3-6-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in the business of collecting garbage or be permitted to haul, convey or
transport over and upon the streets of the City any "garbage" or "other refuse" as defined in this
chapter, or other material giving off noxious odors unless he shall be licensed therefor. (1968 Code,
sec. 41-103)
3-6-3: LICENSE FEE, TERM:
The license fee shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each vehicle used; provided, that if more
than three (3) months of the calendar year shall have expired at the time of the application, the fee
shall be prorated on the basis of quarters for the balance of the calendar year. All licenses shall expire
on December 31 in each year. The license fee may be paid quarterly in advance on January 1, April 1,
July 1 and October 1 of each year. The license shall include a permit to operate one truck. A licensee
may obtain a permit or permits for one hundred dollars ($100.00) per permit, and each licensee must
obtain a permit for each truck used in his said business as a hauler of garbage within the City. Each
licensee will receive a permit number which must be printed on the cab of his truck in numbers at least
two inches (2") high. If a licensee purchases more than one permit, the same permit number with an
additional letter will be issued to such licensee. (1968 Code, sec. 41-112)
The number of licenses to be issued under this chapter shall not exceed eight (8). (1968 Code, sec.
41-115)
3-6-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 95/396
All applications for license hereunder shall be made in writing to the Council, and shall be referred to
the Department of Public Health and Safety for investigation of applicant's compliance with the terms
hereof, and said department shall make a full report of its findings to the council. (1968 Code, sec. 41-
105)
3-6-5: REQUIREMENTS OF COLLECTOR:
No applicant shall be granted a license unless he shall have provided himself with the proper and
necessary machinery or other appliances for properly taking care of and disposing of said garbage in
conformity with the health regulations of the state of Illinois, the county of DeWitt and this city, nor
unless such applicant owns each vehicle to be used in garbage collection, nor if the applicant has
been guilty of any wilful violation of any health or sanitary provisions of the city or is in default on any
contract with the city. (1968 Code, sec. 41-104)
3-6-6: SALE OF LICENSE, COUNCIL APPROVAL:
Any licensee may sell his license and/or permit to any resident of the state, subject to the approval of
the city council. (1968 Code, sec. 41-116)
3-6-7: PAYMENT OF CHARGES:
(A) Extending Credit: No hauler shall extend credit to a customer for a period of more than three (3)
months. (1968 Code, sec. 41-106)
(B) Delinquent Payment: When any customer is more than three (3) months behind in payment, the
hauler then retained by said customer shall terminate service to said customer. (1968 Code, sec.
41-107)
(C) Payment Of Arrears: Customers who have been refused service because of failure to pay for said
service shall not be given service by any other hauler until the said customer shall have paid to the
hauler who terminated his service the amount owing to him; said amount shall in no event be more
than that for three (3) months' services. Upon payment of the three (3) months' arrears or a less
amount if that is all that is owed to the hauler, the city clerk shall give notice of such payment to all
haulers and they shall then have the right to extend service to the customer. (1968 Code, sec. 41-
110)
3-6-8: TERMINATION OF SERVICE, NOTICE:
(A) Haulers: Haulers who are terminating service to a customer for failure of the customer to pay for
such service or terminating the service for any other reason must notify their customer in writing
and also submit a duplicate of said notice to the city clerk. It shall also be the duty of the hauler to
notify the customers when they are violating any section of this chapter and likewise submit a
duplicate copy of said notice to the city clerk. (1968 Code, sec. 41-108)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 96/396
(B) Customers: Upon receipt of notification by the city clerk, the city clerk shall notify all haulers as
licensed hereunder of the customers that have been cut off from service for failure to pay for said
service or for any other reason. (1968 Code, sec. 41-109)
3-6-9: GARBAGE CONTAINERS REQUIRED:
It shall be the duty of every tenant, lessee or occupant of every dwelling, tenement house, lodging
house, hotel, restaurant, boarding house or other person on whose premises kitchen and household
garbage collects, to provide, and at all times to keep within such building, or on the premises, garbage
containers sufficient to hold all kitchen and household garbage which may accumulate on the
premises between collections, such containers to be watertight, and with a tight fitting cover, and
equipped with suitable handles, which containers shall be placed at all times so as to be readily
accessible for removal and emptying, and where they shall not be a public nuisance. No person,
unless authorized and licensed for that purpose, as hereinafter specified, shall interfere with such
containers or the contents thereof. All other refuse and ashes or cinders shall be placed in a separate
covered receptacle, said receptacle to be small enough that one man can easily handle it. Said
receptacles may not be placed in any alley or street, but must be readily accessible for emptying and
removal, but in any event they shall not be placed in a position that they would become a public
nuisance. All such garbage, ashes or cinders and other refuse shall be removed once each week.
(1968 Code, sec. 41-102)
3-6-10: VEHICLE CONDITION:
(A) The beds of all vehicles used in garbage collection shall be tight enough so that none of the
garbage contained therein shall sift through, drop or spill from said vehicles, and covers shall be
provided for the beds of all such vehicles which shall be kept closed when in use. (1968 Code, sec.
41-113)
(B) All ashes and non-noxious matter must be hauled in vehicles of such construction as not to permit
the sifting out or spilling or scattering by the wind or leakage of any matter so hauled or
transported. (1968 Code, sec. 41-114)
3-6-11: CAUSE FOR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
If during the period covered by the license granted, the hauler shall permit his equipment to fall into
disrepair or shall fail to keep the same in a sanitary condition when not in use, or shall fail to obey any
of the provisions of this chapter, the license shall be revoked after a hearing by the Council. (1968
Code, sec. 41-111)
3-6-12: PLACEMENT OF RECEPTACLES:
Not earlier than the day preceding collection, every tenant, every lessee or occupant of every dwelling,
tenement house, lodging house, hotel, restaurant, boarding house, or other person on whose
premises kitchen and household garbage collects shall place or cause to be placed approved
receptacles at the street side behind the street surface so that the contents will not be scattered by the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 97/396
wind or animals. Receptacles shall be returned against or behind the building on the premises no later
than the day following collection. (Ord. 1238, 12-19-2011)
3-6-13: HOURS OF OPERATION:
All collections of residential waste shall be made within the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and seven
o'clock (7:00) P.M. All collections shall be made as quietly as possible. (Ord. 1404, 3-21-2016)
3-6-14: VIOLATION:
Whoever violates any of the provisions hereof shall, upon conviction, be subject to penalty as provided
for in section 1-4-1 of this Code. The provisions of said section shall in no way prevent revocation of
the license as provided in section 3-6-11 of this chapter. (1968 Code, sec. 41-117; amd. Ord. 670, 9-
16-1996; Ord. 1404, 3-21-2016)
Chapter 7
TAXICABS
3-7-1: DEFINITION:
The term "taxicab" as used in this chapter shall mean and include any vehicle used to carry
passengers for hire but not operating a fixed route. (1968 Code, sec. 42-102)
3-7-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to engage in the business of operating a taxicab in the city without first having
secured a license therefor. Application for license shall be made in writing to the city clerk's office
upon forms supplied by the city. Applications shall contain the name of the applicant and his or her
address and the make, model, year of manufacture, state license number for the current year, and
vehicle identification number for each vehicle to be used. If the owner is a corporation or limited
liability company, the application must show the names and addresses of the officers, shareholders,
members, and also the name of the local manager or person to be in charge of the operation within
the city. Any change in officers, principal shareholders, members, owners or managers shall
immediately be communicated to the city. Said application shall be approved by the mayor and city
council. (Ord. 1309, 4-1-2013)
3-7-3: FEE:
The annual fee for such licenses shall be eighty five dollars ($85.00) per each taxicab operated. Said
license fee shall be nontransferable and nonrefundable. The city clerk shall issue suitable tags or
stickers for each taxicab licensed which said tag or sticker shall be displayed in a prominent place on
each taxicab. The licensee shall notify the clerk of the motor number and state license number for
each taxicab operated and the corresponding municipal tag or sticker number. (Ord. 1309, 4-1-2013)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 98/396
3-7-4: CHARACTER OF APPLICANT:
No such license shall be issued to or held by any person who is not a person of good character or who
has been convicted of a felony; nor shall such license be issued to or held by any corporation if any
officer thereof would be ineligible for a license under the foregoing conditions. (1968 Code, sec. 42-
103)
3-7-5: REGULATIONS FOR DRIVERS:
(A) No person shall drive a taxicab or be hired or permitted to do so, unless he has a valid operator's
license issued by the state. (Ord. 794, 10-18-1999)
(B) It shall be unlawful for any driver of a taxicab while on duty to drink any intoxicating liquor, or to
use any profane or obscene language, to shout or call to prospective passengers, or to disturb the
peace in any way. (1968 Code, sec. 42-106)
(C) It shall be the duty of every driver of a taxicab to obey all traffic rules established by state statute
or city ordinance. (1968 Code, sec. 42-108)
3-7-6: VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS:
(A) No taxicab shall be operated unless it bears a state license duly issued, and no such cab shall be
operated unless it is equipped with proper brakes, lights, tires, horn, muffler, rear vision mirror and
windshield wipers in good condition. It shall be the duty of the chief of police to inspect every
taxicab as often as may be necessary to see to the enforcement of the provisions of this
subsection.
(B) Each taxicab, while operated, shall have on each side, in letters readable from a distance of
twenty feet (20'), the name of the licensee operating it. If more than one cab is operated by the
licensee, each cab shall be designated by a different number, and such number also shall so
appear on each side of such cab. (1968 Code, sec. 42-105)
(C) No taxicab shall be operated unless it is covered by a bond or public liability policy as required by
statute. (1968 Code, sec. 42-107)
(D) It shall be unlawful to knowingly permit any taxicab to be used in the perpetration of crime or
misdemeanor. (1968 Code, sec. 42-109)
3-7-7: PASSENGERS:
(A) It shall be the duty of the driver of any taxicab to accept as a passenger any person who seeks to
so use the taxicab, provided such person is not intoxicated and conducts himself in an orderly
manner.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 99/396
(B) No person shall be admitted to a taxicab then occupied by a passenger without the consent of that
passenger.
(C) The driver shall take his passenger to his destination by the most direct available route from the
place where the passenger enters the cab. (1968 Code, sec. 42-110)
(D) It shall be unlawful for a passenger to fail or refuse to pay the lawful fare at the termination of a
trip. (1968 Code, sec. 42-111)
3-7-8: CAB STANDS:
Each cab stand shall be appropriately marked by signs erected under the supervision of the
commissioner of accounts and finances. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle, other than a licensed
taxicab, in any cab stand1.
A licensed taxicab may be parked in any cab stand while such taxicab is in the charge of its driver on
duty awaiting a fare. (1968 Code, sec. 42-112)
3-7-9: INSURANCE:
Every operator must carry automobile liability insurance on each licensed taxicab in the amount of at
least two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) minimum bodily injury per person, and two
hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) minimum bodily injury per accident, and fifty thousand
dollars ($50,000.00) minimum property damage per accident and shall name the city of Clinton,
Illinois, as an additional named insured. Said insurance must be kept in force at all times, and
certificates of all insurance must be kept on file with the city clerk. Said insurance company must be
one licensed to do business in the state of Illinois. (Ord. 1309, 4-1-2013)
Chapter 8
MUNICIPAL OCCUPATION TAXES
3-8-1: MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this city in the business of making sales of
service at the rate of one percent (1%) of the cost price of all tangible personal property transferred by
said servicemen either in the form of tangible personal property or in the form of real estate as an
incident to a sale of service, in accordance with the provisions of section 5/8-11-5 of the Illinois
municipal code.
Every supplier or serviceman required to account for municipal service occupation tax for the benefit
of the city shall file, on or before the last day of each calendar month, the report to the state
department of revenue required by section nine of the "service occupation tax act", approved July 10,
1961, as amended1.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 100/396
At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the state department of revenue the amount of
tax hereby imposed. (Ord. 12, 8-18-1969)
3-8-2: MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX:
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal
property at retail in the city at the rate of one percent (1%) of the gross receipts from such sales made
in the course of such business while this section is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of
section 5/8-11-1 of the Illinois municipal code.
Every such person engaged in such business in the city shall file on or before the last day of each
calendar month, the report to the state department of revenue required by section three of "an act in
relation to a tax upon persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property to
purchasers for use or consumption" approved June 28, 1933, as amended2.
At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the state department of revenue the amount of
tax hereby imposed on account of the receipts from sales of tangible personal property during the
preceding month. (Ord. 13, 8-18-1969)
3-8-3: MUNICIPAL USE TAX:
A tax is hereby imposed in accordance with provisions of section 5/8-11-6 of the Illinois municipal
code upon the privilege of using, in the city, any item of tangible personal property which is purchased
outside Illinois at retail from a retailer, and which is titled or registered with an agency of Illinois
government. The tax shall be at a rate of one percent (1%) of the selling price of such tangible
personal property with selling price to have the meaning as defined in the "use tax act", approved July
14, 19553.
Such tax shall be collected by the Illinois department of revenue for the city imposing the tax and shall
be paid before the title or certificate of registration for the personal property is issued. (Ord. 85, 11-4-
1974)
Chapter 9
RAFFLES
3-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
The words and phrases used in this chapter which are defined in 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 15/0.1
through 15/8.1, shall have the same meanings as in said sections defined. (Ord. 673, 10-21-1996)
3-9-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person, firm or corporation shall conduct raffles or chances within the city of Clinton without having
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 101/396
first obtained a license therefor. Licenses shall be issued only to:
(A) Bona fide religious, charitable, labor, business, fraternal, educational or veterans' organizations
that operate without profit to their members and which have been in existence continuously for a
period of five (5) years immediately before making application for a license and which have had
during that entire five (5) year period a bona fide membership engaged in carrying out their
objectives; or
(B) A nonprofit fundraising organization that the city council determines is organized for the sole
purpose of providing financial assistance to an identified individual or group of individuals suffering
extreme financial hardship as a result of an illness, disability, accident or disaster. Licenses may be
issued yearly or for a single raffle event. The mayor of the city of Clinton is designated as the
person charged with the administration of the appropriate provisions of the Illinois raffles act, this
chapter, and receiving applications for a raffle license. The city council shall act on a license
application within thirty (30) days from the date of application. (Ord. 1275, 6-18-2012)
3-9-3: LICENSE RESTRICTIONS AND INELIGIBILITIES:
(A) Licenses issued by the city of Clinton are subject to the following restrictions:
1. The aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise awarded by a licensee in a single raffle
shall not exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). The maximum retail value of each prize
awarded by a licensee in a single raffle shall not exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). The
maximum price which may be charged for each raffle chance issued or sold shall not exceed
one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). The maximum number of days during which chances may be
issued or sold is sixty (60).
2. The license and application for license must specify the area or areas within the city of Clinton in
which raffle chances will be sold or issued, the time period during which raffle chances will be
sold or issued, the time of determination of winning chances and the location or locations at
which winning chances will be determined.
3. The license application must contain a sworn statement attesting to the not for profit character of
the prospective licensee organization, signed by the presiding officer and the secretary of that
organization.
4. The application for license shall be a form approved by the city council.
5. A license authorizes the licensee to conduct raffles as defined in the Illinois raffles act, 230
Illinois Compiled Statutes 15/0.01 et seq. (Ord. 1275, 6-18-2012)
3-9-4: CONDUCT OF RAFFLES:
(A) The conducting of raffles is subject to the following restrictions:
1. The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of the
organization permitted to conduct that game. Under no circumstances will the net proceeds be
less than ten percent (10%) of the gross receipts.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 102/396
2. No person except a bona fide member of the sponsoring organization may participate in the
management or operation of the raffle.
3. No person may receive any remuneration or profit for participating in the management or
operation of the raffle.
4. A licensee may rent a premises on which to determine the winning chance or chances in a raffle
only from an organization which is also licensed under this chapter.
5. Raffle chances may be sold or issued only within the area specified on the license, and winning
chances may be determined only at those locations specified on the license.
6. A person under the age of eighteen (18) years may participate in the conducting of raffles or
chances only with the permission of a parent or guardian. A person under the age of eighteen
(18) years may be within the area where winning chances are being determined only when
accompanied by his parent or guardian.
(B) If a lessor rents premises where a winning chance or chances on a raffle are determined, the
lessor shall not be criminally liable if the person who uses the premises for the determining of
winning chances does not hold a license issued by the governing body of any county or
municipality, under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 673, 10-21-1996)
3-9-5: RAFFLES MANAGER BOND:
All operation of and the conduct of raffles shall be under the supervision of a single raffles manager
designated by the organization. The manager shall give a fidelity bond to cover the estimated
aggregate retail value of all prizes/merchandise offered at said raffle. The bond shall be in favor of the
organization conditioned upon his honesty and the performance of his duties. Terms of the bond shall
provide that notice shall be given in writing to the city of Clinton not less than thirty (30) days prior to
its cancellation. The city council may waive the bond requirement with a waiver provision on the
license if a unanimous vote of the members of the licensed organization approves the waiver of the
manager's bond. (Ord. 1275, 6-18-2012)
3-9-6: RECORDS:
(A) Each organization licensed to conduct raffles and chances shall keep records of its gross receipts,
expenses and net proceeds for each single gathering or occasion at which winning chances are
determined. All deductions from gross receipts for each single gathering or occasion shall be
documented with receipts or other records indicating the amount, a description of the purchased
item or service or other reason for the deduction, and the recipient. The distribution of net
proceeds shall be itemized as to payee, purpose, amount and date of payment.
(B) Gross receipts from the operation of raffle programs shall be segregated from other revenues of
the organization, including bingo gross receipts, if bingo games are also conducted by the same
nonprofit organization pursuant to license therefor issued by the department of revenue of the state
of Illinois, and placed in a separate account. Each organization shall have separate records of its
raffles. The person who accounts for gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds from the
operation of raffles shall not be the same person who accounts for other revenues of the
organization. (Ord. 673, 10-21-1996)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 103/396
(C) Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall report promptly after the conclusion of each
raffle to its membership, and to the licensing city of Clinton, its gross receipts, expenses and net
proceeds from raffles, and the distribution of net proceeds itemized as required in this section.
(Ord. 1275, 6-18-2012)
(D) Records required by this section shall be preserved for three (3) years, and organizations shall
make available their records relating to the operation of raffles for public inspection at reasonable
times and places. (Ord. 673, 10-21-1996)
Chapter 10
HOTEL OPERATORS' OCCUPATION TAX
3-10-1: IMPOSED:
The city hereby adopts the provisions of section 8-3-14 of the Illinois municipal code1, as amended,
and imposes a tax upon all persons engaged within the city in the business of renting, leasing or
letting rooms in a hotel, as defined in the hotel operators' occupation tax act, 35 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 145/1 et seq., at the rate of three and one-fourth percent (3.25%) of the gross rental receipts
from such renting, leasing or letting; excluding, however, from gross rental receipts, the proceeds of
such renting, leasing or letting to permanent residents of each hotel, said tax to be administered and
collected in accordance with the following sections. (Ord. 776, 3-15-1999)
3-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
All terms used in this chapter shall have the meanings as defined in the hotel operators' occupation
tax act, 35 Illinois Compiled Statutes 145/1 et seq., as amended, and 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/8-3-14, as applicable, and as same shall be in force and effect from time to time. (Ord. 776, 3-15-
1999)
3-10-3: CONSTITUTING SEPARATE CHARGE:
Those persons subject to the tax imposed by this chapter may reimburse themselves for their tax
liability for such tax by separately stating such tax as an additional charge, which charge may be
stated in combination, in a single amount, with the state tax imposed under the hotel operators'
occupation tax act heretofore cited. (Ord. 776, 3-15-1999)
3-10-4: EXEMPTIONS:
Gross rental receipts from the renting, leasing or letting rooms in a hotel only to permanent residents
shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter, and persons subject to the tax imposed hereby
shall be entitled to exclude from gross rental receipts for the purpose of computing the tax imposed
hereby, that portion of such proceeds arising from renting, leasing or letting to permanent residents of
the hotel operated by such person. (Ord. 776, 3-15-1999)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 104/396
3-10-5: USE OF PROCEEDS:
The city shall expend the tax collected pursuant to this chapter solely to promote tourism and
conventions within the city, and otherwise to attract nonresident, overnight visitors to the city, and no
tax collected pursuant to this chapter shall be used to advertise for or otherwise to promote new
competition in the hotel business within the city. (Ord. 776, 3-15-1999)
3-10-6: BOOKS AND RECORDS:
Every person subject to the tax imposed by this chapter shall keep separate books and records of his
business as an operator so as to show the rents and occupancies taxable under this chapter
separately from his transactions not taxable hereunder. If any such operator fails to keep such
separate books or records, he shall be liable to tax at the rate designated herein upon the entire gross
proceeds from the operation of his hotel. (Ord. 776, 3-15-1999)
3-10-7: REGISTRATION:
All persons engaged within the city in the business of renting, leasing or letting rooms in a hotel or
motel, so as to be subject to the tax imposed hereby, shall register his operation in the office of the city
clerk upon a registration form to be adopted and prescribed by the city treasurer, which forms shall
include such information as shall be reasonably necessary in order to assure collection and
enforcement of the tax imposed by this chapter. (Ord. 891, 5-20-2002)
3-10-8: TAX RETURNS:
Each person required to be registered hereunder and subject to the tax imposed by this chapter shall,
on or before the twentieth day of each calendar month, file a tax return in the office of the city clerk on
a form to be adopted and prescribed by the city treasurer which shall include the information required
to be reported on the tax return filed by such person with the state department of revenue pursuant to
the hotel operators' occupation tax act hereinabove cited, for the preceding calendar month, together
with a copy of the return filed with the state for such period. In the event any person required to file a
return hereunder shall not be required to file a monthly return with the state department of revenue
pursuant to the hotel operators' occupation tax act, such persons shall, upon substantiation of the
required filing frequency of the state return, be entitled to file the tax returns due pursuant to this
chapter upon the same frequency and for the same period as the state return is required to be filed by
such person, with the prior approval of the city treasurer. (Ord. 890, 5-20-2002)
3-10-9: PAYMENT:
The tax due pursuant to this chapter shall be due and payable on or before the due date of the tax
return showing the tax liability and shall be paid to the treasurer of the city, together with any interest
and penalty due, and the treasurer shall deposit the funds so collected into a separate fund to be
designated hotel and motel operators' occupation tax fund. (Ord. 776, 3-15-1999)
3-10-10: INTEREST AND PENALTIES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 105/396
If the tax due pursuant to this chapter is not paid on or before the due date of the return required to be
filed by the person responsible for the payment of the tax, such person shall, in addition to the tax, be
liable for a penalty equal to one and one-half percent (11/2%) of the tax due for each month or part
thereof until such tax and penalty is paid in full. The penalty imposed hereby shall be assessed and
collected in the same manner as the tax imposed under this chapter. (Ord. 776, 3-15-1999)
3-10-11: PENALTIES FOR LATE FILING:
Any person responsible for filing a tax return and paying tax pursuant to this chapter who shall fail to
file the required tax return on or before the due date thereof, whether or not the tax is paid therewith,
shall be liable for penalty in the amount of ten dollars ($10.00) per day for each day that such tax
return is late, and each day shall constitute a separate offense for purposes hereof. (Ord. 776, 3-15-
1999)
3-10-12: COMPLIANCE:
All returns required to be filed hereunder shall be executed by the proprietor, a general partner, or an
authorized corporate officer and shall be made under penalties of perjury. Any person wilfully filing a
return containing false or inaccurate information shall be guilty of perjury and of a violation of this
chapter, and shall be subject to the fine imposed for violations of this chapter in addition. (Ord. 776, 3-
15-1999)
3-10-13: AUDITS:
The city, through its designated agent or officer, shall have the right, at reasonable times after
reasonable notice, to examine all books and records maintained by the person registered or required
to be registered under this chapter, including, but not limited to, general accounting records, bank
records, returns required to be filed under the hotel operators' occupation tax act heretofore cited,
state and federal income tax returns and any other books, records or documents which are relevant in
the determination and confirmation of the full and accurate reporting of gross receipts on which tax is
imposed by this chapter, the entitlement to any exemptions claimed, and the payment of the full tax
due pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 776, 3-15-1999)
3-10-14: VIOLATIONS:
Any person violating the foregoing provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine
of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
offense, except as otherwise expressly provided herein, and each day or part thereof upon which such
offense continues, shall constitute a separate offense hereunder. (Ord. 776, 3-15-1999)
3-10-15: LIEN IMPOSED:
At any time after an assessment and demand for payment of any tax interest and/or penalty due
pursuant to this chapter is made against any person, the city may file a notice of lien for said tax in the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 106/396
office of the recorder of deeds of DeWitt County, or any other county in which the person responsible
for the payment of tax resides or has property, and a lien shall attach to all property owned by such
person in said county and shall continue in effect for a period of seven (7) years after filing and may
be foreclosed in the manner of a judicial lien. The remedy of imposing a lien hereunder shall be in
addition to all other remedies available to the city to collect the tax, interest and penalty due, including
civil actions. (Ord. 776, 3-15-1999)
3-10-16: PARTIAL INVALIDITY:
In the event any term or provision of this chapter is determined to be invalid or unenforceable by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such invalid or unenforceable provision shall not affect the validity of
the remaining provisions of this chapter and the provisions hereof declared to be severable. (Ord. 776,
3-15-1999)
Chapter 11
COMMERCIAL USER RATES FOR LANDSCAPE WASTE
FACILITY
3-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
BULK WOOD: Any brush or tree limbs having a diameter in excess of six inches (6").
COMMERCIAL USER: As used in this chapter, is any individual or entity disposing of landscape yard
waste material for hire, either directly or indirectly. The term "commercial user" includes, but is not
limited to, individuals hired specifically to remove landscape yard waste material, or individuals or
entities engaged in businesses that result in the disposal of landscape yard waste materials such as
lawn mowing businesses, tree removal businesses, and landscaping businesses. (Ord. 821, 5-1-2000)
3-11-2: USER RATES:
The user rates for commercial users at the landscape waste facility of the city are hereby established
at seven dollars ($7.00) per cubic yard for all nonbulk wood landscape yard waste materials and nine
dollars ($9.00) per cubic yard for bulk wood waste materials. (Ord. 821, 5-1-2000)
3-11-3: COMPUTATION OF USER RATE:
A city yard waste facility employee will determine the fee based on cubic yards prior to any dumping
by a commercial user. The commercial user will acknowledge and agree to the dumping fees prior to
dumping landscape yard waste material and will sign an invoice acknowledging the rates to be
charged. (Ord. 821, 5-1-2000)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 107/396
Chapter 12
SIDEWALK CAFES
3-12-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
(A) A sidewalk cafe is permitted only on sidewalks. The permit area shall be limited to the area
immediately adjacent to the establishment requesting the permit, or on sidewalks contiguous to the
sidewalk adjacent to the establishment.
(B) No permit shall be issued for sidewalk cafes outside the downtown business district.
(C) No permit will be allowed if seats or equipment in the sidewalk cafe result in the need for additional
restrooms or additional parking and unless such additional restrooms or parking are provided.
(Ord. 1049, 7-3-2006)
3-12-2: GENERAL GUIDELINES:
(A) Any person making use of a sidewalk cafe shall do so in a reasonable manner with due regard for
the health and safety of persons and property. No permittee shall make any physical alteration to
public property without the written permission of the administrative assistant to the city of Clinton. A
permittee shall owe a duty to the city of Clinton and third persons to maintain the permit area in a
clean, safe and sanitary condition.
(B) The permittee shall keep the permit area free of litter, cans, bottles and spills at all times. The
permittee shall promptly collect and dispose of all litter, trash and other waste materials associated
with the sidewalk cafe, including material in the adjacent public right of way or property originating
from the sidewalk cafe. The permittee shall dispose of any such waste in their own trash
containers only.
(C) No cooking or food preparation shall be permitted at any time within the permit area.
(D) Upon the expiration or other termination of a sidewalk cafe use permit, the permittee shall
immediately remove all tables, chairs, furnishings, equipment and other items of personal property
from the permit area. Any such items remaining upon the public right of way may be removed and
disposed of by the city of Clinton at the sole cost and expense of the permittee. (Ord. 1049, 7-3-
2006)
3-12-3: INSURANCE:
A permittee shall maintain liability insurance in an amount deemed acceptable by the city, said
insurance to show the city as an additional insured. (Ord. 1049, 7-3-2006)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 108/396
3-12-4: HOURS OF OPERATION:
The hours when service is permitted at the sidewalk cafe shall be during the business hours of the
permittee. (Ord. 1195, 6-14-2010)
3-12-5: MUSIC AND LIVE ENTERTAINMENT:
No live entertainment or sound amplification equipment shall be allowed at any time within the permit
area. This provision shall not prohibit ambient background music. For purposes of this provision,
"ambient background music" shall mean quiet music that is played at minimal volume such that it is
not audible from adjoining property or public rights of way. (Ord. 1049, 7-3-2006)
3-12-6: FURNITURE AND EQUIPMENT:
(A) Only the following types of furniture or other equipment may be located in a sidewalk cafe:
1. Tables and chairs.
2. Umbrellas.
3. Waste receptacles.
4. Busing carts.
5. Temporary railings or landscaping used to demarcate the boundaries of the permit area.
Said furniture and other equipment shall be portable, shall not be chained, bolted or otherwise
secured together as a unit, shall not be affixed to the surface of the permit area, and shall be
removed on a nightly basis, unless otherwise specifically authorized in the sidewalk cafe permit.
(Ord. 1129, 8-4-2008)
(B) The maximum allowable dimension for tables and temporary railing or landscaping shall be forty
eight inches (48") in diameter, forty eight inches (48") in width or length, and thirty inches (30") in
height.
(C) Tables shall be freestanding with detached chairs or seating, unless it is determined that another
design meets the intent of these regulations and a specific exception is permitted in writing by the
administrative assistant to the city of Clinton.
(D) Umbrellas shall have a maximum diameter of eight feet (8'), a weighted base and be fabric
covered.
(E) Tables, chairs, umbrellas, and other permissible equipment shall be located in the sidewalk cafe
area so that there remains open, at all times, a longitudinal walking space, the location of which
shall be determined by the administrative assistant to the city of Clinton, or designee, of a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 109/396
minimum of five feet (5') in width, with a cross slope not to exceed Americans with disabilities act
(ADA) requirements.
(F) The placement of portable heaters must be reviewed and approved by the city. (Ord. 1049, 7-3-
2006)
3-12-7: ADVERTISING:
No signs, banners, sandwich boards or other like advertising, except for advertising permitted by the
sign code, shall be located in the permit area. (Ord. 1049, 7-3-2006)
Title 4
HEALTH AND SANITATION
Chapter 1
GENERAL HEALTH PROVISIONS
4-1-1: SANITARY CONDITIONS ENFORCED:
(A) Premises:
1. General: It shall be unlawful to permit any building, structure or place to remain in such a
condition as to be dangerous to the public health in any way. Any such structure, building or
place is hereby declared to be a nuisance. (1968 Code, sec. 47-107)
2. Premises Where Foodstuffs Sold Or Stored: All premises used in the sale or storage of food or
drink intended for human consumption shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, and shall
be kept free from flies and vermin of all kinds. It shall be unlawful to permit any person who is
afflicted with a contagious disease to handle any food or drink intended for sale. (1968 Code,
sec. 47-102)
(B) Prohibited Acts: It shall be unlawful to commit or do any act which endangers the public health or
results in annoyance or discomfort to the public. (1968 Code, sec. 47-108)
4-1-2: CONTAGIOUS DISEASES:
(A) Report Required: Every physician called in to care for or treat a person afflicted with a contagious
or epidemic disease shall make a report of same to the health officer within twenty four (24) hours
after becoming cognizant thereof. In case no physician is in attendance, it shall be the duty of the
person in charge of or having the care of such person to make such report within twenty four (24)
hours from the time the disease is recognized. (1968 Code, sec. 46-101)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 110/396
(B) Quarantine:
1. Health Officer To Enforce: The health officer shall have charge of the enforcement of the
quarantine rules. He shall have the power and authority to place any premises within which a
contagious or epidemic disease occurs under quarantine and shall determine the time when the
quarantine shall end. (1968 Code, sec. 46-102)
2. Fumigations: Premises which have been quarantined in accordance with the terms of this
section shall be thoroughly fumigated or otherwise freed from all risk of contagious disease,
under the supervision of the health officer, before said quarantine shall terminate. (1968 Code,
sec. 46-103)
3. Deliveries To Quarantined Premises: No person engaged in the delivery of food or drink
intended for human consumption shall enter any premises which are quarantined because of the
existence of a contagious or epidemic disease. No containers or bottles shall be removed from
any such premises until the termination of the quarantine, and no such container which has been
left at such premises during the quarantine period shall be placed in use for carrying food or
drink until it has been thoroughly sterilized. (1968 Code, sec. 46-105)
(C) Spreading Contagion: It shall be unlawful for any person to spread, wilfully or carelessly, any
contagious disease or to so cause the spread of the same. (1968 Code, sec. 46-104)
(D) Penalty: Any person violating any of the provisions of this section or violating any of the
reasonable rules of the health officer with regard to quarantined premises, or disturbing or
disregarding any notice of quarantine placed by or under the direction of the health officer shall be
subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (1968 Code, sec. 46-106)
4-1-3: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
4-1-3-1: FOOD AND DRINK:
(A) Unwholesome Food: It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale any unwholesome or polluted food
or drink of any kind in the city. (1968 Code, sec. 47-101)
(B) Serving Food: Utensils for personal use in all places serving food or drink to the public shall be
thoroughly cleaned and sterilized after each such usage. (1968 Code, sec. 47-110)
(C) Common Drinking Cup: It shall be unlawful to maintain any common drinking cup, dipper or other
similar utensil, for the use of more than one person in any public hall, theater, store or other place
frequented by the public. (1968 Code, sec. 47-109)
4-1-3-2: REFUSE AND DEBRIS, DEPOSITS:
(A) Refuse: It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit anywhere in the city any uncovered piles of
refuse, garbage, offal or carcasses of dead animals. Such refuse must be buried at least two feet
(2') below the surface of the ground or burned in properly constructed incinerators or otherwise
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 111/396
properly disposed of. Any uncovered pile of refuse is hereby declared to be a nuisance. (1968
Code, sec. 47-105)
(B) Deposits On Public Ways:
1. Grass And Leaves: It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or deposit, or cause to be
dumped or deposited, any grass, leaves, branches or any other things in the roadway or gutter
of any public street in the city. (1968 Code, sec. 56-125)
2. Rubbish: It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or deposit or cause to be dumped or
deposited, any rubbish, paper, tin cans, bottles or any other material or refuse upon or in the
public streets, gutters or sidewalks within the city limits. (1968 Code, sec. 56-146)
4-1-3-3: STAGNANT POOLS:
Any stagnant pool of water in the city is hereby declared to be a nuisance. It shall be unlawful for any
person to permit any such nuisance to remain or exist on any property under his control. (1968 Code,
sec. 47-104)
4-1-3-4: OBSTRUCT WATERCOURSES:
It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to obstruct or pollute any watercourse or source of
water supply in the city. (1968 Code, sec. 47-103)
4-1-3-5: SPITTING:
It shall be unlawful to spit or expectorate on any public sidewalk or street or other public place, or on
the floor or walls of any store, theater, hall, public vehicle or other place frequented by the public or to
which the public is invited. (1968 Code, sec. 47-112)
4-1-3-6: DENSE SMOKE:
It shall be unlawful to cause or permit the emission of dense smoke from any fire, chimney, engine, oil
burner or any other agency in the city so as to cause annoyance or discomfort to the residents thereof.
For the purpose of testing and grading the density of smoke, the Ringelmann smoke chart as
published and used by the United States geological survey shall be, and is hereby adopted, as a
standard for such grading, and "smoke" shall be and is hereby defined as and declared to be "dense"
when it is of a degree of density of number 3 of the said chart, or greater, for more than six (6) minutes
in any one hour, whether such period of time is consecutive or not. (1968 Code, sec. 47-113)
4-1-4: NUISANCES; ABATEMENT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 112/396
(A) Removal; Notice: It shall be the duty of the health officer to serve or cause to be served upon any
person creating, maintaining or allowing to exist a nuisance in violation of the provisions of this
chapter and to demand the abatement of the nuisance within ten (10) days. The notice may be
served by any of the following methods:
1. By any method provided by law for service of summons, either within or without this state.
2. By postage prepaid mail addressed to the owner or occupant.
3. In those instances where the address and location of the owner or occupant is unknown, service
may be had by publication in a newspaper located within the municipality.
(B) City May Abate: If the person so served does not abate the nuisance within ten (10) days, the
commissioner of public health and safety may proceed to abate such nuisance, keeping an
account of the expenses of the abatement, and such expense shall be charged and paid by such
owner or occupant. (Ord. 354, 8-5-1985)
4-1-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to penalty as provided in
section 1-4-1 of this code. (1968 Code, sec. 47-114)
Chapter 2
SEPTIC TANKS
4-2-1: SEWAGE DISPOSAL FACILITIES REQUIRED:
Every building or structure in the city used for residence, business, trade, industry or meeting
purposes, where sewer service is available, shall be equipped with properly constructed and installed
adequate sewage disposal facilities. The plumbing in all such places shall conform to the ordinances
of the city and laws of the state relative thereto1. (1968 Code, sec. 53-101)
4-2-2: SEPTIC TANKS PERMITTED; CONDITIONS:
4-2-2-1: CAPACITY:
Any such premises not connected with a sanitary sewer system shall be equipped with an adequate
septic tank having a capacity of not less than five hundred (500) gallons for each seven (7) persons
living or working in such place, and an additional seventy five (75) gallons for each person in excess
of seven (7); provided, that the tank in any premises used for meeting purposes shall have a capacity
of not less than one thousand five hundred (1,500) gallons. (1968 Code, sec. 53-102)
4-2-2-2: LOCATION, CONSTRUCTION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 113/396
Each such tank shall be located at least twenty feet (20') from any building, and shall be constructed
of 12-gauge steel, monolithic concrete, or of brick or concrete blocks adequately coated inside so as
to be impervious to water. Baffle shall be located from six inches (6") to nine inches (9") away from the
inlet and outlet and must extend twelve inches (12") beneath the sewer level in the tank. Each tank
must be equipped with a manhole or similar suitably covered opening to permit inspection or cleaning.
(1968 Code, sec. 53-103)
4-2-2-3: FEEDER SEWER LATERALS, CONSTRUCTION:
The feeder sewer from the tank to the laterals of the disposal field shall be constructed of vitrified belland-
spigot tile with cemented joints and shall be laid with a grade of one foot (1') per one hundred feet
(100'); disposal field tile shall be located at least seventy five feet (75') distant from any well and ten
feet (10') from the tank, and thirty feet (30') from any building used for human habitation. No lateral
shall be closer than five feet (5') from the lot line. There shall be at least two hundred feet (200') of
disposal field tile, consisting of four inch (4") drain tile laid with open joints. Disposal tiles shall be laid
to a depth of not more than two feet (2') on a slope not to exceed six inches (6") per one hundred feet
(100'). (1968 Code, sec. 53-104)
4-2-2-4: BACKFILL:
Backfill in the trench under the tile shall be six inches (6") of coarse gravel or crushed stone. Earth
backfill shall be well tamped. (1968 Code, sec. 53-105)
4-2-2-5: INSPECTIONS REQUIRED:
No septic tank or any pipes leading to or from the same shall be covered unless and until such tank
and pipes have been inspected and found to be in compliance with the ordinance provisions of the city
and with the state laws pertaining thereto. (1968 Code, sec. 53-106)
4-2-3: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter, or using or occupying any premises in the city as
habitations or for business, trade, industry or meeting purposes, unless such premises are equipped
with sewage disposal facilities consisting of either a connection with a sanitary sewer system or proper
septic tank, shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (1968 Code, sec. 53-
107)
Chapter 3
PLANTS AND WEEDS
4-3-1: NUISANCES DECLARED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 114/396
(A) Weeds: Any weeds such as jimson, goldenrod, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cockleburr or other
weeds of a like kind, found growing in any lot or tract of land in the city are hereby declared to be a
nuisance, and it shall be unlawful to permit any such weeds to grow or remain in any such place.
(1968 Code, sec. 52-101)
(B) Barberry Bushes: lt shall be a nuisance and unlawful to plant or permit the growth of the bush or
the species of tall, common or European barberry, further known as Berberia vulgaris or its
horticultural varieties within the city. (1968 Code, sec. 52-103)
4-3-2: HEIGHT RESTRICTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for anyone to permit any weeds, grass or plants or underbrush other than trees,
bushes, flowers or other ornamental plants to grow to a height exceeding eight inches (8") anywhere
in the city. Any such plants or underbrush or weeds exceeding such height are hereby declared to be
a nuisance. (1968 Code, sec. 52-102)
4-3-3: ABATEMENT:
(A) Removal; Notice: It shall be the duty of the health officer to serve or cause to be served a notice
upon the owner or occupant of any premises on which weeds or plants are permitted to grow in
violation of the provisions of this chapter and to demand the abatement of the nuisance within
seven (7) days. The notice may be served by any of the following methods:
1. By any method provided by law for service of summons, either within or without this state.
2. By postage prepaid mail addressed to the owner or occupant.
Service by mail shall be deemed complete four (4) days after mailing.
3. In those instances where the address and location of the owner or occupant is unknown, service
may be had by publication in a newspaper located within the municipality.
(B) City May Abate: If the person so served does not abate the nuisance within seven (7) days, the
commissioner of public health and safety may proceed to abate such nuisance, keeping an
account of the expenses of the abatement, and such expenses shall be charged and paid by such
owner or occupant. (Ord. 527, 9-16-1991)
4-3-4: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as provided in
section 1-4-1 of this code; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or
on which such nuisance continues unabated after seven (7) days from receipt of notice. (Ord. 528, 9-
16-1991)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 115/396
Title 5
POLICE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
ANIMALS
5-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
ANIMAL: Any animal, other than man, which may be affected by rabies.
OWNER: Any person who shelters, harbors, feeds, encourages or permits an animal to remain at,
near or about his premises or living quarters shall be deemed the owner or keeper of such animal and
responsible therefor. (Ord. 156, 4-2-1979)
5-1-2: STATE LAW ADOPTED:
This chapter adopts and supplements the Animal Control Act of 510 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1 et
seq. (Ord. 156, 4-2-1979)
5-1-3: DOMESTIC ANIMALS:
(A) Running At Large:
1. It shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper to permit any animal to run at large within the City.
Any dog or cat found upon any public street, sidewalk, alley, parkway or any unenclosed place
shall be deemed running at large, unless such dog or cat is firmly held on a leash or is in an
enclosed vehicle.
2. If any dog or cat shall be found upon the private premises of any other person than the owner or
keeper of such dog or cat, the dog or cat shall be deemed running at large, unless firmly held on
a leash or in an enclosed vehicle.
3. All dogs and cats running at large in the City are hereby declared to be a public nuisance and
shall be apprehended and, in the discretion of the DeWitt County animal control warden,
impounded and if not redeemed, destroyed.
4. Any person inconvenienced or injured, or who may be in danger of being injured, either in
person or property, by reason of the unlawful running at large in the City of any animal contrary
to this chapter or any other City ordinance may take and drive such animal to the DeWitt County
Pound.
(B) Removal Of Excrement: It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having control or custody of
any domestic animal to permit the animal to defecate upon any public property of this City or upon
the private premises of any person other than the owner or keeper of such animal, unless such
person immediately removes the feces and disposes of it properly. (Ord. 604, 1-3-1995)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 116/396
(C) Means Of Removal: No owner or keeper of any animal shall appear with such animal on any
sidewalk, street, park or other public area or on any private property neither owned nor occupied
by said person without the means of removal of any feces left by the animal. For purposes of this
subsection, the term "means of removal" shall mean any manufactured sealable container. Any
individual refusing to display such manufactured sealable container when requested to do so by a
City official shall be presumed to have violated this subsection. (Ord. 838, 12-4-2000)
5-1-4: CARE OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS:
Animals which are kept in the pound shall be humanely treated and fed. The City shall work with the
DeWitt County animal control warden who shall be in charge of the impounded animals. (Ord. 156, 4-
2-1979)
5-1-5: IMPOUNDING FEES:
(A) Animals which are impounded pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be kept in the
enclosures established as the City Pound (DeWitt County Pound) until redeemed or otherwise
disposed of.
(B) Animals shall be held for at least three (3) days for redemption.
(C) Any person who seeks to redeem any impounded animal shall pay a fee of twenty five dollars
($25.00) on the first occasion that the animal is so impounded; a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for the
second such time; and a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the third such redemption and a
one hundred dollar ($100.00) redemption fee for each additional occasion during a twelve (12)
month period. (Ord. 156, 4-2-1979)
5-1-6: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
No person shall cruelly treat any animal in the City in any way. Any person who inhumanely beats,
underfeeds, overloads or abandons any animal shall be guilty of a violation of this section. (Ord. 156,
4-2-1979)
5-1-7: ANIMAL NOISES PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to harbor or keep any animal which disturbs the peace by loud noises at any time,
day or night. (Ord. 156, 4-2-1979)
5-1-8: PENALTY:
Any person violating a provision of this chapter shall be fined in the amount of one hundred dollars
($100.00). (Ord. 1452, 8-7-2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 117/396
Chapter 2
GENERAL OFFENSES
5-2-1: GAMBLING:
(A) Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to gamble, to make any bet, participate in any lottery or gambling
hazard or crap game, or to buy or sell any chances or tickets in any gambling game, arrangement
or device, except for those activities authorized by the laws of the State of Illinois under the Bingo
License and Tax Act, the Illinois Lottery Law, the Raffles Act, the Charitable Games Act, the Illinois
Pull Tabs and Jar Games Act and the Video Gaming Act.
(B) Gambling Devices: It shall be unlawful to possess any gambling device or paraphernalia with the
intent to use the same for any unlawful purpose, except for those devices expressly licensed and
approved under the State of Illinois Video Gaming Act. Any such device or paraphernalia kept with
such intent may be confiscated by any member of the Police Department. (Ord. 1279, 9-4-2012)
5-2-2: PROSTITUTION:
(A) Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to practice prostitution in the City. (1968 Code, sec.
56-105)
(B) Soliciting: It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit in any street, alley or other place in the City
for the purpose of inducing any person to engage in prostitution or any unlawful sexual intercourse
of any kind. (1968 Code, sec. 56-106)
(C) House Of Ill Fame: It shall be unlawful to maintain, frequent or patronize any house of ill fame or
house of prostitution in the City. (1968 Code, sec. 56-107)
5-2-3: INDECENT, OBSCENE ACTS:
(A) Indecent Conduct: It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any indecent or immoral act, or to
appear in any public place in clothes properly belonging to the opposite sex, or not properly or
decently garbed. (1968 Code, sec. 56-111)
(B) Profanity: It shall be unlawful to use profanity in any street, alley or other public place in the City.
(1968 Code, sec. 56-110)
5-2-4: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
A person commits disorderly conduct when he knowingly:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 118/396
(A) Does any act in such unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb another and to provoke a
breach of the peace; or
(B) With intent to annoy another, makes a telephone call, whether or not conversation thereby ensues;
or
(C) Transmits in any manner to the fire department of any city, town, village or fire protection district a
false alarm of fire, knowing at the time of such transmission that there is no reasonable ground for
believing that such fire exists; or
(D) Transmits in any manner to another a false alarm to the effect that a bomb or other explosive of
any nature is concealed in such place that its explosion would endanger human life, knowing at the
time of such transmission that there is no reasonable grounds for believing that such bomb or
explosive is concealed in such place; or
(E) Transmits in any manner to any peace officer, public officer or public employee a report to the
effect that an offense has been committed, knowing at the time of such transmission that there is
no reasonable ground for believing that such an offense has been committed; or
(F) Enters upon the property of another and for a lewd or unlawful purpose deliberately looks into a
dwelling on the property through any window or other opening in it. (Ord. 46, 4-2-1973)
5-2-5: INTOXICATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to be in an intoxicated condition in or on any street, alley or other
public place in the city. (1968 Code, sec. 56-109)
5-2-6: FIGHTING; ASSAULT AND BATTERY:
(A) Fighting: It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly start a fight or to commit any assault or
battery in any public place in the city. (1968 Code, sec. 56-112)
(B) Assault And Battery: It shall be unlawful to commit an assault and battery upon the person of
another. (1968 Code, sec. 56-140)
5-2-7: ASSEMBLAGES; DISTURBING, UNLAWFUL:
(A) Disturbing Assemblages: It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb any lawful assemblage or
gathering in the city, and it shall be unlawful for a person to disquiet or disturb any congregation or
assembly met for any lawful purpose, religious or otherwise, by making a noise, or by any rude,
indecent behavior, or profane discourse or disorderly conduct, within their place of meeting, or so
near the same as to disturb the order or solemnity of the meeting. (1968 Code, secs. 56-114, 56-
143)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 119/396
(B) Unlawful Assemblages: It shall be unlawful to collect, gather or be a member of any disorderly
crowd, or any crowd gathered together for any unlawful purposes. (1968 Code, sec. 56-122)
5-2-8: KILLING ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in killing any animal other than prescribed by law, in the
city. (1968 Code, sec. 56-115)
5-2-9: WEAPONS; UNLAWFUL USE:
(A) Concealed Weapons: It shall be unlawful to carry any concealed weapons in the city in violation of
the laws of this state1. (1968 Code, sec. 56-116)
(B) Discharge Of Firearms: It shall be unlawful to discharge any firearm or air gun in the city; provided,
that this subsection shall not be construed to prohibit any officer of the law to discharge a firearm in
the performance of his duty; nor to any citizen to discharge a firearm when lawfully defending his
person or property. (1968 Code, sec. 56-117)
5-2-10: MISSILES, INJURIOUS MATERIALS:
It shall be unlawful to cast, throw or propel any missile on any street, alley or other public place, and it
shall be unlawful to throw or deposit any glass, nails, tacks or other similar articles on any street,
sidewalk, alley or other public place in the city. (1968 Code, sec. 56-120)
5-2-11: ADVERTISING, BILLPOSTING:
(A) Prohibited Advertisements: It shall be unlawful to advertise any unlawful business or articles in the
city.
(B) Damage Advertisements: It shall be unlawful to injure or deface any lawful advertisement or
notice. (1968 Code, sec. 56-120)
(C) Posting Bills: It shall be unlawful for any person to post any bills or advertisements on any public
property without the authority of the City Council, and it shall be unlawful to post any bill or
advertisement on any property without the written consent of the owner thereof. (1968 Code, sec.
56-123)
(D) Penalty: Any person violating this section shall be fined in the amount of one hundred dollars
($100.00). (Ord. 1452, 8-7-2017)
5-2-12: LOITERING:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 120/396
(A) Loitering Prohibited: No person shall obstruct or encumber any street corner.
(B) Penalty: Any person violating this section shall be fined in the amount of one hundred dollars
($100.00). (Ord. 1452, 8-7-2017)
5-2-13: IMPERSONATING OFFICERS:
It shall be unlawful for a person to falsely represent himself to be an officer of the City, or without being
duly authorized by the City, to exercise or attempt to exercise any of the duties, functions or powers of
a City officer. (1968 Code, sec. 56-142)
5-2-14: INJURE, DAMAGE PROPERTY:
(A) Molesting Vehicles: No person shall climb upon or into any automobile, wagon, carriage, sleigh or
other vehicle while the same may be in motion or attach his sled or cart to any such vehicle,
without the consent of the driver thereof. (1968 Code, sec. 56-144)
(B) Injury To Property: It shall be unlawful to wilfully, maliciously or negligently break, deface, injure or
destroy any property of the State, County or City, or any private property. (1968 Code, sec. 56-145)
5-2-15: DANGEROUS CONDITIONS AFFECTING PUBLIC WAYS:
(A) Scaffolds: Any scaffolds or ladders placed in such a way that they overhang or can fall onto any
public street, alley or other public place in the City, shall be firmly constructed and safeguarded;
and it shall be unlawful to place or leave any tools or articles on any such place in such a manner
that the same can fall onto any such street, sidewalk, alley or other public place from a height
greater than four feet (4'). (1968 Code, sec. 56-127)
(B) Articles On Windows: It shall be unlawful to place any movable article on any window ledge, or
other place abutting on a public street, alley or other place at a height above four feet (4') from the
ground, in such a manner that the same can be or is in danger of falling onto any such street,
sidewalk, alley or other public place. (1968 Code, sec. 56-128)
(C) Penalty: Any person violating this section shall be fined in the amount of one hundred dollars
($100.00). (Ord. 1452, 8-7-2017)
5-2-16: WHISTLES AND LOUD NOISES:
(A) Unlawful: It shall be unlawful to blow or cause to be blown any steam whistle of any stationary
engine or steam engine in the City except as a signal for starting or stopping work or in
emergencies to avoid injury to persons or property.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 121/396
(B) Penalty: Any person violating this section shall be fined in the amount of one hundred dollars
($100.00). (Ord. 1452, 8-7-2017)
5-2-17: VAGRANTS:
It shall be unlawful for mendicants or vagrants to frequent any depot, store, theater, street, alley,
sidewalk, park or other place publicly frequented in the City.
Any person found sleeping in any such place, and who has no established domicile or residence, shall
be considered to be a vagrant. (1968 Code, sec. 56-132)
5-2-18: UNLAWFUL DUMPING IN LANDSCAPE WASTE FACILITY:
(A) It shall be unlawful to dump yard waste material in the landscape waste facility of the City, other
than during posted dumping hours.
(B) It shall be unlawful to dump yard waste materials other than within the confines of the authorized,
fenced dumping area of the landscape waste facility.
(C) It shall be unlawful to dump any materials other than yard waste materials within or in the area
adjacent to the dumping area of the landscape waste facility.
(D) It shall be unlawful to dump yard waste materials in plastic bags.
(E) For purposes of this section, the term "yard waste material" shall be defined to include leaves,
brush, tree limbs, and grass clippings.
(F) Anyone violating any of the provisions of this section shall be fined in the sum of one hundred
dollars ($100.00) per occurrence. (Ord. 792, 9-20-1999)
5-2-19: PUBLIC TIPPLING:
Except in the sidewalk cafe service area of a permitted and licensed sidewalk cafe, no person shall,
within the City, be permitted to consume intoxicating liquor while located on the sidewalks, streets, or
other City property or permit any open bottle, container or utensil containing intoxicating liquor to be
located upon the sidewalks, streets or other City property. (Ord. 1195, 6-14-2010)
5-2-20: POSSESSION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA:
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly possess an item of drug paraphernalia as described in
the Illinois Drug Paraphernalia Control Act, with the intent to use it in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 122/396
introducing cannabis or a controlled substance into the human body, or in preparing cannabis or a
controlled substance for that use. (Ord. 1452, 8-7-2017)
5-2-21: CANNABIS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly possess cannabis. (Ord. 1452, 8-7-2017)
5-2-22: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES UNLAWFUL FOR MINORS:
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to consume or have in his or
her possession on any street or highway or in any public place or in any place open to the public any
alcoholic beverage. (Ord. 1452, 8-7-2017)
5-2-23: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined as follows:
(A) Fine Upon Issuance Of Ticket:
1. Any person violating any provision of this chapter other than as set forth in subsection (A)2 of
this section, shall be fined the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
2. Any person violating section 5-2-4, 5-2-5, 5-2-6, 5-2-9, 5-2-14, 5-2-20, 5-2-21, or 5-2-22 of this
chapter, shall be fined the sum of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
(B) Court Proceeding: Any person violating any provision of this chapter may be taken to court and be
subject to a fine established by the court, upon conviction, between the limits of two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00) and seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each occurrence. (Ord. 1452, 8-7-
2017)
Chapter 3
MINORS
5-3-1: CURFEW:
(A) Loitering Of Minors: It is unlawful for a person less than seventeen (17) years of age to be present
at or upon any public assembly, building, place, store or highway at the following times, unless
accompanied by and supervised by a parent, legal guardian or other responsible companion at
least eighteen (18) years of age approved by a parent or legal guardian, or unless engaged in a
business or occupation which the laws of this State authorize a person less than eighteen (18)
years of age to perform:
Between 12:01 A.M. and 6:00 A.M. Saturday;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 123/396
Between 12:01 A.M. and 6:00 A.M. Sunday; and
Between 11:00 P.M. on Sunday to Thursday, inclusive, and 6:00 A.M. on the following day.
(B) Responsibility:
1. Parents: It is unlawful for a parent, legal guardian or other person to knowingly permit a person
in his custody or control to violate subsection (A) of this section.
2. Owners Of Amusement Places: It is unlawful for any person operating places of amusement and
entertainment to permit any minors under the age of seventeen (17) years to enter or remain in
such places of amusement and entertainment during the hours prohibited under this section;
provided, however, that the provisions of this section do not apply when the minor is
accompanied by his parent, legal guardian or other responsible companion at least eighteen (18)
years of age approved by a parent or legal guardian. (1983 Code)
5-3-2: TRUANCY:
(A) Definitions: The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except when the context clearly indicates a different
meaning:
TRUANT: A child subject to a compulsory school attendance and who is absent without valid cause
from such attendance for a school day or portion thereof.
VALID CAUSE FOR ABSENCE: Illness, observance of a religious holiday, death in the immediate
family, family emergency, and such other situations beyond the control of the student as
determined by the Board of Education in each district or such other circumstances which cause
reasonable concern to the parent for the safety or health of the student.
(B) Truancy Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to be a truant.
(C) Parental Responsibility: The parent or custodian of any truant under thirteen (13) years of age
shall be subject to the penalties hereinafter provided. (Ord. 1474, 3-5-2018)
5-3-3: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined in the amount of one hundred dollars
($100.00). (Ord. 1452, 8-7-2017)
Chapter 4
ABANDONED, WRECKED VEHICLES
5-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 124/396
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them as
follows:
ABANDONED VEHICLES: All motor vehicles or other vehicles in a state of disrepair rendering the
vehicles incapable of being driven in their condition; or any motor vehicle or other vehicle that has not
been moved or used for seven (7) consecutive days or more and is apparently deserted.
ANTIQUE VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle or other vehicle twenty five (25) years of age or older.
HIGHWAY: Any street, alley or public way within the city. (1983 Code)
5-4-2: ABANDONMENT:
(A) Abandonment On Highways And Public Property: The abandonment of a motor vehicle or other
vehicle or any part thereof on any highway in the municipality or on any public property is unlawful
and subject to penalties as set forth in this code.
(B) Abandonment On Private Property: The abandonment of a motor vehicle or other vehicle or any
part thereof on private property situated anywhere in the municipality and being owned by
someone other than the owner or custodian of the abandoned vehicle, is unlawful.
(C) Unlawful Storage On Owner's Property: It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having
custody of any motor vehicle or other vehicle in a state of disrepair rendering the vehicle incapable
of being driven in its condition to store or permit to remain any such vehicle on the owner's or
custodian's private property. It shall be unlawful for any person, after notification to remove any
abandoned vehicle from any private property has been given, to move the same to any other
private property upon which storage is not permitted or onto any public highway or other public
property for purposes of storage.
(D) Nuisance Declared: The abandonment of a motor vehicle or other vehicle or any part thereof on
any highway in the municipality, public property or private property, and the unlawful storage of an
abandoned vehicle on private property is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and may be
abated or removed and penalties imposed as provided in title 4, chapter 1 of this code.
(E) Permitted Storage: This section shall not apply to any motor vehicle or motor vehicle accessory
stored within an enclosed building, or on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful
place and manner when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise, in a storage place
or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner, or seasonal use vehicles such as
snowmobiles, motorcycles, motorscooters, and nonmotorized campers. (Ord. 399, 4-13-1987)
5-4-3: NOTIFY POLICE DEPARTMENT:
When an abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed motor vehicle or other vehicle comes into the
temporary possession or custody of a person in this state, not the owner of the vehicle, such person
shall immediately notify the municipal police department when the vehicle is within the corporate limits
of the city. Upon receipt of such notification, the chief of police shall authorize a towing service to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 125/396
remove and take possession of the abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed motor vehicle or other
vehicle. The towing service will safely keep the towed vehicle and its contents, maintain a record of
the tow until the vehicle is claimed by the owner or any other person legally entitled to possession
thereof, or until it is disposed of as provided in this chapter. (1983 Code)
5-4-4: REMOVAL:
(A) When a motor vehicle or other vehicle is abandoned on a highway in this municipality ten (10)
hours or more, its removal by a towing service may be authorized by order of the chief of police.
(B) When an abandoned, unattended, wrecked, burned or partially dismantled motor vehicle or other
vehicle is creating a traffic hazard because of its position in relation to the highway or its physical
appearance is causing the impeding of traffic, its immediate removal from the highway by a towing
service may be authorized by the order of the chief of the police department.
(C) When a motor vehicle or other vehicle or any part thereof, has been abandoned on public property
or private property or unlawfully stored on private property, said vehicle may be authorized for
removal by or upon the order of the commissioner of public health and safety after notice has been
given required by section 4-1-4 of this code.
(D) The owner of any vehicle removed from any highway, or public or private property, shall be
responsible for all towing costs in addition to any other expenses of the abatement of the nuisance.
(Ord. 399, 4-13-1987)
5-4-5: RECORDS KEPT:
When a motor vehicle or other vehicle is authorized to be towed away, the police department shall
keep and maintain a record of the vehicle towed, listing the color, year of manufacture, manufacturer's
trade name, manufacturer's series name, body style, vehicle identification number and license plate
and number displayed on the vehicle. The record shall also include the date and hour of tow, location
towed from, location towed to, reason for towing and the name of the officer authorizing the tow. (1983
Code)
5-4-6: OWNER UNKNOWN:
When the municipal police department does not know the identity of the registered owner or other
legally entitled person, they will cause the motor vehicle registration records of the state of Illinois to
be searched by a directed communication to the secretary of state for the purpose of obtaining the
required ownership information.
The police department will cause the stolen motor vehicle files of the Illinois state police to be
searched by a directed communication to the Illinois state police for stolen or wanted information on
the vehicle. When the Illinois state police files are searched with negative results, the information
contained in the national crime information center (NCIC) files will be searched by the Illinois state
police. The information determined from these record searches will be used by the police department
in sending a notification by certified mail to the owner or legally entitled person advising where the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 126/396
vehicle is held, requesting a disposition be made and setting forth public sale information. (1983
Code)
5-4-7: NOTIFY STATE POLICE:
When the registered owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of a motor vehicle or
other vehicle cannot be identified from the registration files of this state or from the registration files of
a foreign state, if applicable, the police department shall notify the Illinois state police for the purpose
of identifying the vehicle's owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of the vehicle. The
information obtained by the Illinois state police will be immediately forwarded to the law enforcement
agency having custody of the vehicle for notification of owner. (1983 Code)
5-4-8: SALE; PUBLIC AUCTION:
Any time before a motor vehicle or other vehicle is sold at public sale or disposed of as provided
herein, the owner or other person legally entitled to its possession may reclaim the vehicle by
presenting to the police department proof of ownership or proof of the right to possession of the
vehicle. No vehicle shall be released to the owner or other person under this section until all towing
and storage charges have been paid. (1983 Code)
5-4-9: NOTICE OF SALE:
Whenever an abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed motor vehicle or other vehicle, seven (7) years of
age or newer, remains unclaimed by the registered owner or other person legally entitled to its
possession for a period of thirty (30) days after notice has been given as provided herein, the police
department having possession of the vehicle shall cause it to be sold at public sale to the highest
bidder. Notice of the time and place of the sale shall be posted in a conspicuous place for at least ten
(10) days prior to the sale on the premises where the vehicle has been impounded. At least ten (10)
days prior to the sale, the police department shall cause a notice of the time and place of the sale to
be sent by certified mail to the registered owner or other person known by the police department or
towing service to be legally entitled to the possession of the vehicle. Such notice shall contain a
complete description of the vehicle to be sold and what steps must be taken by any legally entitled
person to reclaim the vehicle.
In those instances where the certified notification specified herein has been returned by the postal
authorities to the police department due to the addressee having moved, or being unknown at the
address obtained from the registration records of this state, the sending of a second certified notice
will not be required. (1983 Code)
5-4-10: SALE WITHOUT NOTICE:
When the identity of the registered owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of an
abandoned, lost or unclaimed vehicle of seven (7) years of age or newer cannot be determined by any
means provided for in this chapter, the vehicle may be sold as provided herein or disposed of in the
manner authorized by this chapter without notice to the registered owner or other person legally
entitled to the possession of the vehicle.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 127/396
When an abandoned vehicle of more than seven (7) years of age is impounded as specified by this
chapter, it will be kept in custody for a minimum of ten (10) days for the purpose of determining
ownership, the contacting of the registered owner by the U.S. mail, public service or in person, for a
determination of disposition; and, an examination of the Illinois state police stolen motor vehicle files
for theft and wanted information. At the expiration of the ten (10) day period, without the benefit of
disposition being received from the registered owner, the chief of police will authorize the disposal of
the vehicle as junk only.
A motor vehicle or other vehicle classified as an antique vehicle is excluded from this chapter. (1983
Code)
5-4-11: REPORT MAINTAINED:
When a motor vehicle or other vehicle in the custody of the police department is reclaimed by the
registered owner or other legally entitled person, or when the vehicle is sold at public sale or otherwise
disposed of as provided in this chapter, a report of the transaction will be maintained by the police
department for a period of one year from the date of the sale or disposal. (1983 Code)
5-4-12: PROCEEDS OF SALE:
When a vehicle located within the corporate limits of the municipality is authorized to be towed away
by the chief of police and disposed of as set forth in this chapter, the proceeds of the public sale or
disposition after the deduction of towing, storage and processing charges shall be deposited in the
municipal treasury. (1983 Code)
5-4-13: LIABILITY:
Any police officer, towing service owner, operator or employee shall not be held to answer or be liable
for damages in any action brought by the registered owner, former registered owner or his legal
representatives, or any other person legally entitled to the possession of a motor vehicle or other
vehicle when the vehicle was processed and sold or disposed of as provided by this chapter. (1983
Code)
Chapter 5
TOBACCO SALES
5-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed
to them in this section, except when the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
MINOR: Any person under eighteen (18) years of age.
POSSESSION: To have upon one's person or have within the person's limited control.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 128/396
TOBACCO PRODUCTS: Cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, or
any smokeless tobacco, which means tobacco in any form which is suitable for dipping, ingesting,
chewing or tobacco in any other form.
USE: To smoke, inhale, ingest, dip or chew tobacco in any of its forms. (Ord. 943, 7-7-2003)
5-5-2: PURPOSE:
It is the policy of the City to prohibit the sale of tobacco or smokeless tobacco to minors and to prohibit
minors from buying or selling tobacco in any of its forms, to prohibit the selling, giving or furnishing of
tobacco in any of its forms to minors, and providing penalties therefor. (Ord. 943, 7-7-2003)
5-5-3: PROVIDING TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO A MINOR:
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether acting individually or as an owner, officer, employee or
agent of or on behalf of any persons, firm or corporation, to sell, buy for, distribute samples of, furnish,
exchange or give away any tobacco product in any form to a minor. (Ord. 943, 7-7-2003)
5-5-4: POSSESSION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS BY A MINOR:
No minor shall have in his or her possession or use, any tobacco product in any of its various forms. It
shall not be a violation of this section to possess a tobacco product for the limited purpose of acting as
a clerk, salesperson, stocking shelves, or any related purpose of an employer legally selling such
products. (Ord. 943, 7-7-2003)
5-5-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined in the amount of one hundred dollars
($100.00). (Ord. 1452, 8-7-2017)
Title 6
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 1
GENERAL TRAFFIC PROVISIONS
6-1-1: TRAFFIC CODE ADOPTED:
There is hereby adopted for the purpose of prescribing regulations for pedestrians and the operation
of vehicles, that certain Code known as the Illinois Vehicle Code1, which Code has been and now is
filed in the Office of the City Clerk, and the same is hereby adopted and represented as fully as if set
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 129/396
out at length herein, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the City. (1983
Code)
6-1-2: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined in the amount of one hundred dollars
($100.00). (Ord. 1452, 8-7-2017)
Chapter 2
VEHICLE PARKING REGULATIONS
6-2-1: NO PARKING PLACES DESIGNATED:
At any time it shall be unlawful to permit any vehicle to stand in any of the following places, except
when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a policeman
or traffic signal:
(A) Stop, stand or park a vehicle:
1. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street.
2. On a sidewalk.
3. Within an intersection.
4. On a crosswalk.
5. Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty feet (30') of points on the curb
immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a different length is indicated by signs or
markings.
6. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing or parking
would obstruct traffic.
7. Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway tunnel.
8. On any railroad tracks.
9. At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.
10. On any controlled access highway.
11. In the area between roadways of a divided highway, including crossovers.
(B) Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except momentarily to pick up or discharge
passengers:
1. In front of a public or private driveway.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 130/396
2. Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant.
3. Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk at an intersection.
4. Within thirty feet (30') upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop sign, yield sign, or traffic
control signal located at the side of a roadway.
5. Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street
opposite the entrance to any fire station within seventy five feet (75') of such entrance (when
properly signposted).
6. At any place where official signs prohibit standing. (1983 Code)
7. On city right of way in the area between the curb and sidewalk. (Ord. 1161, 6-1-2009)
(C) Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in loading or unloading property or passengers:
1. Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing.
2. At any place where official signs prohibit parking. (1983 Code)
6-2-2: MANNER OF PARKING:
Vehicles parked in any parking lot maintained by the city or along any street shall be parked in
accordance with the painted lines upon the surface of the parking lot or street or by the direction of the
commissioner of public health and safety. No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway or right
of way other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic
movement and with the curbside wheels of the vehicle within twelve inches (12") of the curb or edge
of the roadway provided that where a street has been marked for angle parking, vehicles shall be
parked at the angle indicated by such marks and within the boundaries designated by such marks.
Vehicles shall be parked head in parking only as permitted in any parking space, whether on the street
or in any parking lot, except for the loading and unloading of a vehicle from a business on the Clinton
public square, and with the exception of a motorcycle which will be allowed to back into a parking
space. (Ord. 1161, 6-1-2009)
6-2-3: VEHICLES PERMITTED:
(A) General: Parking of motor vehicles in the city shall be limited to passenger automobiles and station
wagons designated and used for the carrying of not more than nine (9) passengers and pickup
trucks. The parking of semitrailers, tractors and detached semitrailers, is hereby prohibited on any
street, curb, right of way, or public way at any time. Recreational vehicles, motor homes, campers,
and trailers, shall not be parked on any paved portion of a street for more than four (4) consecutive
days; provided, however, that said recreational vehicles, motor homes, campers and trailers shall
never be parked on any street, or right of way for any portion of time in such a manner as obstructs
the vision of traffic or otherwise creates a traffic hazard. Notwithstanding the foregoing, building
contractors may park construction trailers in city streets after having applied for and received a
street parking permit from the chief of police. (Ord. 737, 6-29-1998)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 131/396
(B) City Parking Lots: The parking of motor vehicles in the parking lots of the city shall be limited to
passenger automobiles and station wagons designated and used for the carrying of not more than
nine (9) passengers or light pickup trucks. Vehicles which are designated and used for pulling or
carrying freight and also those vehicles or motorcars which are designated and used for carrying
more than nine (9) passengers are prohibited from parking in the city parking lots. (1968 Code,
sec. 27-102)
6-2-4: COMMISSIONER OF STREETS AND PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS TO
SUPERVISE:
The commissioner of streets and public improvements shall be in charge of all parking along and upon
the streets located within the city where said parking is not controlled by parking meters. Said
commissioner shall determine the areas in which there is to be parking, the areas in which there will
be parking upon one side of the street only, all areas where there is to be no parking and any and all
other things in connection with parking along and upon said streets. Said commissioner shall also
have full authority to determine and to put into effect all traffic controls including, but not limited to,
providing one-way streets, stop signs wherever said commissioner deems it necessary, caution signs,
speed limits within the city limits, and any and all other controls of traffic or parking as will be the most
beneficial and best serve the interests of the citizens of the city. (1968 Code, sec. 27-105)
6-2-5: TIME LIMITS:
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any street or alley in the city for a period of longer than
twenty four (24) hours without specific consent of the commissioner of public health and safety. Any
vehicle left unattended in any street or alley of the city for more than twenty four (24) hours shall be
construed to be a lost or abandoned vehicle1. (1968 Code, secs. 27-103, 43-147)
6-2-6: LIMITED PARKING DESIGNATED:
(A) Two Hour And Four Hour Parking Limits:
1. Two Hour Parking Limit: It shall be unlawful for any person to directly or indirectly permit a
vehicle owned by him or her to be parked in the same parking space during the limited parking
hours of a day after two (2) hours have expired from the time it was initially parked in such
parking space, on the following streets:
(a) Outer perimeter of downtown square area, except as otherwise designated for fifteen (15)
minute parking or handicapped parking.
(b) Both sides of Main Street between Monroe and Quincy Streets.
(c) Both sides of Center Street between Adams and Washington Streets.
2. Four Hour Parking Limit: It shall be unlawful for any person to directly or indirectly permit a
vehicle owned by him or her to be parked in the same parking space during the limited parking
hours of a day after four (4) hours have expired from the time it was initially parked in such
parking space, on the inside perimeter of the downtown square area.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 132/396
The time limits herein specified shall be in effect between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M.
and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. on any day except Sundays and national holidays.
(B) Parking Prohibited During Certain Hours: It shall be unlawful to permit any vehicle to stand or
remain parked between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and four o'clock (4:00) A.M. on the
downtown square area. (Ord. 1276, 8-20-2012)
(C) Parking Prohibited At All Times: When signs are erected giving notice thereof, parking is hereby
prohibited at all times on both sides of FA Routes 54 and 10 from Alexander Street on the east to
the Y intersection of Routes 54 and 10 on the west within the city. (Ord. 98, 8-4-1975)
(D) Window Parking Permit; Downtown: The commissioner of public health and safety may authorize
to the city clerk the authority to issue a parking permit for the residents, employers and employees
of the downtown business district. Said parking permit shall allow the privilege of parking in any
nine (9) hour parking meter zone in the city without having to deposit any coins for said meter. The
charge for such a permit shall be seventy five dollars ($75.00) for each permit. The parking permit
shall be valid from January 1 to December 31 of that year. The city clerk shall maintain all records
as to the name, address, phone number, etc., for all parking permits. No person shall transfer to
another person any such parking permit. The stickers must be attached and displayed on the
driver's side, lower corner of the windshield. If during the term of a parking permit, the owner
thereof needs a replacement permit, there will be assessed a five dollar ($5.00) replacement
sticker fee. (Ord. 1036, 12-19-2005)
(E) Persons With Disability Sign: All signs erected and used to designate the reservation of parking
facilities for a person with disabilities shall be established and located as provided in the Illinois
vehicle code2 and the Illinois accessibility code (77 Ill. adm. code part 400). (Ord. 1276, 8-20-
2012)
6-2-7: PARKING RESTRICTED:
(A) Vehicles For Sale: It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle upon any street for the purpose of
displaying it for sale, or to park any vehicle upon any business street from which said vehicle
merchandise is peddled. (1968 Code, sec. 43-145)
(B) Loading Zones: During the times specified herein, it shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to
stand a passenger vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary for the loading or unloading
of passengers, not to exceed five (5) minutes, and for the driver to stand any freight carrying
vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary to load, unload and deliver materials, not to
exceed thirty (30) minutes, in any of the following places:
1. In any public alley, during any hour of the day or night.
2. At any place not to exceed seventy five feet (75') along the curb before the entrance to any
hospital or hotel at any time.
3. At any place not to exceed seventy five feet (75') along the curb before the entrance to a public
building between eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M., except on Sunday.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 133/396
4. Directly in front of the entrance to any theater at any time the theater is open for business. (1968
Code, sec. 43-146)
(C) Alleys: No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions
as to leave available less than ten feet (10') of the width of the roadway for the free movement of
vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position
as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property. (1968 Code, sec. 43-148)
(D) Cab Stands, Bus Stands: No vehicle other than a licensed taxicab shall be parked in any area
designated by the council as a cab stand3; and no vehicle other than a bus shall be parked in a
place so designated as a bus loading zone. (1968 Code, sec. 43-149)
6-2-8: PARKING METERS AND PARKING METER ZONES:
6-2-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this section 6-2-8, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated herein:
PARKING METER: Mechanical device located upon a public street or sidewalk in a place regularly
designated as a "parking meter zone" hereinafter defined, which device shall record a certain number
of minutes by the use of a clock mechanism determining the period of time for which parking privileges
may be extended to the person depositing a coin therein.
PARKING METER ZONE: A certain designated and marked section of a public street within marked
boundaries where a vehicle may be temporarily parked and allowed to remain. (1968 Code, sec. 43-
163)
6-2-8-2: PARKING METER ZONES ESTABLISHED:
Parking meter zones shall be such as may from time to time be established by the council. (1968
Code, sec. 43-164)
6-2-8-3: FIFTEEN MINUTE PARKING:
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle, or to permit a vehicle to remain parked for more than fifteen
(15) minutes in any parking space designated by the commissioner of streets and public
improvements as a fifteen (15) minute parking space. This prohibition shall be in effect between the
hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. on any day except Sundays and national
holidays. (Ord. 1276, 8-20-2012)
6-2-8-4: UNLOADING MATERIALS:
Vehicles used in making deliveries to adjacent premises may be parked in a parking meter zone
without the insertion of the coin provided for in this section 6-2-8, between the hours of six o'clock
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 134/396
(6:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. for a period of no more than fifteen (15) minutes.
No material of any kind shall be placed or stored in a parking meter zone unless a permit therefor has
been obtained from the commissioner of streets and public improvements. Where such permit is
issued, a fee of two dollars ($2.00) for each day or portion thereof for which the zone is so used shall
be paid. (1968 Code, sec. 43-166)
6-2-8-5: PLACING METERS; MARKINGS:
(A) Placing Meters: Parking meters shall be installed in the parking meter zones as established and
provided for by the council and shall be placed upon the curb immediately adjacent to the
individual parking places hereinafter described. Each parking meter shall be placed or set in such
manner as to show or display by a signal whether or not the parking space adjacent to such meter
is legally in use. (1968 Code, sec. 43-167)
(B) Marking Places: The commissioner of streets and public improvements shall have markings
painted or placed upon the curb or street adjacent to each parking meter for the purpose of
designating the parking space and the angle at which vehicles are to be parked to the curb. Each
vehicle parking within any parking meter zone shall park within the lines or markings so
established. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in such position that the same shall not be
entirely within the area designated by such lines or markings. (1968 Code, sec. 43-168)
6-2-8-6: PLACING COINS IN METERS:
It shall be the duty of the operator of any vehicle, upon parking said vehicle in any parking space
adjacent to which a parking meter is installed, to deposit the proper coins for the time desired as set
forth on said meter, and, if necessary, to activate said meter. (Ord. 1011, 5-16-2005)
6-2-8-7: TAMPERING WITH METERS:
It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by the council to deface, injure, tamper with, open or
wilfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed under the provisions of
this chapter.
It shall be unlawful to deposit any slug, device or metallic or other substitute for any legal coin in any
parking meter. (1968 Code, sec. 43-170)
6-2-9: SNOW ROUTES; PARKING RESTRICTED:
(A) The following streets are hereby designated as snow routes:
Alexander Street from Jemima to East Macon Street.
Cain Street from Macon to Woodlawn.
Center Street from Route 54 to Woodlawn Avenue.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 135/396
Colonial Drive from Holiday Drive to Texas Township Road.
East Macon Street from Alexander to North George.
George Street from Macon Street to Woodlawn Avenue.
Hickory Drive and Quincy Street from Route 51 to Van Buren.
Holiday Drive.
Jemima Street from Sherman Street to Alexander Avenue.
Kirkwood Drive, all of said street.
Leander Street from Mulberry to Rosewood Drive.
Main Street from Walnut to Route 54 east.
Mulberry Street from White Street to West Leander.
Park Lane to Jericho Road.
Rosewood Drive to Park Lane.
Sherman Street from Van Buren to Revere gates.
Texas Township Road from Route 51 to Kirkwood Drive.
Walnut Street from Route 10 to West Webster Street.
White Street from Mulberry Street to Grant Street.
Woodlawn Avenue from Center Street to Cain Street. (Ord. 167, 11-19-1979, eff. 12-1-1979; amd.
Ord. 238, 1982)
(B) There shall be no parking on either side of streets designated as snow routes twenty four (24)
hours after a two inch (2") snowfall has accumulated on such snow routes.
(C) In addition to the snow routes mentioned, there shall be no parking on the Downtown Square from
one o'clock (1:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) A.M. or in the city parking lots from one o'clock (1:00)
A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
(D) Parking may be resumed on individual streets as soon as final plowing, as announced, has been
completed on that street.
(E) Vehicles parking on snow routes in violation of this section shall be towed and may be reclaimed
upon payment of any towing and storage fee, if any.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 136/396
(F) The street commissioner is hereby authorized and directed to place and establish signs and such
other devices in accordance with sound traffic engineering principles as are necessary to
implement and execute this section.
(G) The street commissioner, street superintendent or chief of police is hereby authorized to declare a
snow emergency and to provide a news release to local media when two inches (2") of snowfall
have accumulated or is expected and of the city's intent to remove snow on such snow routes and
to tow vehicles which may be parked thereon in violation of this section. (Ord. 167, 11-19-1979, eff.
12-1-1979)
6-2-10: HANDICAPPED PERSONS, PARKING:
(Rep. by Ord. 400, 4-20-1987)
6-2-11: PARKING VIOLATIONS, FINES:
(A) Two Hour Parking; Parking Meters:
1. Parking Meters: Any person who shall fail to activate a parking meter as required, shall be fined
five dollars ($5.00), if such fine is paid within forty eight (48) hours; and if said fine is not paid
within forty eight (48) hours, then the fine shall be ten dollars ($10.00), and shall remain so until
thirty (30) days after mailing a notice by the city to the violator. At the end of the aforesaid thirty
(30) day period, the fine shall increase to forty dollars ($40.00).
2. Two Hour Parking: Any person who shall violate the two (2) hour parking limit shall be fined five
dollars ($5.00), if such fine is paid within forty eight (48) hours; and if said fine is not paid within
forty eight (48) hours, then the fine shall be ten dollars ($10.00), and shall remain so until thirty
(30) days after mailing a notice by the city to the violator. At the end of the aforesaid thirty (30)
day period, the fine shall increase to forty dollars ($40.00).
(B) Parking On Sidewalk, Other Prohibited Places: Any person who shall violate any section
prohibiting parking on a sidewalk or parkway, or shall park with the left front driver's side of a
vehicle next to the curb, except on one-way streets, shall be fined five dollars ($5.00), if such fine
is paid within forty eight (48) hours; and if said fine is not paid within forty eight (48) hours, then the
fine shall be ten dollars ($10.00) and remain so until thirty (30) days after mailing of a notice by the
city to the violator. At the end of the aforesaid thirty (30) day period, the fine shall increase to forty
dollars ($40.00).
(C) Restricted Areas, Time Limit Parking: Any person who shall violate any section prohibiting parking
of a vehicle in a designated area, including reserved spaces or restricting the length of time a
vehicle may there be parked, shall be fined five dollars ($5.00), if such fine is paid within forty eight
(48) hours; and if said fine is not paid within forty eight (48) hours, then the fine shall be ten dollars
($10.00) and shall remain so until thirty (30) days after mailing of a notice by the city to the violator.
At the end of the aforesaid thirty (30) day period, the fine shall be increased to forty dollars
($40.00). (Ord. 741, 8-3-1998)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 137/396
(D) Overnight Parking Of Semitractors And Semitrailers: Any person who shall park in violation of
subsection 6-2-6(B) of this chapter, or any person who shall park a semitractor, tractor or detached
semitrailer on any street, shoulder, or right of way shall be fined twenty five dollars ($25.00), if such
fine is paid within forty eight (48) hours; and if said fine is not paid within forty eight (48) hours,
then the fine shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) and remain so until thirty (30) days after mailing of a
notice by the city to the violator. At the end of the aforesaid thirty (30) day period, the fine shall
increase to one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 740, 7-6-1998)
(E) Failure To Pay Fine, Court: At the end of the thirty (30) day period provided above, any violator
may be taken to court and the fine established by the court, upon conviction, between the limits of
forty dollars ($40.00) and five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. (Ord. 737, 6-29-1998)
(F) Snow Emergency Routes: Any person who shall violate section 6-2-9 of this chapter establishing
snow emergency routes shall be fined twenty five dollars ($25.00).
(G) Exceptions: The above subsections shall not apply to persons parking a vehicle so as to obstruct
the entrance or exit of any place where the police or fire department apparatus or other emergency
equipment is kept or housed, or so as to block an emergency entrance to a hospital. Nor shall this
subsection apply to any person parking a vehicle so as to entirely obstruct traffic in any street or
alley, or parking in such a way as to reduce traffic on an arterial street to one-way traffic only; nor
to any person who refuses to move a vehicle he illegally parked at the request of any member of
the police department. (Ord. 248, 1983)
(H) Presumption Of Liability: Proof of registration of a motor vehicle and proof of a violation of this
chapter shall be construed as prima facie proof that the registered owner of such motor vehicle
was the user or operator thereof at the time of the violation charge.
(I) Violations, Issue Tickets: It shall be the duty of a duly appointed agent of the city council to issue
tickets to all persons who violate the provisions of this chapter. Such tickets may be delivered to
the violator personally, or may be affixed to the vehicle of the violator. The said ticket shall direct
the violator to appear and present such ticket at a designated place on or before a certain hour
designated thereon. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to abridge the power of the
police officer to arrest any violator and take him into custody. (Ord. 208, 8-17-1981)
(J) Chalk Lines: Any person who shall remove chalk lines or other markings from tires used to
establish violations of this chapter shall be fined twenty five dollars ($25.00), if such fine is paid
within forty eight (48) hours; and if such fine is not paid within forty eight (48) hours, then the fine
shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) and remain so until thirty (30) days after mailing of the notice by the
city to the violator. At the end of the aforesaid thirty (30) day period, the fine shall increase to one
hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 737, 6-29-1998)
Title 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 138/396
Chapter 1
CITY CEMETERIES
7-1-1: DESIGNATION OF CITY CEMETERIES:
(A) Cemeteries Designated: City cemeteries or tracts or lots of land which have been purchased for
cemetery purposes, and such other land as in the future may be purchased, are hereby set apart
and dedicated for cemetery purposes and uses, to be kept and controlled by the corporate
authorities of the city, and said premises shall be known and designated as the Woodlawn
Cemetery, Mausoleum Park or Memorial Park, and shall be under the supervision and control of
the commissioner of public health and safety. (Ord. 32, 1-4-1972)
(B) Plats And Surveys, Recording Of: Said tracts of land, and any others that may hereafter be
purchased for cemetery purposes, or as an addition to said grounds, shall be laid off into lots of
appropriate size, as the council may determine, and surveys and plats of said lots shall be made
under the direction of the council, which surveys and plats shall designate the lots by number, and
be filed and recorded in the office of the recorder of DeWitt County, Illinois, which lots shall be sold
at such prices as the council may from time to time direct; provided, that no part of said land shall
be sold or used for any other than burial purposes, and the same shall be taken subject to such
regulations as the council may from time to time establish, touching the management of said
cemetery. (1968 Code, sec. 23-102)
(C) Grounds Set Aside For Paupers: A portion of said grounds, under the direction of the council, shall
be used and designated as "commons" for the burial of strangers and the friends of persons
unable to purchase lots. (Ord. 32, 1-4-1972)
7-1-2: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
No cemetery or burying ground shall hereafter be established within the corporate limits of the city nor
shall any cemetery or burying ground heretofore established within the city be extended or enlarged or
used for burial purposes, except by consent of the council, under a penalty of not more than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) for each violation and a like penalty for each day such violation shall
continue. (1968 Code, sec. 23-105)
7-1-3: BURIAL IN CEMETERY REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish or enlarge a cemetery or to bury any person within the
city limits, or within one mile thereof, except in an established cemetery. (1968 Code, sec. 47-106)
7-1-4: PURCHASE OF LOTS; DEEDS:
Any person desiring to purchase any cemetery lot or lots shall pay the price thereof to the city clerk,
who shall thereupon give the purchaser a receipt for the amount paid, which receipt shall state the
number of the lot proposed to be purchased. It shall be the duty of the city clerk to prepare a deed for
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 139/396
such lot, which deed shall be signed by the mayor and countersigned by the clerk and executed under
the seal of the city. (1968 Code, sec. 23-104)
7-1-5: CEMETERY LOTS; RATES:
(A) The fee or charge for ground or grave space in Woodlawn Park, Memorial Park, Mausoleum Park
and Oak Park cemeteries and the mausoleum is hereby fixed at the sum of six hundred fifty dollars
($650.00) with monumental (upright stone) privileges and five hundred fifty dollars ($550.00)
without monumental (flat stone) privileges.
(B) The fee or charge for ground or grave space in the cremation section of Memorial Park is two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per lot.
(C) The fee or charge for ground or grave space in Baby Haven section of Memorial Park is one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per space. (Ord. 1259, 4-16-2012)
7-1-6: DIGGING GRAVES AND SERVICE; FEES:
(A) For graveside funeral services or processions commencing before three o'clock (3:00) P.M. on
weekdays, the fees for digging graves, backfilling graves, or servicing funerals are hereby fixed in
the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for adults, two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for children
under the age of twelve (12) years, one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for newborns and infants,
and one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for cremations.
(B) For graveside funeral services or processions commencing after three o'clock (3:00) P.M. on
weekdays, or on Saturdays, or observed city holidays, the fees for digging graves, backfilling
graves, or servicing funerals are hereby fixed in the sum of seven hundred dollars ($700.00) for
adults, four hundred dollars ($400.00) for children under the age of twelve (12) years, two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00) for newborns and infants, and three hundred dollars ($300.00) for
cremations.
(C) The fee charged for rental of the funeral tent for services is hereby fixed in the sum of two hundred
dollars ($200.00).
(D) An application to install a new foundation must be submitted to the city prior to installation of a new
monument foundation. All new monument foundation installations must be inspected by proper city
of Clinton cemetery employees prior to concrete being poured. The fee charge for inspection of a
new monument foundation is hereby fixed in the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) per foundation
request. (Ord. 1402, 12-21-2015)
7-1-7: BURIAL VAULTS REQUIRED:
Either a concrete box or burial vault must be provided for each interment except for infants. (Ord. 32,
1-4-1972)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 140/396
7-1-8: PROHIBITED ACTS:
(A) Loitering At Night Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to go or remain upon the grounds of the city
cemeteries or any burying grounds within the city before sunrise in the morning or after sunset in
the evening without permission of the cemetery sexton, or other person in charge of such
cemeteries or burying grounds. (1968 Code, sec. 56-138)
(B) Shooting Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for a person within the city cemeteries or burying grounds
to discharge any firearm, or be found hunting or trespassing, or to trespass upon any grave within
the city, or to refuse to obey any lawful order of the city sexton, or any person having charge of any
cemetery or burying ground. (1968 Code, sec. 56-139)
7-1-9: TRANSFERS:
Any person desiring to transfer ownership of a cemetery space or spaces shall file an application for
transfer with the city clerk. No such transfer shall be allowed without approval of the city council. The
fee for transfer of a cemetery space shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) per space. (Ord. 364, 12-2-1985)
Chapter 2
DOCTOR JOHN WARNER HOSPITAL
7-2-1: CITY HOSPITAL ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established a city hospital for the use and benefit of the inhabitants of the city, which
hospital shall be known as the "Doctor John Warner hospital". (1968 Code, sec. 17-101)
7-2-2: SUPERVISION AND CONTROL:
The hospital hereinabove established, and the board of directors thereof1, shall be under the
supervision and control of the commissioner of public affairs, and the same is hereby assigned to the
department of public affairs. (1968 Code, sec. 17-102)
Chapter 3
VESPASIAN WARNER PUBLIC LIBRARY
7-3-1: LIBRARY ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established a free public library and reading room for the use and benefit of the
inhabitants of the city, which library and reading room shall be known as the "Vespasian Warner public
library". (1968 Code, sec. 16-101)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 141/396
7-3-2: PROHIBITED ACTS:
(A) Injuring Books: No person shall wilfully or maliciously cut, write upon, injure, deface, tear or
destroy any book, newspaper, plate, picture, engraving or statue belonging to the Vespasian
Warner public library. (1968 Code, sec. 56-134)
(B) Failure To Return Books: No person shall fail to return any book belonging to the Vespasian
Warner public library, according to the requirements of the bylaws duly made and adopted by the
directors of such library1 for the government thereof. (1968 Code, sec. 56-136)
Chapter 4
CITY PARKS
7-4-1: CLOSING HOURS:
No person, other than authorized park personnel and city police, shall be allowed in any city park, with
the exception of Mr. Lincoln Square Park, between the hours of sunset and sunrise without special
consent.
No person, other than authorized park personnel and city police, shall be allowed in Mr. Lincoln
Square Park between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. (Ord. 1378, 7-
20-2015)
Chapter 5
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
7-5-1: SUPERVISION:
All public streets, alleys, sidewalks and other public ways in the city shall be under the supervision of
the commissioner of streets and public improvements and his employees1. Said commissioner shall
be charged with the enforcement of all city ordinance provisions relating to such public places, except
traffic ordinances, and is hereby authorized to enforce such ordinances of the city. (1968 Code, sec.
28-101)
7-5-2: PERMIT TO CONSTRUCT; SPECIFICATIONS:
It shall be unlawful to construct or lay any pavement on any public street, sidewalk, alley or other
public way, or to repair the same, without first having secured a permit therefor. Applications for such
permits shall be made to the city clerk, and shall state the location of the intended pavement or repair,
the extent thereof, and the person who is to do the actual construction work. No such permits shall be
issued except on order of the commissioner of streets and public improvements. (1968 Code, sec. 28-
102)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 142/396
All street and sidewalk pavements shall be made in conformity with specifications laid down or
approved from time to time by the council. (1968 Code, sec. 28-103)
7-5-3: MAINTENANCE, REPAIRS:
All public street, alley and sidewalk pavements shall be kept in good repair. Such repair work, whether
done by the city or by the abutting owner, shall be under the supervision of the commissioner of
streets and public improvements. (1968 Code, sec. 28-105)
7-5-4: DEFECTS REPORTED:
It shall be the duty of every city officer or employee becoming cognizant of any defect in any street,
alley or sidewalk, or any obstruction thereof, to report the same to the commissioner of streets and
public improvements as soon as possible. (1968 Code, sec. 28-106)
7-5-5: BARRICADES; DISTURBANCE TO2:
(A) During Construction: Any person laying or repairing any pavement on a street, sidewalk or other
public place, or making an excavation in any other place, shall maintain suitable barricades to
prevent injury to any person or vehicle by reason of the work; such barricades shall be protected
by lights at nighttime.
(B) Defects: Any defect in any such pavement shall be barricaded to prevent injury, and any person
properly maintaining any opening or excavation in any such place shall guard such opening or
excavation while the same remains open by proper barricades and lights. (1968 Code, sec. 28-
108)
(C) Disturbing Barricades: It shall be unlawful to disturb or interfere with any barricade or lights lawfully
placed to protect or mark any new pavement or excavation or opening in any public street, alley or
sidewalk. (1968 Code, sec. 28-109)
7-5-6: DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION:
(A) Permit Required: No person shall construct a driveway for vehicles across any sidewalk in the city
without having first obtained a permit therefor. Applications for such permits shall be made to the
city clerk and shall be accompanied by the fee required. (1968 Code, sec. 29-101)
No permit for construction of a driveway for commercial use, or for the habitual use of other than
the owner or occupant of the premises served, shall be issued except upon the order of the
commissioner of streets and public improvements. (1968 Code, sec. 29-101; amd. 1983 Code)
(B) Fee: The fee for all such construction permits shall be ten dollars ($10.00) for a private driveway
and twenty five dollars ($25.00) for a commercial driveway. (1968 Code, sec. 29-102; amd. 1983
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 143/396
Code)
(C) Specifications:
1. Grade Surface: No driveway shall be so constructed or graded as to leave a steep sharp
depression or other obstruction in the sidewalk. The grade shall be as nearly as possible the
same as that of the adjoining sidewalk. It shall be unlawful to have the surface finish of any
driveway where the same crosses the sidewalk constructed of such materials as to render it
slippery and hazardous to pedestrians, or to have the grade of such portion vary from the grade
of the sidewalk, or be other than level. (1968 Code, sec. 29-103)
2. Materials: Driveways across sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete or of such other
materials as may be approved by the council. (1968 Code, sec. 29-104)
(D) Repair, Maintain: It shall be the duty of the person maintaining a driveway to keep the same in
good repair where it crosses the sidewalk, and free from obstruction and openings. (1968 Code,
sec. 29-105)
(E) Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this section shall be fined not less than five dollars
($5.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and a separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (1968
Code, sec. 29-106)
7-5-7: PRIVATE USE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to use any street, sidewalk or other public place as space for the
display of goods or merchandise for sale, or to write or mark any signs or advertisements on any such
pavements, except by authority of the city council. (1968 Code, sec. 28-110)
7-5-8: INJURY TO PAVEMENTS3:
(A) New Pavements: It shall be unlawful to walk upon or drive any vehicle or animal upon or injure any
newly laid street or sidewalk pavement while the same is guarded by a warning sign or barricade,
or to knowingly injure any soft newly laid pavement. (1968 Code, sec. 28-104)
(B) General: It shall be unlawful to injure any sidewalk, street or alley pavement. (1968 Code, sec. 28-
112)
7-5-9: ENCROACHMENTS AND OBSTRUCTIONS PROHIBITED:
(A) General Obstructions: It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any building or structure which
encroaches upon any public street or property, or for any person to cause, create or maintain any
obstruction of any street, alley, sidewalk or other public way, except as may be specifically
authorized by ordinance or by the commissioner of streets and public improvements when
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 144/396
necessary in an emergency or in connection with any lawful construction, repair or removal work.
(1968 Code, secs. 28-107, 28-111)
(B) Obstructing Stairways Or Exits: It shall be unlawful to obstruct or permit the obstruction of any
stairway, aisle, corridor or exit in any office building, factory, hotel, school, church, theater,
assembly hall, lodge or other public hall, or any building used by two (2) or more tenants or
families in such a manner that it interferes with the free use of such stairway, aisle, corridor or exit.
(1968 Code, sec. 56-130)
(C) Drains: It shall be unlawful to obstruct any drain in any public street or alley. (1968 Code, sec. 28-
114)
7-5-10: MAINTENANCE OF CERTAIN STRUCTURES RESTRICTED:
(A) Poles And Wires: It shall be unlawful to erect any poles or wires or to maintain any poles in or
wires over any public street, alley or other public way without having first secured permission from
the commissioner of streets and public improvements. (1968 Code, sec. 28-115; amd. 1983 Code)
(B) Gas Pumps: It shall be unlawful to maintain or erect any gasoline pump or tank in any public
street, alley or sidewalk. (1968 Code, sec. 28-116)
(C) Covers On Wells: It shall be unlawful to permit any well, or any other similar excavation to remain
uncovered, excepting on premises secured by a fence of at least six feet (6') in height with all
doors or entrances to such premises locked. (1968 Code, sec. 56-131)
7-5-11: SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL REQUIRED; BUSINESS DISTRICT:
(A) Purpose: The purpose of this section is to avoid the hazards to persons and damage to property
resulting from the accumulation of snow and ice on the streets and sidewalks of the Clinton
downtown business district. (Ord. 135, 10-17-1977)
(B) Definitions:
DOWNTOWN BUSINESS DISTRICT: Clinton downtown business district, also known as DBD,
means that area of the square bounded by Quincy Street, Washington Street, Madison Street and
Adams Street; also municipal parking lots.
SHRUBS: Those trees, shrubs and other living plants in the DBD which help beautify the area.
SNOW DAYS: Any day that snow or ice accumulates on the ground.
SQUARE: The business area surrounding Mr. Lincoln's Square and streets leading from the area.
(Ord. 135, 10-17-1977; amd. 1983 Code; Ord. 694, 5-19-1997)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 145/396
(C) Snow Removal, Sidewalks: Each person who owns or operates a business or building in the DBD
shall be responsible for the removal of snow or ice on the sidewalk in front of the building or
business in the following manner:
1. The snow and ice shall be removed from the sidewalk fronting the business building at least six
feet (6') in width from the building.
2. All snow or ice removed shall be placed in the street or hauled away. No snow or ice shall be
placed on shrubs.
3. The use of salt or any chemical containing salt shall be prohibited in any areas which are
adjacent to shrubs or from which runoff could damage shrubs.
4. All snow and ice removal shall be completed by nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. each business day.
(Ord. 135, 10-17-1977)
5. Each person who fails to comply with the foregoing provision shall have his area cleaned by the
city, and said person shall reimburse the city for the expense of such cleaning at the rate of
twenty five dollars ($25.00) per man hour, which rate shall include the use of the machinery. A
minimum of twenty five dollars ($25.00) will be charged. (Ord. 287, 11-21-1983)
(D) Snow Removal, Streets: The city shall clean and remove snow and ice from the streets of the DBD
by nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. each business day. (Ord. 135, 10-17-1977)
(E) Parking: Parking is prohibited on the square on snow days until streets have been cleaned. (Ord.
135, 10-17-1977; amd. 1983 Code)
(F) Penalty: Each person who fails to comply with the provisions of this section shall be subject to a
fine as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 135, 10-17-1977)
7-5-12: DEPOSITS ON STREETS:
It shall be unlawful to deposit on any street or sidewalk any material which may be harmful to the
pavement thereof, or any glass or other articles which may do injury to any person, animal or property.
Coal or other materials may be deposited in streets preparatory to delivery or use, provided that such
deposit does not reduce the usable width of the roadway at the point to less than eighteen feet (18');
provided, that such material or coal, other than material to be used in actual building construction,
shall not be permitted to remain on such street for more than three (3) hours.
Any such material or coal shall be guarded by lights if same remains upon any street after nighttime.
(1968 Code, sec. 28-113)
7-5-13: PLAYING GAMES IN STREETS:
It shall be unlawful to play any games upon any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place where
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 146/396
such games cause unnecessary noise or interfere with traffic or pedestrians. (1968 Code, sec. 28-
117)
7-5-14: SKATEBOARDS AND ROLLERBLADES PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to ride a skateboard or rollerblade upon any street, alley, sidewalk or other public
place in the "downtown business district", as defined in subsection 7-5-11(B) of this chapter. (Ord.
694, 5-19-1997)
7-5-15: VEHICLE WEIGHT AND LOAD LIMITS:
(A) Load Limits: It shall be unlawful to drive on any street, any motor vehicle with projecting loads or of
a width in excess of that permitted by the state traffic law for driving on improved highways4. (Ord.
530, 9-16-1991; amd. Ord. 694, 5-19-1997)
(B) Weight Limitations: No vehicle or combination of vehicles equipped with pneumatic tires shall be
operated, unladen or with load, upon any city street except streets designated as state highways,
when the gross weight of said vehicle or combination of vehicles exceeds sixteen thousand
(16,000) pounds. The foregoing limitation shall not apply to trucks or vehicles going upon city
streets for the purpose of loading or unloading cargo or merchandise within the city, or to any
service or utility vehicles or vehicles used in garbage collection. The weight limitation for trucks or
vehicles going upon city streets for the purpose of loading or unloading cargo or merchandise
within the city, or for any service or utility vehicle or vehicle used in garbage collection, shall be the
same weight limitations as those provided in the Illinois vehicle code for trucks and vehicles
operating on highways in the state of Illinois. (Ord. 530, 9-16-1991; amd. Ord. 576, 6-7-1993; Ord.
694, 5-19-1997)
(C) Temporary Weight Limitations On Certain City Streets:
1. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, no vehicle or combination of vehicles equipped with
pneumatic tires shall be operated, unladed or with load, upon the following streets when the
gross weight of said vehicle or combination of vehicles exceed sixteen thousand (16,000)
pounds, from February 1 through April 30 of each year:
City Street From To
Cromwell Drive Business Route 51 Walnut Street
North Walnut Street 100 feet south of
Benton Street
South city limit
South Madison Street Webster North city limit
2. The limitations set forth in subsection (C)1 of this section shall not apply to the following:
(a) All firefighting apparatus and equipment for snow and ice removal operations owned or
operated by any governmental body and all vehicles, equipment and apparatus operating
under the jurisdiction and/or direction of the city of Clinton, any law enforcement agency in the
state and/or county or the DeWitt County emergency services department, shall be exempt
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 147/396
from these limitations; and all vehicles, equipment and apparatus operating to restore gas,
electric, water or sewer services in an emergency due to an unplanned disruption of service
shall be exempt from these limitations.
(b) School buses shall be exempt from these limitations.
(c) Vehicles used in garbage collection shall be exempt from these limitations.
3. Upon application and good cause being shown, the director of public works may issue a special
permit, at his discretion, authorizing the applicant to operate a vehicle at gross weights in excess
of the limitations set forth in this subsection upon showing an undue hardship on the operator of
said vehicle or upon a showing that said vehicle cannot reasonably be dismantled or
disassembled in such a manner as to comply with the weight limitations contained in this
subsection. The special permit shall be issued at the sole discretion of the director of public
works and may contain such conditions as may, in the sole discretion of the director of public
works, be required. (Ord. 1038, 1-17-2006)
7-5-16: PENALTY:
Any person violating section 7-5-15 of this chapter shall be fined one hundred dollars ($100.00). Any
person violating any other provision of this chapter shall be fined as provided in section 1-4-1 of this
code. (Ord. 1038, 1-17-2006)
Chapter 6
EXCAVATIONS
7-6-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to tunnel under or to make any excavation in any street, alley or
other public place in the city without having obtained a permit therefor, as is herein required, or without
complying with the provisions of this chapter or in violation of or variance from the terms of any such
permit. (Ord. 168, 1-7-1980, eff. 1-21-1980)
7-6-2: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; FEE; TIME LIMIT:
(A) Application: Applications for such permits shall be made to the city clerk, and shall describe the
location of the intended excavation or tunnel, the size thereof, the purpose therefor, and the person
doing the actual excavating work and the name of the person for whom or which the work is being
done, and shall contain an agreement that the applicant will comply with all ordinances relating to
the work to be done. (Ord. 168, 1-7-1980, eff. 1-21-1980)
(B) Fees; Issuance: The fee for such permit shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00), and no such permit
shall be issued except on order of the commissioner of streets and public improvements. (Ord.
285, 11-7-1983, eff. 11-21-1983)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 148/396
(C) Time Limit: Each application for a permit shall state the length of time it is estimated will elapse
from the commencement of the work until the restoration of the surface of the ground, or until the
refill is made ready for the pavement to be put on by the city, if the city restores such surface
pavement. It shall be unlawful to fail to comply with this time limitation unless permission for an
extension of time is granted by the city council. (Ord. 168, 1-7-1980, eff. 1-21-1980)
7-6-3: GUARANTEE DEPOSIT REQUIRED:
No such permit shall be issued unless and until the applicant therefor has deposited with the clerk a
cash deposit in the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00), when an alley which has not been improved
with asphalt, oil and chip, or paving is involved; three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00), when an asphalt
or oil and chip street or alley is involved; and five hundred dollars ($500.00), if the excavation is in a
paved area to ensure the proper restoration of the ground and laying of the pavement, if any. If it is
necessary for the city to restore the roadway to its original condition, the deposit shall be used to
defray the expenses of the city, and the balance shall be returned to the applicant without interest after
the project is completed to the satisfaction of the commissioner of streets and public improvements. If
the expense to the city exceeds the deposit held, the applicant shall be liable for the balance of the
expense.
Each separate excavation in any street, alley or public place within the city shall require a separate
deposit with the city clerk. Additionally, each excavation exceeding twenty feet (20') in length shall
require a separate deposit for each twenty foot (20') section. (Ord. 875, 12-17-2001)
7-6-4: BARRICADES AND LIGHTS:
Any person making or maintaining any excavation in any street or alley shall keep the same
adequately guarded by barricades and lights to protect persons and property from injury1. (Ord. 168,
1-7-1980, eff. 1-21-1980)
7-6-5: MANNER OF EXCAVATING:
(A) General:
1. Compliance With Permit: It shall be unlawful to make any such excavation or tunnel in any way
contrary to or at variance with the terms of the permit therefor.
2. Bracing: Proper bracing shall be maintained to prevent the collapse of adjoining ground.
(B) Prevent Injury To Properties:
1. Pipes, Cables And Conduits: No injury shall be done to any pipes, cables or conduits in
connection with such work, and notice shall be given to the city department or officer charged
with the care of any such pipes, cables or conduits which may be affected by the making of any
such excavation or tunnel before such pipes, cables or conduits shall be disturbed.
2. Trees And Shrubs: No unnecessary damage or injury shall be done to any trees or shrubs or the
roots thereof2.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 149/396
(C) Temporary Sidewalks: If any sidewalk is blocked by any such work, a temporary sidewalk shall be
constructed or provided which shall be safe for travel and convenient for users. (Ord. 168, 1-7-
1980, eff. 1-21-1980)
(D) Restoring Surface: Any person making any excavation or tunnel in or under any public street, alley
or public place in the city shall restore the surface thereof to its original condition if there is no
pavement there. Refills shall be properly tamped down, and any bracing in such tunnel or
excavation shall be left in the ground.
Any opening in a paved or improved portion of a street or alley shall be repaired and the surface
relaid by the applicant in compliance with this subsection and subject to the supervision of the
commissioner of streets and public improvements, or if such work is not done within ten (10) days
after restoration is possible, the city may restore the surface and charge the cost thereof to the
permittee.
(E) Trenches: All trenches made in any street or improved alley shall be a minimum of twelve inches
(12") wide at the road surface. This minimum width shall be maintained for a minimum of six
inches (6") in depth. (Ord. 285, 11-7-1983, eff. 11-21-1983)
7-6-6: SUPERVISION:
The commissioner of streets and public improvements shall be charged with the authority to designate
proper fill material and supervise and inspect the resurfacing of any such excavation. (Ord. 168, 1-7-
1980, eff. 1-21-1980)
7-6-7: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter relative to securing permits shall not apply to officers or employees of
the city engaged in doing work for the city, nor to persons who are operating under a franchise or
grant from the city, if such franchise provides for the making of excavations and tunnels without
securing a permit therefor. (Ord. 168, 1-7-1980, eff. 1-21-1980)
7-6-8: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 168, 1-7-1980, eff. 1-
21-1980)
Chapter 7
TREES, SHRUBS AND OTHER PLANTS
7-7-1: TITLE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 150/396
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the CITY OF CLINTON TREE ORDINANCE of
Clinton, Illinois. (Ord. 827, 9-5-2000)
7-7-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
(A) Purpose: It is the purpose of this chapter to promote and protect the public health, safety and
general welfare by providing for the regulation of the planting, maintenance, and removal of trees,
shrubs and other plants within Clinton, Illinois.
(B) Intent: It is the intent of the city council of Clinton that the terms of this chapter shall be construed
so as to educate and promote:
1. The planting, maintenance, restoration and survival of desirable trees, shrubs and other plants
within the city; and
2. The protection of community residents from personal injury and property damage and the
protection of the city of Clinton from property damage, caused or threatened by the improper
planting, maintenance, or removal of trees, shrubs, or other plants located within the community.
(Ord. 827, 9-5-2000)
7-7-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used within this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth in this section:
ARBORICULTURAL SPECIFICATIONS AND STANDARDS OF PRACTICE FOR CITY OF CLINTON
(Hereinafter ARBORICULTURAL SPECIFICATIONS MANUAL): A manual prepared by the tree
commission containing regulations and standards for the planting, maintenance and removal of trees,
shrubs and other plants upon city owned property.
CITY OWNED PROPERTY: Property within the city limits of Clinton, Illinois, and: a) owned by the city
in fee simple absolute, or b) dedicated to the public for present or future use for purposes of vehicular
or pedestrian traffic, or for public easements. This shall include any land which lies between the curb
line of any street or highway and the lot line of the abutting premises.
PARK TREES: Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other wood vegetation on public parks having individual
names, and all areas owned by the city, or to which the public has free access as a park.
PROPERTY OWNER: The record owner or contract purchaser of any parcel of land.
STREET TREES: Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation on land lying within the city
right of way for all streets, avenues, alleys or ways within the city.
TREES, SHRUBS AND OTHER PLANTS: All vegetation, woody or otherwise, except lawn grass and
flowers less than twenty four inches (24") in height. (Ord. 827, 9-5-2000)
7-7-4: GENERAL AUTHORITY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 151/396
The city council, or its authorized representatives, are hereby empowered to superintend, regulate and
encourage the preservation, culture and planting of shade trees, plants and shrubs upon city owned
property, and to direct the method and time of trimming the same; to advise, without charge, owners
and occupants of lots regarding the kind of trees, plants and shrubs, and the method of planting best
adapted to and most desirable on particular streets and public highways; and to take such measures
as may be deemed necessary for the control and extermination of insects, pests and plant diseases
which may injuriously affect trees, plants and shrubs that are now growing or hereafter may be
growing on the public highways and parks of the city. (Ord. 827, 9-5-2000)
7-7-5: TREE COMMISSION:
(A) Establishment: For purposes of assisting the city council with respect to its general authority
concerning trees, shrubs and other plants, the city of Clinton tree commission (hereinafter "tree
commission") is hereby established.
(B) Composition: The tree commission shall be composed of seven (7) commissioners. Five (5)
commissioners shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council. These five (5)
commissioners shall serve without pay and shall reside within the city of Clinton, Illinois. The
remaining two (2) commissioners, shall be from the city of Clinton and who shall be ex officio and
shall not vote, shall be appointed by the city council. Subject to the exceptions in subsection (C) of
this section, each nonex officio commissioner of the tree commission shall serve for a term of three
(3) years.
(C) Appointment Of Members: Two (2) of the five (5) commissioners initially appointed to the tree
commission, who are not ex officio members, shall serve for a term of one year; two (2) of the five
(5) commissioners initially appointed shall serve for a term of two (2) years; and one of the five (5)
commissioners initially appointed shall serve for a term of three (3) years. They shall start on a
common date. Determination of the length of terms of the five (5) commissioners initially appointed
shall be determined by the mayor at the time of appointment.
(D) Expiration Or Vacation Of Terms: Within thirty (30) days following the expiration of the term of any
appointed commissioner, a successor shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the
council, and the successor shall serve for a term of three (3) years. Should any commissioner
resign or be removed from the tree commission, a successor shall be appointed by the mayor and
shall serve for the unexpired period of the vacated term. A member of the tree commission may be
removed by the mayor with the consent of the city council.
(E) Organization:
1. Chairman: The tree commission shall select from among its members a chairman. In the
temporary absence of the chairman, the members of the tree commission may designate an
acting chairman to serve in his or her absence.
2. Secretary: The tree commission shall select from among its members a secretary. The tree
commission may designate a temporary secretary to serve in the absence of the secretary.
3. Rules: The tree commission may adopt such rules or bylaws for the conduct of its business as it
may deem necessary or desirable consistent with this chapter and other applicable ordinances
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 152/396
of the city of Clinton.
4. Meetings: The tree commission shall meet regularly at such times and places as it may
determine. Special meetings as are necessary or desirable may be called by the chairman,
secretary, and any three (3) members of the tree commission.
5. Quorum: A quorum of the tree commission shall be three (3) of its voting members. All actions of
the tree commission shall be determined by a majority vote of those present and voting.
(F) Duties And Responsibilities: The tree commission shall perform the following duties:
1. Advise and consult with the city council, through the commissioner of streets and public
improvements. The topics under which this advice and consultation may be given may include,
but are not limited to, any of the following:
(a) Develop an urban forestry plan for adoption by the city;
(b) Propose amendments to this chapter, and alterations or revisions to the "Arboricultural
Specifications Manual", and urban forestry plan;
(c) Establish policy concerning selection, planting, maintenance, and removal of trees, shrubs,
and other plants within the city;
(d) The allocation of funds and expenditures of funds for planting, care and maintenance of
trees, shrubs and other plants on public property;
(e) The establishment of educational and informational programs; and
(f) The issuance of permits required by this chapter.
2. Investigate, counsel, update annually and administer an urban forestry plan for the care,
preservation, pruning, planting, replanting and removal or disposition of trees and shrubs along
city streets and other public places. Such plan will be presented annually to the mayor and the
city council, and the tree commission will determine, with the assistance of any experts the tree
commission wishes to consult, a list of street tree species for the city. This list shall be used to
select appropriate trees to be planted on city rights of way and shall become part of the overall
comprehensive tree plan for the city. (Ord. 827, 9-5-2000)
7-7-6: PERMITS:
(A) Scope Of Requirement: Except for a city employee and utility company employee at the direction
of the city council or a contractor hired by the city of Clinton, no person may perform any of the
following acts without first obtaining a permit from the tree commission:
1. Plant or treat, on city owned property, any tree, shrub, or other plant except that this provision
shall not be construed to prohibit owners of property adjacent to city owned property from
watering or fertilizing any tree, shrub, or other plant located on such city owned property;
2. Remove, destroy, cut down, break, deface, trim or in any way injure any tree, shrub, hedge, fruit,
flower, plant, vegetable or anything which may be thereon for ornament or utility on city owned
property;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 153/396
3. Trim, prune, or remove any tree or portions thereof if such tree or portions thereof reasonably
may be expected to fall on city owned property and thereby cause damage to persons or
property;
4. Place, on city owned property, either above or below ground level, a container for trees, shrubs,
or other plants;
5. Damage, cut, tap, carve, or transplant any tree, shrub, or other plant located on city owned
property;
6. Attach any rope, wire, nail, sign, poster, or any other manmade object to any tree, shrub, or
other plant located on city owned property; or permit any such wire to come into contact with any
such tree;
7. Dig a tunnel or trench on city owned property;
8. Climb any tree growing on city owned property or walk upon the branches thereof, while wearing
spurs unless any such person is in the act of removing such tree;
9. Place or maintain upon the ground in any street, park or parkway in the city any stone, cement
or other material which shall impede free passage of water and air to the roots of any tree,
without leaving an open space of ground not less than two feet (2') in width all around the trunk
of such tree. Whenever there is no such open space about any tree in any street, park or
parkway in the city, the superintendent of public works may make such open space or cause the
same to be made.
(B) Additional Permits: Nothing in this section shall be construed to exempt any person from the
requirements of obtaining any additional permits as required by law.
(C) Copy Of Permit: Copies of all permits issued, along with all supporting documentation shall be filed
with the city clerk's office by the tree commission within five (5) days after issuance. (Ord. 827, 9-5-
2000)
7-7-7: PLANTING ON CITY OWNED PROPERTY:
The tree commission shall not issue a permit for the planting of, and no person shall plant, any tree or
shrub upon city owned property except under the following conditions:
(A) That such tree is one of the varieties approved in the urban forestry plan adopted by the city
council;
(B) That such tree is free from infectious disease;
(C) An application, signed by the applicant, has been submitted to and approved by the tree
commission detailing the location, number, size, and species of trees, shrubs, or other plants that
will be affected by such acts, setting forth the purpose of such information that the tree commission
may find reasonably necessary;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 154/396
(D) The applicant agrees to perform the work for which the permit is sought in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, the urban forestry plan and with the regulations and standards set forth
in the "Arboricultural Specifications Manual"; and
(E) The applicant certifies that he or she has read and understands those provisions of the urban
forestry plan, this chapter and of the "Arboricultural Specifications Manual" which are pertinent to
the work for which the permit is sought. (Ord. 827, 9-5-2000)
7-7-8: TRIMMING REQUIREMENTS:
The tree commission shall not issue a permit for the destruction, removal or trimming of any tree or
shrub on city owned property or on private property if such tree or portion thereof reasonably may be
expected to fall on city owned property except under the following conditions:
(A) Proper preventive measures approved by the city of Clinton, are taken to ensure the safety of the
public while such work is being done;
(B) Such acts are not inconsistent with the development and implementation of the urban forestry plan
or with any regulations or standards of the "Arboricultural Specifications Manual";
(C) An application has been signed by the applicant and submitted to the tree commission detailing
the location, number, size and species of trees, shrubs or other plants that will be affected by such
acts, setting forth the purpose of such acts and the methods to be used, and presenting any
additional information that the tree commission may find reasonably necessary;
(D) The applicant agrees to perform the work for which the permit is sought in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, the urban forestry plan and with the regulations and standards set forth
in the "Arboricultural Specifications Manual"; and
(E) If the work for which a permit is issued entails the felling of any tree or part thereof, located on
private property, which, as a result of such felling reasonably may be expected to fall upon city
owned property, and if such felling is done by one other than the owner of the property on which
such felling is done, then the applicant shall agree to indemnify and to hold the city of Clinton
harmless for all damages resulting from conduct pursuant to the permit and shall deposit with the
city clerk a liability insurance policy in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00)
per person, three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) per accident for bodily injury liability and
fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) aggregate for property damage liability, which policy shall name
the city of Clinton as an additional insured.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to exempt public utility companies or their agents from
any of the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 827, 9-5-2000)
7-7-9: OBSTRUCTING PUBLIC LAMPS OR STREET SIGNS:
It shall be unlawful for the owner, lessee or person in possession, charge or control of any premises
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 155/396
upon which any tree or shrub is growing to permit the same to grow in such a manner as to obstruct or
prevent in any way the light from any public lamp from falling upon the street, or to obstruct visibility of
any traffic control device. (Ord. 827, 9-5-2000)
7-7-10: MINIMUM HEIGHT OF TREE BRANCHES OVER STREETS AND
SIDEWALKS:
No person shall maintain upon any lot which he is an owner or person in control, any tree which is so
located as to extend its branches over a public alley or highway, unless the same shall be kept so
trimmed that there shall be a clear height, unobstructed by branches, above vehicular traffic and
sidewalks as specified in the "Arboricultural Specifications Manual"; and every such person shall
remove all dead branches or stubs on such trees which are or may become a menace to persons or
vehicles upon the public ways. (Ord. 827, 9-5-2000)
7-7-11: MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF HEDGES AND SHRUBS:
(A) No person shall maintain any hedge or shrub, or permit the same to grow or remain, along the
sidewalks abutting his premises or within the lesser of ten feet (10') from the curb line or five feet
(5') from the nearest right of way line of any intersecting street at a height greater than three feet
(3').
(B) No person shall maintain any hedge or shrub, or permit the same to grow or remain, anywhere
upon his premises which interferes with the clear view of traffic by drivers approaching the
intersection. (Ord. 827, 9-5-2000)
7-7-12: FAILURE TO TRIM TREES:
(A) Whenever any person whose duty it is to keep any tree, hedge or shrub trimmed or cut as
provided in sections 7-7-9 through 7-7-11 of this chapter, shall fail to do so, the city shall cause to
be served upon such person notice requiring the same to be done forthwith; and if such person
shall fail to cause such trees, etc., to be trimmed within ten (10) days after the service of such
notice, he shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine as provided in this chapter for each
such offense; and each day following the tenth day after service of such notice during which such
person shall fail to trim said trees, etc., shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
(B) Such notice may be served by delivering the same, or a copy thereof, to such owner or occupant,
or by leaving the same at his usual place of business or abode; and in case such owner is a
nonresident of the city, by mailing notice to his last known address and by posting a copy of the
same in a conspicuous place upon the lot on or in front of which such trees may be located. (Ord.
827, 9-5-2000)
7-7-13: TRIMMING BY THE CITY:
In the event of the failure of an owner or person in control to trim, or cause to be trimmed, any trees,
hedges or shrubs as provided in sections 7-7-9 through 7-7-11 of this chapter, within the time provided
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 156/396
by notice served pursuant to the preceding section, such trees, etc., may be trimmed by the city; and
the expenses therefor shall be deemed a debt to the city on the part of said owner or person in
control. (Ord. 827, 9-5-2000)
7-7-14: SAFEGUARDING OF TREES DURING CONSTRUCTION:
In the erection, alteration, repair or removal of any building or structure, the owner thereof shall place
or cause to be placed such guards around all nearby trees on the public highway as will effectually
prevent injury to such trees. (Ord. 827, 9-5-2000)
7-7-15: NUISANCES:
The following are hereby declared to be public nuisances:
(A) Any dead or dying tree, shrub or other plant, if such tree, shrub or plant or portions thereof may
reasonably be expected to fall on city owned property;
(B) Any tree affected with a fungus disease caused by Graphium ulmi, commonly known as Dutch elm
disease;
(C) Any otherwise healthy tree, shrub, or other plant, which harbors insects or diseases which
reasonably may be expected to injure or harm any tree, shrub or other plant; and
(D) Any tree, shrub, other plant, or portion thereof, which by reason of location or condition constitutes
an imminent danger to the health, safety, or welfare of the general public. (Ord. 827, 9-5-2000)
7-7-16: INFECTED TREES PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person owning property whereon any tree or shrub such as is mentioned in
the preceding section is situated, to possess, keep or preserve such tree or shrub. (Ord. 827, 9-5-
2000)
7-7-17: NUISANCE TREE REMOVAL:
Trees growing upon public property constituting nuisances under this chapter shall be removed at the
expense of the city. (Ord. 827, 9-5-2000)
7-7-18: ENFORCEMENT:
The city council may appoint any officer or other person to carry out the intent or purpose of this
chapter, who shall act under their specific direction or as he may be instructed thereto by the mayor,
and the mayor is hereby empowered to carry out and execute the terms of this chapter, and to aid him
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 157/396
in fulfilling the same he may require members of the police department or tree commission to assist
therein. (Ord. 827, 9-5-2000)
7-7-19: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
In the enforcement of this chapter, the mayor or his representative or city employees may enter upon
private property at all reasonable hours for purposes of inspecting any trees, shrubs, weeds or plants
thereon, and may remove such specimens as are required for purposes of analysis to determine
whether or not the same are infected or noxious. (Ord. 827, 9-5-2000)
7-7-20: HINDERING ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent the mayor or his representative, or a city employee, from
entering upon private property for the purposes of performing his duties under this chapter, or to
otherwise interfere with the mayor or his representative in the lawful performance of his duties under
this chapter. (Ord. 827, 9-5-2000)
7-7-21: PENALTY:
Any person who violates, neglects or refuses to comply with, or who resists or opposes the
enforcement of any provision of this chapter, shall upon conviction thereof be fined not less than
twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each offense, and for
each subsequent offense such person shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00); and such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each
and every day during which said violation, neglect or refusal to comply with the provisions of this
chapter shall continue. (Ord. 827, 9-5-2000)
7-7-22: RESTITUTION:
Upon conviction, for the mutilation, death or removal of a tree, shrub or other plant located on city
owned property, the person convicted shall provide restitution to the city by paying to repair or replace
such tree, shrub or other plant as determined in accordance with the "Guide To The Professional
Evaluation Of Landscape Trees, Specimen Shrubs And Evergreens" as published by the International
Society of Arboriculture. (Ord. 827, 9-5-2000)
Chapter 8
CITY WATERWORKS SYSTEM
7-8-1: SERVICE CONNECTION PERMITS; CHARGES:
No connections with the waterworks system shall be made without a permit issued by the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 158/396
commissioner of public property or his authorized representative1. All such connections shall be made
by city forces under the supervision of such commissioner, and no connections shall be covered until
the work has been inspected to the satisfaction of the commissioner. Whenever any premises shall
hereafter be connected with the waterworks system, a charge of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for
residential and five hundred dollars ($500.00) for commercial shall be made. (Ord. 875, 12-17-2001)
7-8-2: APPLICATION FOR WATER SERVICE; TURN ON FEE; DEPOSIT:
(A) Application: No water from the waterworks system of the city shall be turned on for service into any
premises by any person but the superintendent of the waterworks system or some person
authorized by him to perform this service. Application to have water turned on shall be made in
writing to the superintendent of the system and shall contain an agreement by the applicant to
abide by and accept all of the provisions of this chapter as conditions governing the use and
service of the waterworks system of the city by the applicant. (Ord. 516, 4-15-1991)
(B) Turn On Fee: A fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be paid for turning on the water. The only
exception to this will be when the customer temporarily relocates to another home out of state, in
which case a twenty dollar ($20.00) fee shall be added to the bill at the time of turn on.
(C) Deposit: A deposit of seventy five dollars ($75.00) shall be made with each application, this sum to
be retained by the city to ensure payment of all bills. When service to the applicant is discontinued
permanently, this deposit, less any amount still due the city for water service, shall be refunded
without interest; provided, that where any applicant for water service is the owner of record and
occupant of the premises to be served, no such deposit shall be required. (Ord. 1258, 4-16-2012)
(D) Connections Required: The owner, occupant or party or parties in possession of any house,
structure, factory, industrial or commercial establishment or any other building or structure of any
other character which uses water and is located on property within the corporate limits of the city,
shall cause such house, structure, factory, industrial or commercial establishment or any other
building or structure of any other character to be connected with the waterworks system of the City
within ninety (90) days from the date that water facilities become available to such property.
It shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant or party or parties in possession of any house, structure,
factory, industrial or commercial establishment or any other building or structure of any other character
located on property within the City to establish or maintain a water well, as defined in 415 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 30/3, if water facilities from the waterworks system of the City are available to such
property; provided, however, that nothing contained herein shall prohibit an individual from applying,
pursuant to City ordinance 459, for a permit for a high capacity well to be used for emergency
purposes only. (Ord. 516, 4-15-1991)
7-8-3: WATER RATES:
(A) Rates Within The City Limits: The following rates and charges for the use and services of the
waterworks system of the City to persons residing within the City are hereby established, based on
the amount of water received by each premises and calculated on a monthly basis:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 159/396
For the first 100 cubic feet $16.07
For the next 1,900 cubic feet $3.32 per 100 cubic feet or fraction thereof
For all over 2,000 cubic feet $1.77 per 100 cubic feet or fraction thereof
The City Council reserves the right to make special charges for water service supplied to properties
not covered by the above rates or which, in the judgment of the City Council, should be charged
special rates. The rates established hereby shall be in effect and shown on the billings dated May 31,
2016, and each month thereafter. (Ord. 1408, 4-18-2016)
(B) Rates Outside City: All patrons and customers of the waterworks system receiving water through
meters located outside of the City, or persons residing outside the City limits, shall pay two (2)
times the rate inside the City, except and unless said patron or customer shall have used a
minimum of one million (1,000,000) cubic feet of water during a twelve (12) month period
beginning May 1 and ending April 30, of each year. Said patrons shall be subject to the same rules
and regulations herein provided, with reference to said service, unless otherwise expressly
provided. (Ord. 516, 4-15-1991)
(C) Review Of Water Rates: Water rates are levied to recover the operation, maintenance and
replacement costs incurred by the City in operating the water system. The adequacy of the water
service charge shall be reviewed, not less often than annually, by certified public accountants for
the City in their annual audit report. The water service charge shall be revised periodically to reflect
a change in local capital costs or operation, maintenance and replacement costs.
The method for computation of rates and service charges shall be made available to any user within
seven (7) days of the receipt of a written request for such. Any disagreement over the method used or
in the computations thereof shall be remedied by the City Council within thirty (30) days after
notification of a formal written appeal outlining the discrepancies. (Ord. 863, 9-17-2001)
7-8-4: METERS REQUIRED:
All premises using the City water supply must be equipped with an adequate cubic foot water meter.
All meters placed in service on any premises using the City water supply will be provided and owned
by the City Water Department which retains the right to inspect, repair and replace them upon
reasonable notice to the owner of the premises.
When a meter owned by the City is placed in service, other than as a replacement for a meter owned
by the City already in use, the property owner or other person receiving such service shall pay a fee
as herein specified. When a meter owned by the City is placed in service as a replacement for a
privately owned meter, the property owner, or other person receiving such service, will pay a fee as
herein provided, unless the privately owned meter is received in exchange by the Water Department.
Water meter fees as established by the City, based on the current cost and connection diameter, must
be paid prior to installation. (Ord. 1258, 4-16-2012)
7-8-5: REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS RELATING TO METERS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 160/396
(A) Installation: Meters shall be installed in a location that will provide easy access thereto.
(B) Reading Meters: The superintendent of the water department shall read or cause to be read every
water meter used in the city at such times as are necessary so that the bills may be sent out at the
proper times.
(C) Testing Meters: Upon request or complaint of the consumer, any water meter shall be tested for
accuracy. If, upon testing, the meter is found to be over three percent (3%) off in accuracy, the
meter shall be replaced at no cost to the consumer. If the meter is found to be three percent (3%)
or less in accuracy, then the consumer shall pay a testing fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00).
(D) Required For New Construction: Any house or building constructed within the city or constructed
outside of the city and using city water must have installed a meter that will service each individual
user located upon any new constructed property.
(E) Meters For Multiple-Family Units: Any water user located within or outside of the city which is
metered on the basis of one meter per building, but where there are more than one-family units
provided for in said building, shall pay for each additional family unit, the sum of two dollars ($2.00)
per month per additional family unit over and above the number of meters installed on said
premises. (Ord. 516, 4-15-1991)
7-8-6: PAYMENT OF RATES AND CHARGES; PROCEDURE FOR NONPAYMENT:
7-8-6-1: PREMISES CHARGED:
Charges for service shall be made and collected against each lot, parcel of land or premises to which
water is supplied by the city waterworks system. (Ord. 516, 4-15-1991)
7-8-6-2: LIABILITY FOR CHARGES:
The owner of any lot, parcel of land or premises using or receiving waterworks services of the city, the
occupant of such premises and the user of the services shall be jointly and severally liable for the
payment of charges for such use and services to such lot, parcel of land or premises, and all services
are rendered to the premises by the said city only on the condition that such owner, occupant and user
shall be jointly and severally liable therefor to the city. (Ord. 516, 4-15-1991)
7-8-6-3: RENDITION OF BILLS:
Bills for the rates and charges herein established shall be made and sent out monthly. The bills shall
be due and payable on the fifteenth day following the date of rendition. All bills shall be payable at the
office of the city collector. If any charges for the service of the system shall not be paid by the fifteenth
day following the date of rendition of the bill, a delayed payment charge of ten percent (10%) of the
amount of the bill shall be added thereto and collected therewith. (Ord. 516, 4-15-1991)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 161/396
7-8-6-4: NONPAYMENT OF BILLS; TURN ON FEE:
If any bills for the waterworks service shall remain unpaid for thirty (30) days following the rendition of
the bill therefor, the water supply for the lot, parcel of land or premises affected shall be cut off and
shall not be turned on again except on payment in full of the delinquent charges therefor, in addition to
the payment of fifty dollars ($50.00).
When waterworks services have been cut off they shall remain cut off until the next business day.
Once the water department has been dispatched to the premises, the turn on fee shall apply. (Ord.
1258, 4-16-2012)
7-8-6-5: LIEN AND FORECLOSURE FOR NONPAYMENT:
(A) Lien: Charges for water shall be a lien upon the premises as provided by statute. Whenever a bill
for water service remains unpaid thirty (30) days after it has been rendered, the city clerk may file
with the recorder of DeWitt County a statement of lien claim. This statement shall contain the legal
description of the premises served, the amount of the unpaid bill and a notice that the city claims a
lien for this amount as well as for all charges for water served subsequent to the period covered by
the bill.
If the consumer of water whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the premises, and the city clerk
has notice of this, then notice shall be mailed to the owner of the premises, if his address is known
to the city clerk, whenever such bill remains unpaid for a period of thirty (30) days after it has been
rendered.
The failure of the city clerk to record such lien claims or to mail such notice, or the failure of the
owner to receive such notice, shall not affect the right to foreclose the lien for unpaid water bills as
mentioned in the following subsection.
(B) Foreclosure Of Lien: Property subject to a lien for unpaid water charges shall be sold for
nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of such sale shall be applied to pay the charges, after
deducting costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be by bill
in equity in the name of the city.
The city attorney is hereby authorized and directed to institute such proceedings, in the name of
the city, in any court having jurisdiction over such matters, against any property for which the water
bill has remained unpaid thirty (30) days after it has been rendered. (Ord. 516, 4-15-1991)
7-8-6-6: REVENUES AND ACCOUNTS:
(A) Revenues: All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the water system shall be
deposited in the water account of the water fund. All such revenues and monies shall be held by
the city treasurer separate and apart from his private funds and separate and apart from all other
funds of the city treasurer, and shall be deposited not more than ten (10) days after receipt of the
same, or at such more frequent intervals as may from time to time be directed by the mayor and
council.
The city treasurer shall receive all such revenues from the water system and all other funds and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 162/396
monies incident to the operation of such system as the same may be delivered to the treasurer and
may direct the same in the account of the fund designated the water fund of the city of Clinton,
Illinois. Said treasurer shall administer said fund in every respect in the manner provided by the
statute of the revised cities and villages act, effective January 1942.
(B) Accounts: The city treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall keep proper
books, records, and accounts in which complete and correct entries shall be made of all
transactions relative to the water system, and at regular annual intervals the treasurer shall cause
to be made an audit by an independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and
disbursements of the water system.
In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual audit report shall also reflect the
revenues and operating expenses of the water facilities, including a replacement cost. The
financial information to be shown in the audit report shall include the following:
1. Flow data showing total gallons received at the water plant for the current fiscal year.
2. Billing data to show total number of gallons billed per fiscal year.
3. Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year.
4. Number of users connected to the system.
5. Number of nonmetered users. (Ord. 863, 9-17-2001)
7-8-7: NOTICE TO DISCONTINUE SERVICE:
Water shall be deemed to have been supplied to the waterworks system during any month unless the
water user shall have given written notice to the water department prior to the first day of the month
that service should be discontinued on or prior to the first day of such month. Upon the receipt of such
notice, water service shall be discontinued in accordance therewith and shall not be resumed until a
request for the resumption of water shall be made. (Ord. 516, 4-15-1991)
7-8-8: RIGHT OF ACCESS; USE INSPECTION:
The city and its employees shall have ready access at all reasonable times to the premises, places or
buildings where water service is supplied for the purpose of inspecting, examining and testing the
consumption, use and flow of water, and it shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, prevent or
obstruct the city or its duly authorized agent in its duties hereunder. Every user of the system shall
take the same upon the conditions prescribed in this section. (Ord. 516, 4-15-1991)
7-8-9: CITY NOT LIABLE:
(A) Service Failures: All waterworks service supplied by the waterworks system shall be upon the
express condition that the city shall not be liable, nor shall any claim be made against it, for
damages or injury caused by reason of the breaking of any main, branches, service pipes,
apparatus or appurtenances connected with said system or any part or portion thereof, or for any
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 163/396
interruption of the supply by reason of the breakage of machinery, or by reason of stoppage,
alterations, extensions or renewals.
(B) Service Interruption: The city reserves the right to shut off water at any time in the mains for the
purpose of repairing, cleaning, making connections with or extensions to same, or for the
concentrating of water in any part of the city in case of fire, and for restricting the use of water in
case of deficiency in supply, including the suspension of the use of water for sprinkling lawns or
gardens. No claim shall be made against the city by reason of the breaking of any service pipe or
service cock, or damage arising from shutting off of water for repairing, laying or relaying mains,
hydrants or other connections, or repairing any part of the water system, or from failure of the
water supply, or by increasing the water pressure at any time, or from concentrated or restricted
use of water as stated above. (Ord. 516, 4-15-1991)
7-8-10: INSTALLATION AND CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS:
7-8-10-1: WATER SERVICE INSTALLATIONS:
All service pipes and laterals from the waterworks system of the city (water mains) to the stop box
shall be installed by and at the expense of the city for a distance not to exceed two hundred feet
(200'). If such water service must cross a city or state road or alley that requires boring and casing,
the cost of such boring and/or casing shall be borne by the applicant for the service or the owner of
the property being served. All expense for more than two hundred feet (200') shall be at the cost of
and installed by the owner of the property to be served or the applicant for the service. All such water
services shall have a curb cock on the terrace with a stop box flush with the ground. (Ord. 516, 4-15-
1991)
7-8-10-2: REPAIRS TO SYSTEM:
All repairs for service pipes and laterals from the waterworks system (water main) to the stop box shall
be made by and at the expense of the city. From the stop box to the property being served, all repairs
and excavations shall be by and at the expense of the property owner. (Ord. 516, 4-15-1991)
7-8-10-3: CROSS CONNECTIONS:
(A) If in accordance with the Illinois plumbing code2 or in the judgment of the superintendent of water
distribution, an approved backflow prevention device is necessary for the safety of the public water
supply system, the superintendent of water distribution will give notice to the water customer to
install such an approved device immediately. The water customer shall, at his own expense, install
such an approved device at a location and in a manner in accordance with the Illinois plumbing
code and all applicable local regulations and shall have inspections and tests made of such
approved devices as required by the Illinois plumbing code and local regulations.
(B) No person shall establish or permit to be established or maintain or permit to be maintained any
connection whereby private, auxiliary or emergency water supply other than the regular public
water supply of the city enters the supply or distribution system of the municipality, unless such
private, auxiliary or emergency water supply and the method of connection and use of such supply
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 164/396
shall have been approved by the superintendent of water distribution and the Illinois environmental
protection agency.
(C) It shall be the duty of the superintendent of water distribution to cause surveys and investigations
to be made of industrial and other properties served by the public water supply to determine
whether actual or potential hazards to the public water supply may exist. Such surveys and
investigations shall be made a matter of public record and shall be repeated at least every two (2)
years, or as often as the superintendent of water distribution shall deem necessary. Records of
such surveys shall be maintained and available for review for a period of at least five (5) years.
(D) The approved cross connection control device inspector shall have the right to enter at any
reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water supply or distribution
system of the city for the purpose of verifying the presence or absence of cross connections, and
the water superintendent or his authorized agent shall have the right to enter at any reasonable
time any property served by a connection to the public water supply or distribution system of the
city for the purpose of verifying information submitted by the customer regarding the required cross
connection control inspection. On demand, the owner, lessees or occupants of any property so
served shall furnish to the superintendent of water distribution any information which he may
request regarding the piping system or systems of water use on such property. The refusal of such
information, when demanded, shall, within the discretion of the superintendent of water distribution,
be deemed evidence of the presence of improper connections as provided in this section.
(E) The superintendent of water distribution of the city is hereby authorized and directed to
discontinue, after reasonable notice to the occupant thereof, the water service to any property
wherein any connection in violation of the provisions of this section is known to exist, and to take
such other precautionary measures as he may deem necessary to eliminate any danger of
contamination of the public water supply distribution mains. Water service to such property shall
not be restored until such conditions have been eliminated or corrected in compliance with the
provisions of this section, and until a reconnection fee of ten dollars ($10.00) is paid to the city.
Immediate disconnection with verbal notice can be effected when the superintendent of water
distribution is assured that imminent danger of harmful contamination of the public water supply
system exists. Such action shall be followed by written notification of the cause of disconnection.
(F) The consumer responsible for backsiphoned material or contamination through backflow, if
contamination of the potable water supply system occurs through an illegal cross connection or an
improperly installed, maintained or repaired device, or a device which has been bypassed, must
bear the cost of cleanup of the potable water supply system. (Ord. 516, 4-15-1991)
7-8-10-4: WATER SERVICE PIPE:
All water services used or laid on city property or in city streets shall be of K copper construction. At
no time will plastic or galvanized pipe be used regardless of who is laying said pipe. (Ord. 516, 4-15-
1991)
7-8-10-5: COMPLIANCE WITH PLUMBING REGULATIONS:
No water shall be turned on for service in any premises in which the plumbing does not comply with
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 165/396
the ordinances of the city; provided, that water may be turned on for construction work in unfinished
buildings, subject to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 516, 4-15-1991)
7-8-10-6: EXCAVATIONS FOR CONNECTIONS:
Excavations for installing service pipes and laterals or repairing the same shall be made in compliance
with the ordinance provisions relating to making excavations in streets; provided, that it shall be
unlawful to place any service pipe in the same excavation with, or directly over, any drainpipe or sewer
lateral. (Ord. 516, 4-15-1991)
7-8-10-7: SHUTOFF BOXES:
Shutoff boxes or service boxes shall be placed on every service pipe, and shall be located between
the curb line and the sidewalk line where this is practicable. Such boxes shall be so located that they
are easily accessible and shall be protected from frost. (Ord. 516, 4-15-1991)
7-8-10-8: WATER SERVICE TO MORE THAN ONE PREMISES:
No owner or plumber shall be permitted to connect water pipes into any two (2) distinct premises or
tenements unless separate and distinct stopcocks shall be placed on the outside of each such
premises along the sidewalk opposite the same, nor shall any pipe be allowed to cross lots or
buildings to adjoining premises. Duplex flats, double houses and apartment houses shall be
considered as one "premises". A "premises" shall be construed to cover all buildings and divisions
under one common roof, owned by one party, who will be charged for all services to such premises.
(Ord. 516, 4-15-1991)
7-8-11: RESALE OF WATER; UNAUTHORIZED USE:
No water supplied by the waterworks system of the city shall be resold by any user. No water user
may supply water to other families or allow them to take it, except for use on the premises and for the
purpose specified in such user's approved application, nor after water is introduced into any building
or upon any premises shall any person make or employ any other person to make any tap or
connection with work upon the premises for alterations, repairs, extensions or attachments without
written permit therefor. Resale or unauthorized use of water shall be grounds for discontinuance of
water service to the user, or the premises, or both. (Ord. 516, 4-15-1991)
7-8-12: TAMPERING WITH SYSTEM:
It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by the city council to tamper with, alter or injure any
part of the city waterworks or supply system, or any meter. (Ord. 516, 4-15-1991)
7-8-13: PENALTY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 166/396
Any person violating this chapter shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed for each and every day during which a violation continues or exists. (Ord. 516, 4-15-1991)
7-8-14: ACCESS TO RECORDS:
The Illinois environmental protection agency or its authorized representatives shall have access to any
books, documents, papers and records of the city which are applicable to the city of user water rates
for the purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts, and transcriptions thereof to ensure
compliance with the terms of the loan agreement and rules of any state loan. (Ord. 863, 9-17-2001)
Chapter 9
SEWER USE REGULATIONS
7-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used in this chapter shall be
as follows:
CLARIFICATION OF WORD USAGE: "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissible.
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT:
Administrator: The administrator of the U.S. environmental protection agency.
Federal Act: The federal clean water act (33 USC 466 et seq.) as amended (Pub. L. 95-217).
Federal Grant: The U.S. government participation in the financing of the construction of treatment
works as provided for by title II, "Grants For Construction Of Treatment Works", of the act and
implementing regulations.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT:
Approving Authority: The commissioner of streets and public improvements.
Chapter: This chapter of this code.
City: The city of Clinton, Illinois.
NPDES PERMIT: Any permit or equivalent document or requirements issued by the administrator or,
where appropriate, by the director, after enactment of the federal clean water act to regulate the
discharge of pollutants pursuant to section 402 of the federal act.
PERSON: Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any individual, firm, company, municipal
or private corporation, association, society, institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.
SEWER TYPES AND APPURTENANCES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 167/396
Building Drain: That part of the lowest piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge
from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building
sewer or other approved point of discharge, beginning five feet (5') (1.5 meters) outside the inner face
of the building wall.
Building Sewer: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal.
Combined Sewer: A sewer which is designed and intended to receive wastewater, storm, surface
and ground water drainage.
Easement: An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.
Public Sewer: A sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the city. It shall also include
sewers within or outside the city boundaries that serve one or more persons and ultimately discharge
into the city sanitary or combined sewer system even though those sewers may not have been
constructed with city funds.
Sanitary Sewer: A sewer that conveys sewage or industrial wastes or a combination of both, and
into which storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
Sewer: A pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other waste liquids, including storm, surface
and ground water drainage.
Sewerage: The system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection, transportation and pumping
of sewage.
Storm Sewer: A sewer that carries storm, surface and ground water drainage but excludes sewage
and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water.
Storm Water Runoff: That portion of the precipitation that is drained into the sewers.
STATE GOVERNMENT:
Director: The director of the Illinois environmental protection agency.
State Act: The Illinois antipollution bond act of 19701.
State Grant: The state of Illinois participation in the financing of the construction of treatment works
as provided for by the Illinois antipollution bond act and for making such grants as filed with the
secretary of state of the state of Illinois.
TREATMENT:
Pretreatment: The treatment of wastewaters from sources before introduction into the wastewater
treatment works.
Wastewater Treatment Works: An arrangement of devices and structures for treating wastewater,
industrial wastes and sludge. Sometimes used as synonymous with "waste treatment plant" or
"wastewater treatment plant" or "pollution control plant".
TYPES OF CHARGES:
Basic User Charge: The basic assessment levied on all users of the public sewer system.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 168/396
Capital Improvement Charge: A charge levied on users to improve, extend or reconstruct the
sewage treatment works.
Debt Service Charge: The amount to be paid each billing period for payment of interest, principal
and coverage of (loan, bond, etc.) outstanding.
Local Capital Cost Charge: Charges for costs other than the operation, maintenance and
replacement costs, i.e., debt service and capital improvement costs.
Replacement: Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories or appurtenances
which are necessary during the useful life of the system to maintain the capacity and performance for
which such system was designed and constructed. The term "operation and maintenance" includes
"replacement".
Sewerage Fund: The principal accounting designation for all revenues received in the operation of
the sewerage system.
Surcharge: The assessment in addition to the basic user charge and debt service charge which is
levied on those persons whose wastes are greater in strength than the concentration values
established in subsection 7-9-5(E) of this chapter.
Useful Life: The estimated period during which the collection system will be operated.
Wastewater Service Charge: The charge per month levied on all users of the wastewater facilities.
The service charge shall be computed as outlined in subsection 7-9-8(L) of this chapter and shall
consist of the total or the basic user charge, the local capital cost and a surcharge, if applicable.
USER TYPES:
Commercial User: Includes transit lodging, retail and wholesale establishments or places engaged in
selling merchandise or rendering services.
Control Manhole: A structure located on a site from which industrial wastes are discharged. Where
feasible, the manhole shall have an interior drop. The purpose of a "control manhole" is to provide
access for the city representative to sample and/or measure discharges.
Industrial Users: Includes establishments engaged in manufacturing activities involving the
mechanical or chemical transformation of material of substance into products.
Institutional/Governmental User: Includes schools, churches, penal institutions and users associated
with federal, state and local governments.
Residential User: All dwelling units such as houses, mobile homes, apartments, permanent multifamily
dwellings.
User Class: The type of user: residential, institutional/governmental, commercial or industrial as
defined herein.
WASTEWATER AND ITS CHARACTERISTICS:
BOD (Denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical
oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty degrees
Celsius (20C), expressed in milligrams per liter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 169/396
Effluent Criteria: As defined in any applicable "NPDES permit".
Floatable Oil: Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from
wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free
of floatable fat if it is properly pretreated, and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection
system.
Garbage: Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of
food and from the handling, storage and sale of food.
Industrial Waste: Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance discharged, permitted to flow or escaping
from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial or business establishment or process, or from the
development, recovery or processing of any natural resource as distinct from sanitary sewage.
Major Contributing Industry: An industrial user of the publicly owned treatment works that:
(A) Has a flow of fifty thousand (50,000) gallons or more per average workday; or
(B) Has a flow greater than ten percent (10%) of the flow carried by the municipal system receiving
the waste; or
(C) Has in its waste a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in standards issued under section
307(a) of the federal act; or
(D) Is found by the permit issuing authority, in connection with the issuance of the NPDES permit
to the publicly owned treatment works receiving the waste, to have significant impact, either
singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on that treatment works or upon the
quality of effluent from that treatment works.
Milligrams Per Liter: A unit of the concentration of water or wastewater constituent. It is 0.001 g of
the constituent in one thousand milligrams (1,000 mg) of water. It has replaced the unit formerly used
commonly, parts per million, to which it is approximately equivalent, in reporting the results of water
and wastewater analysis.
ppm: Parts per million by weight.
pH: The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration expressed by one of
the procedures outlined in the IEPA division of laboratories manual of laboratory methods.
Properly Shredded Garbage: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that
have been shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions
normally prevailing in public sewers.
Sewage: Is used interchangeably with "wastewater".
Slug: Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which, in concentration of any given
constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes
more than five (5) times the average twenty four (24) hour concentration of flows during normal
operation.
Suspended Solids (SS): Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water,
sewage or industrial waste, and which are removable by a laboratory filtration device. Quantitative
determination of suspended solids shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in the IEPA
division of laboratories manual of laboratory methods.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 170/396
Unpolluted Water: Water quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that
would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by
discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
Wastewater: The spent water of a community. From this standpoint, of course, it may be a
combination of the liquid- and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial
plants and institutions together with any ground water, surface water and storm water that may be
present.
Water Quality Standards: Are defined in the water pollution regulations of Illinois.
WASTEWATER FACILITIES: The structures, equipment and processes required to collect, carry away
and treat domestic and industrial wastes and transport effluent to a watercourse.
WATERCOURSE AND CONNECTIONS:
Natural Outlet: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or ground
water.
Watercourse: A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. (Ord.
517, 4-15-1991)
7-9-2: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED:
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary
manner on public or private property within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city,
any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectional waste.
(B) It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the
jurisdiction of said city, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has
been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
(C) Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault,
septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
(D) The owner of all the houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment,
recreation or other purposes situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley or right of way
in which there is now located or may in the future be located any public sanitary (or combined)
sewer of the city is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to
connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter, within ninety (90) days after date of official notice to do so; provided, that said public
sewer is within two hundred feet (200') of the property line. (Ord. 517, 4-15-1991)
7-9-3: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL:
(A) Where a public sanitary (or combined) sewer is not available under the provisions of subsection 7-
9-2(D) of this chapter, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 171/396
complying with the provisions of this section. (Ord. 517, 4-15-1991)
(B) Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first
obtain a written permit signed by the commissioner of streets and public improvements. The
application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city (see section 7-9-13 of this
chapter) which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other information as
deemed necessary by the commissioner of streets and public improvements. A permit and
inspection fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for residential and five hundred dollars
($500.00) for commercial, government/institutional and industrial shall be paid to the city at the
time the application is filed. (Ord. 875, 12-17-2001)
(C) A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is
completed to the satisfaction of the commissioner of streets and public improvements. He shall be
allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the
permit shall notify the commissioner of streets and public improvements when the work is ready for
final inspection and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made
within twenty four (24) hours of the receipt of written notice by the commissioner of streets and
public improvements.
(D) The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all
recommendations of the state of Illinois private sewerage disposal licensing act and code2 and
with the state of Illinois environmental protection agency. No permit shall be issued for any private
sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is
less than four thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet for residential and two thousand five
hundred (2,500) for commercial or industrial. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to
discharge to any natural outlet.
(E) At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage
disposal system, as provided in subsection 7-9-2(D) of this chapter, a direct connection shall be
made to the public sewer in compliance with this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools and
similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material, such
material as required by the Illinois environmental protection agency.
(F) The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at
all times, and at no expense to the city.
(G) No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere with any additional
requirements that may be imposed by the Clinton public health and safety officer. (Ord. 517, 4-15-
1991)
7-9-4: BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS:
(A) No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with, or opening into, use, alter, or
disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the
city.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 172/396
(B) All disposal by any person into the sewer system is unlawful except those discharges in
compliance with federal standards promulgated pursuant to the federal act and more stringent
state and local standards.
(C) There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits:
1. For residential wastewater service, and
2. For commercial, institutional/governmental or industrial wastewater service.
In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the
city (see section 7-9-13 of this chapter).
The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information
considered pertinent in the judgment of the commissioner of streets and public improvements. A
permit and inspection fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for residential, and one hundred dollars
($100.00) minimum, plus fifty dollars ($50.00) per inch over four inches (4") for commercial or
industrial building sewer permits, shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. The
industry, as a condition of permit authorization, must provide information describing its
wastewater constituents, characteristics and type of activity. A building permit will be issued and
a sewer connection allowed if downstream sewerage facilities have sufficient capacity to
adequately handle the additional anticipated waste load. (Ord. 517, 4-15-1991)
(D) All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be
borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly
or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. When a building sewer is
installed, a cleanout pipe shall be installed at the owner's expense on the owner's property near
the property line.
(E) A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except, that
where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available
or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the
building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole
considered as one building sewer. In any case, the building sewer shall be connected directly to an
available manhole if such manhole is within one hundred fifty feet (150') of the property line. (Ord.
701, 9-2-1997)
(F) Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on
examination by the city, to meet all requirements of this chapter.
(G) The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer and the methods to be
used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform
to the requirements of this chapter.
(H) Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the
basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the
public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by a means which is
approved in accordance with subsection (B) of this section and discharged to the building sewer.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 173/396
(I) No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains
or other sources of surface runoff or ground water to a building sewer or building drain which in
turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
(J) The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the
building and plumbing code, or other applicable rules and regulation of the city, or the procedures
set forth in appropriate specifications of the "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main
Construction In Illinois". All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation
from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the commissioner of streets
and public improvements before installation.
(K) The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the commissioner of streets and public
improvements when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer.
The connection shall be made under the supervision of the commissioner of streets and public
improvements or his representative.
(L) All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and
lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public
property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city.
(Ord. 517, 4-15-1991)
(M) All repairs to the building sewer, including excavation and digging cost from the building to the
property line and including two hundred feet (200') beyond the property line shall be made by and
at the expense of the owner of the premises served. All repairs to the building sewer more than
two hundred feet (200') beyond the property line of the premises served including excavation and
digging on city property or right of way shall be made by and at the expense of the city, provided
however, the city shall not perform or be responsible for any repair work on private property
regardless of how far the building sewer extends beyond the property line of the premises served.
(Ord. 875, 12-17-2001)
7-9-5: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS; PROHIBITED DISCHARGES:
(A) No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any storm water, surface water, ground
water, roof runoff or subsurface drainage to any sanitary sewer.
(B) Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are
specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the
commissioner of streets and public improvements.
(C) No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any of the following described waters or
wastes to any public sewers:
1. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas.
2. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity,
either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 174/396
process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create any
hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
3. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other corrosive property capable
of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works.
4. Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the
flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but
not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and
paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders, in an
amount in excess of that allowed by the Clinton sanitary district or the IEPA.
(D) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances,
materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely, in the opinion of the commissioner of streets and
public improvements, that such wastes can harm the sewers, have an adverse effect on the
receiving stream or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. In
forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the commissioner of streets and public
improvements will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation
to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage
treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the
sewage treatment plant and maximum limits established by regulatory agencies. The substances
prohibited are:
1. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit
(150F) (65C).
2. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous materials; or oils, whether emulsified or not,
in excess of one hundred milligrams per liter (100 mg/l) or containing substances which may
solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty two (32) and one hundred fifty
degrees Fahrenheit (150F) (0 and 65C).
3. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded.
4. Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes or concentrated plating
solution whether neutralized or not.
5. Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc or similar objectionable or toxic
substances; or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such
material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits
established by the commissioner of streets and public improvements for such materials.
6. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor producing substances, in such
concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the commissioner of streets and
public improvements as necessary after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the
requirements of the state, federal or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to
the receiving waters.
7. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half life or concentration as may exceed limits
established by applicable state or federal regulations.
8. Any wastes or waters having a pH in excess of 9.5.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 175/396
9. Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.0005 mg/l as Hg at any time except as
permitted by applicable state regulations.
10. Any cyanide in excess of applicable state regulations.
11. Materials which exert or cause:
(a) Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, fuller's earth,
lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium
chloride and sodium sulfate).
(b) Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning
solutions).
(c) Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to
constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works.
(d) Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes constituting "slugs" as defined herein.
12. Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by
the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree
that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies having
jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
(E) If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers,
which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in subsection (D)
of this section, and/or which are in violation of the standards for pretreatment provided in 40 CFR
403, June 26, 1978, and any amendments thereto, and which, in the judgment of the
commissioner of streets and public improvements, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage
works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or
constitute a public nuisance, the commissioner of streets and public improvements may:
1. Reject the wastes;
2. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers;
3. Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
4. Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating the wastes not covered by
existing taxes or sewer charges, under the provisions of subsection (K) of this section.
If the commissioner of streets and public improvements permits the pretreatment or equalization
of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the
review and approval of the commissioner of streets and public improvements and subject to the
requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
(F) Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the commissioner of
streets and public improvements, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes
containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful
ingredients; except, that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or
dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the commissioner of
streets and public improvements, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for
cleaning and inspection.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 176/396
(G) Where preliminary treatment or flow equalizing facilities are provided, they shall be maintained
continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense.
(H) Each industry shall be required to install a control manhole and, when required by the
commissioner of streets and public improvements, the owner of any property serviced by a building
sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together with such
necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation,
sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and
safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the commissioner of
streets and public improvements. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and
shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
(I) The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall provide
laboratory measurements, tests and analyses of waters and wastes to illustrate compliance with
this chapter and any special conditions for discharge established by the city or regulatory agencies
having jurisdiction over the discharge.
The number, type and frequency of laboratory analyses to be performed by the owner shall be as
stipulated by the city, but no less than once per year the industry must supply a complete analysis
of the constituents of the wastewater discharge to assure that compliance with the federal, state
and local standards is being met. The owner shall report the results of measurements and
laboratory analyses to the city at such times and in such a manner as prescribed by the city. The
owner shall bear the expense of all measurements, analyses and reporting required by the city. At
such times as deemed necessary, the city reserves the right to take measurements and samples
for analysis by an outside laboratory service.
(J) All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which
reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of IEPA
division of laboratories manual of laboratory methods, and shall be determined at the control
manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no
special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest
downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected.
Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents
upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property. The
particular analyses involved will determine whether a twenty four (24) hour composite of all outfalls
of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but
not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from twenty four (24) hour
composites on all outfalls, whereas pHs are determined from periodic grab samples.
(K) No statement contained in this section shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or
arrangement between the city and any industrial concern, whereby an industrial waste of unusual
strength or character may be accepted by the Clinton sanitary district for treatment, subject to
payment therefor, in accordance with already established fees by the Clinton sanitary district, by
the industrial concern, provided such payments are in accordance with federal and state guidelines
for user charge system. (Ord. 517, 4-15-1991)
7-9-6: PROTECTION OF SEWAGE WORKS FROM DAMAGE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 177/396
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, wilfully or negligently break, damage, destroy or tamper with
any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating
this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct3. (Ord. 517, 4-
15-1991)
7-9-7: POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS:
(A) The commissioner of streets and public improvements and other duly authorized employees of the
city, the Illinois environmental protection agency and the U.S. environmental protection agency,
bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties for the
purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
The commissioner of streets and public improvements or his representative shall have no authority
to inquire into any processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper or other
industries, beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the
sewers or waterway or facilities for waste treatment.
(B) While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in subsection (A) of this
section, the commissioner of streets and public improvements or duly authorized employees of the
city, the Illinois environmental protection agency and the U.S. environmental protection agency
shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company, and the
company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees and the city shall
indemnify the company against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage
asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as
such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain conditions as required in
subsection 7-9-5(D) of this chapter.
(C) The commissioner of streets and public improvements and other duly authorized employees of the
city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties
through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to,
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the
sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said
easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement
pertaining to the private property involved. (Ord. 517, 4-15-1991)
7-9-8: WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGES:
(A) Basis For Wastewater Service Charges: The wastewater service charge for the use of and for
service supplied by the wastewater facilities of the city shall consist of a basic user charge, a debt
service charge and a capital improvement charge.
(B) Basic User Charge: The basic user charge is levied on all users to recover the operation,
maintenance plus replacement (OM&R) costs and shall be based on water usage as recorded by
water meters or sewage meters.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 178/396
(C) Debt Service Charge: The debt service charge is computed by apportioning the annual debt
service (as a charge per 100 cubic feet).
(D) Capital Improvement Charge: The capital improvement charge is levied on users to provide for
capital improvements, extensions or reconstruction of the sewage treatment works.
(E) Charge To Be Reviewed, Revised: The adequacy of the wastewater service charge shall be
reviewed, not less often than annually, by certified public accountants for the city in their annual
audit report. The wastewater service charge shall be revised periodically to reflect a change in
local capital costs or OM&R costs.
(F) Users Notified Of Rate: The users of the wastewater treatment services will be notified annually, in
conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate and that portion of the user charges which are attributable
to the wastewater operation, maintenance and replacement.
(G) Measurement Of Flow: The volume of flow used for computing basic user charges shall be the
metered water consumption read to the lowest even increments of one hundred (100) cubic feet.
1. If the person discharging wastes into the public sewers procures any part, or all, of his water
from sources other than the public waterworks system, all or part of which is discharged into the
public sewers, the person shall install and maintain, at his expense, water meters of a type
approved by the commissioner of streets and public improvements for the purpose of
determining the volume of water obtained from these other sources.
2. Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged may be required by the commissioner of
streets and public improvements if these volumes cannot otherwise be determined from the
metered water consumption records.
3. Metering devices for determining the volume of waste shall be installed, owned and maintained
by the person. Following approval and installation, such meters may not be removed, unless
service is cancelled, without the consent of the commissioner of streets and public
improvements. (Ord. 517, 4-15-1991)
(H) Basic User Charge: There shall be and there is hereby established a basic user charge of metered
water consumption to be applied to all users to recover OM&R costs as follows:
Rate Usage
$0.73 100 cubic feet
(I) Debt Service Charge: There shall be and there is hereby established a debt service charge to each
user of the wastewater facility as follows:
Rate Usage
$1.24 100 cubic feet
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 179/396
(J) Capital Improvement Charge: There shall be and there is hereby established a capital
improvement charge to each user of the wastewater facility as follows:
Rate Usage
$0.17 100 cubic feet
(K) Rates: A minimum charge of $2.14 per month shall be applied to all users whose water
consumption does not exceed 100 cubic feet per month. This minimum charge consists of $0.73
for OM&R costs, $1.24 for debt service costs and $0.17 for capital improvement costs. (Ord. 573,
4-27-1993)
(L) Computation Of Wastewater Service Charge: The wastewater service charge shall be computed
by the following formula:
CW
=
(Vu-X) CC + (Vu-X) CD + (Vu-X) CU + CM
Where
CW
=
Amount of wastewater service charge ($) perbilling period, based on volume
CC
=
Capital improvement charge (subsection (J) of this section)
CD
=
Debt service charge (subsection (I) of this section)
CM
=
Minimum charge for operation, maintenance and replacement (subsection (K) of
this section)
Vu =
Wastewater volume for the billing period
X =
Allowable consumption in gallons for the minimum charge (subsection (K) of this
section)
CU
=
Basic user charge for operation, maintenance and replacement (subsection (H)
of this section)
(Ord. 517, 4-15-1991)
(M) Computation Of Wastewater Service Charge Outside City Limits: The wastewater service charge
shall be computed by the following formula:
CW
=
2 ((Vu-X) CC + (Vu-X) CD + (Vu-X) CU + CM)
Where CW
=
Amount of wastewater service charge ($) per billing period, based on volume.
(Ord. 733, 5-18-1998)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 180/396
7-9-9: BILLS:
(A) Bills: Said rates or charges for service shall be payable monthly. The owner of the premises, the
occupant thereof and the user of the service shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the
service to such premises, and the service is furnished to the premises by the city only upon the
condition that the owner of the premises, occupant and user of the services are jointly and
severally liable therefor to the city.
Bills for sewer service shall be sent out monthly.
All sewer bills are due and payable fifteen (15) days after being sent out. A penalty of ten percent
(10%) shall be added to all bills not paid by the fifteenth day after they have been rendered.
(B) Delinquent Bills: If the charges for such services are not paid within thirty (30) days after the
rendition of the bill for such services, such services shall be discontinued without further notice and
shall not be reinstated until all claims are settled.
(C) Lien; Notice Of Delinquency: Whenever a bill for sewer service remains unpaid for thirty (30) days
after it has been rendered, the city attorney shall file with the county recorder of deeds a statement
of lien claim. This statement shall contain the legal description of the premises served, the amount
of the unpaid bill and a notice that the city claims a lien for this amount as well as for all charges
subsequent to the period covered by the bill.
If the user whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the premises and the city clerk has notice of this,
notice shall be mailed to the owner of the premises, if his address be known to the clerk, whenever
such bill remains unpaid for the period forty five (45) days after it has been rendered.
The failure of the city attorney to record such lien or to mail such notice or the failure of the owner
to receive such notice shall not affect the right to foreclose the lien for unpaid bills as mentioned in
subsection (D) of this section.
(D) Foreclosure Of Lien: Property subject to a lien for unpaid charges shall be sold for nonpayment of
the same, and the proceeds of the sale shall be applied to pay the charges, after deducting costs,
as is the case in the foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be by bill in equity in the
name of the city. The city attorney is hereby authorized and directed to institute such proceedings
in the name of the city in any court having jurisdiction over such matters against any property for
which the bill has remained unpaid forty five (45) days after it has been rendered.
(E) Revenues: All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the sewerage system shall be
deposited in the sewerage account of the sewerage fund. All such revenues and monies shall be
held by the city treasurer separate and apart from all other funds of the city, and all of said sum,
without any deductions whatever, shall be delivered to the city treasurer not more than ten (10)
days after receipt of the same, or at such more frequent intervals as may from time to time be
directed by the mayor and council.
The city treasurer shall receive all such revenues from the sewerage system and all other funds
and monies incident to the operation of such system as the same may be delivered to him and
deposit the same in the account of the fund designated as the "sewerage fund of the city of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 181/396
Clinton". Said treasurer shall administer such fund in every respect in the manner provided by
statute of the "revised cities and villages act", effective January 1942.
(F) Accounts: The city treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall keep proper
books, records and accounts in which complete and correct entries shall be made of all
transactions relative to the sewerage system, and at regular annual intervals shall cause to be
made an audit by an independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and
disbursements of the sewerage system.
In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual audit report shall also reflect the
revenues and operating expenses of the wastewater facilities, including a replacement cost, to
indicate that sewer service charges under the waste cost recovery system do in fact meet these
regulations. In this regard, the financial information to be shown in the audit report shall include the
following:
1. Billing data to show total number of cubic feet billed per fiscal year.
2. Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year.
3. Number of users connected to the system.
(G) Penalty: Any person violating any provisions of this section shall be fined not less than twenty five
dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense.
(H) Access To Records: The IEPA or its authorized representative shall have access to any books,
documents, papers and records of the city which are applicable to the city system of user charges
for the purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts and transcriptions thereof to ensure
compliance with the terms of the special and general conditions to any state or federal grant. (Ord.
517, 4-15-1991)
7-9-10: EFFECTIVE DATE OF RATES:
The rates and service charges established for user charges in section 7-9-8 of this chapter shall be in
effect and shown on the billings dated May 28, 1993, and each month thereafter. (Ord. 573, 4-27-
1993)
7-9-11: VALIDITY:
If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this chapter shall be held to be invalid or
unenforceable for any reason, the invalidity or unenforceability of such section, paragraph, clause or
provision shall not affect any of the remaining provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 517, 4-15-1991)
7-9-12: APPEALS:
The method for computation of rates and service charges established for user charges in section 7-9-
8 of this chapter shall be made available to a user within seven (7) days of receipt of a written request
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 182/396
for such. Any disagreement over the method used or in the computations thereof shall be remedied by
the city council within fourteen (14) days after notification of a formal written appeal outlining the
discrepancies. (Ord. 517, 4-15-1991)
7-9-13: APPLICATION FORMS:
The following forms shall be used with regard to sewer permits outlined in this chapter.
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING SEWER APPLICATION
To the City of Clinton:
A. THE UNDERSIGNED, being the
(Owner)
property located at
(Number Street)
DOES HEREBY REQUEST a permit to install and connect a building to serve the
(Residence)
at said location.
1. The following indicated fixtures will be connected to the proposed building sewer:
Number
Fixtures
Kitchen Sinks
Number
Fixtures
Water Closets
Lavatories Bathtubs
Laundry tubs Showers
Urinals Garbage grinders
Specify other fixtures .
2. The maximum number of persons who will use the above fixtures is/are .
3. The name and address of the person or firm who will perform the proposed work is .
4. Plans and specifications for the proposed building sewer are attached hereunto as Exhibit "A".
B. In consideration of the granting of this permit, THE UNDERSIGNED AGREES:
1. To accept and abide by all provisions of the City Code of the City of Clinton, and of all other
pertinent ordinances or regulations that may be adopted in the future.
2. To maintain the building sewer at no expense to the City of Clinton.
3. To notify the commissioner of streets and public improvements when the building sewer is ready
for inspection and connection to the public sewer, but before any portion of the work is covered.
DATE: SIGNED:
(Applicant)
Address of Applicant
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 183/396
Certification by City Clerk
$ connection fee paid.
$ inspection fee paid.
Application approved and permit issued:
DATE: SIGNED:
Commissioner, Streets
and Public Improvements
PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL APPLICATION
To the City of Clinton:
A. THE UNDERSIGNED, being the
(Owner)
of the property located at
Number Street
DOES HEREBY REQUEST a permit to install sanitary sewage disposal facilities to serve the
(Residence, Commercial Building)
at said location.
1. The proposed facilities include:
to be constructed in complete accordance with the plans and specifications attached hereunto
as Exhibit "A".
2. The area of the property is square feet (or square meters).
3. The name and address of the person to be served by the proposed facilities is: .
4. The maximum number of persons to be served by the proposed facilities is: .
5. The locations and nature of all sources of private or public water supply within the one hundred
(100) feet (30.5 meters) of any boundary of said property are shown on the plat attached
hereunto as Exhibit "B".
B. In consideration of the granting of this permit, THE UNDERSIGNED AGREES:
1. To furnish any additional information relating to the proposed work that shall be requested by the
Commissioner of Streets and Public Improvements.
2. To accept and abide by all provisions of the City Code, of the City of Clinton, and of all other
pertinent ordinances or regulations that may be adopted in the future.
3. To operate and maintain the wastewater disposal facilities covered by this application in a
sanitary manner at all times, in compliance with all requirements of the City of Clinton and at no
expense to the City of Clinton.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 184/396
4. To notify the Commissioner of Streets and Public Improvements at least twenty four (24) hours
prior to commencement of the work proposed, and again at least twenty four (24) hours prior to
the covering of any underground portions of the installation.
DATE: SIGNED:
Address of Applicant
$ inspection fee paid.
Certification by City Clerk
Application approved and permit issued:
DATE: SIGNED:
Commissioner of Streets
and Public Improvements
COMMERCIAL, INSTITUTIONAL/GOVERNMENTAL,
AND INDUSTRIAL SEWER CONNECTION APPLICATION
To the City of Clinton:
A. THE UNDERSIGNED, being the
(Owner, Lessee, Tenant, etc.)
of the property located at
DOES HEREBY REQUEST a permit to
(Install, Use)
industrial sewer connection serving the
(Name of Company)
which company is engaged in at said location.
1. A plat of the property showing accurately all sewers and drains now existing is attached
hereunto as Exhibit "A".
2. Plans and specifications covering any work proposed to be performed under this permit is
attached hereunto as Exhibit "B".
3. A complete schedule of all process waters and industrial wastes produced or expected to be
produced at said property, including a description of the character of each waste, the daily
volume and maximum rates of discharge, and representative analyses, is attached hereunto as
Exhibit "C".
4. The name and address of the person or firm who will perform the work covered by this permit is
.
B. In consideration of the granting of this permit THE UNDERSIGNED AGREES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 185/396
1. To furnish any additional information relating to the installation or use of the industrial sewer for
which this permit is sought as may be adopted in the future.
2. To operate and maintain a control manhole and any waste pretreatment facilities, as may be
required as a condition of the acceptance into the public sewer of the industrial wastes involved,
in an efficient manner at all times, and at no expense to the City of Clinton.
3. To cooperate at all times with the Commissioner of Streets and Public Improvements and his
representative in their inspecting, sampling, and study of the industrial wastes, and any facilities
provided for pretreatment.
4. To notify the Commissioner of Streets and Public Improvements immediately in event of any
accident, negligence, or other occurrence that occasions discharge to the public sewers of any
wastes or process waters not covered by this permit.
DATE: SIGNED:
Applicant
Address of Applicant
Certification by City Clerk
$ connection fee paid.
$ inspection fee paid.
Application approved and permit granted:
DATE: SIGNED:
Commissioner of Streets
and Public Improvements
(Ord. 517, 4-15-1991)
Footnote 1: 30 ILCS 405/1 et seq.
Footnote 2: 225 ILCS 225/1 et seq.
Footnote 3: See section 5-2-4 of this code.
Title 8
FIRE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL FIRE PREVENTION REGULATIONS
8-1-1: PUBLIC GATHERINGS:
8-1-1-1: REGULATIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 186/396
It shall be unlawful to hold, manage and conduct any meeting or entertainment of any kind in the city
in any premises other than a building constructed in full compliance with the city ordinances and laws
pertaining thereto for auditorium, theater or lodge room purposes. (1968 Code, sec. 50-101)
8-1-1-2: INSPECTIONS:
No such gatherings or entertainment shall be held or presented in any premises other than a building
as described in the preceding section, unless such premises have been examined by the fire chief or
building inspector not more than three (3) days before the date of such gathering and found to be free
from any fire hazard and found to be suitable for the purpose. No structure enclosed by a roof shall be
used for such purpose unless the same is constructed of nonflammable materials. Provided, that tents
or structures covered by canvas or similar material may be so used if such canvas or other material
has been properly treated so as to be rendered fire resistive. (1968 Code, sec. 50-102)
8-1-1-3: NOTICE FOR INSPECTION:
It shall be the duty of any person conducting, calling for or managing any gathering in any premises
other than a theater, lodge room or auditorium building constructed as provided in section 8-1-1-1 of
this chapter, to notify the city clerk of the date of such intended use at least ten (10) days before such
meeting is to take place; upon such notice the fire chief or the building inspector shall inspect the
premises to determine whether or not they comply with the provisions hereof. Any permit issued for
any such gathering shall be subject to the condition that this section be fully complied with, whether or
not such condition is embodied in the permit. (1968 Code, sec. 50-106)
8-1-1-4: CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS:
(A) Exits: Adequate unobstructed exits shall be provided in all premises used for such purposes to
permit rapid egress of all persons attending, and there shall be at least two (2) separate exits
located at least thirty feet (30') apart. There shall be two (2) linear feet of doorway or exit space for
each one hundred (100) people accommodated. (1968 Code, sec. 50-103)
(B) Seats: Any stands or rows of seats used in such premises shall be so constructed as to be safe for
the use designed, and shall be sufficiently strong to carry the same weight and stress as is
required for the construction of the auditorium floors of theater buildings, not less than one hundred
(100) pounds per square foot. (1968 Code, sec. 50-104)
(C) Doors: All doors or gates or exits from premises used for such purposes shall open outward, and
no such exit shall be so constructed or locked that egress from inside the premises is blocked.
(1968 Code, sec. 50-105)
8-1-1-5: CAPACITY REQUIREMENTS OBEYED:
It shall be unlawful to admit to any such premises a number of persons to exceed the number of actual
seats maintained for their accommodation. (1968 Code, sec. 50-104)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 187/396
8-1-1-6: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this section 8-1-1 shall be fined as provided in section 1-4-1 of
this code. (1968 Code, sec. 50-107)
8-1-2: PUBLIC BUILDINGS:
8-1-2-1: RESPONSIBILITY AND ENFORCEMENT:
The owner, agent, occupant or person charged with the custody of any public building, auditorium,
hotel, theater, lodge hall or church, and in the case of a school, the president of the board of education
or the person in charge thereof and owning the same, shall be held liable for the equipment and
maintenance of such apparatus as is required in this section for the maintenance and safety of all
exits, stairs, doors, windows or passageways. (1968 Code, sec. 51-101)
It shall be the duty of the fire chief or his assistants to inspect all apparatus to be installed, and their
location, and to make or cause to be made periodic inspections concerning the operation and
accessibility of regular and emergency exits in all such public places. (1968 Code, sec. 51-102)
8-1-2-2: LOCATION AND NUMBER OF FIRE PREVENTION APPLIANCES:
The location and number of the fire appliances shall be as follows (unless other location shall be more
accessible and convenient for protection against fires):
(A) Foyer: Two (2) one-quart chemical hand extinguishers, one at each end.
(B) Manager's office: One 2-gallon chemical hand extinguisher or five (5) gallon hand pump.
(C) Public buildings, auditoriums, lodge halls and hotels: Five (5) gallon hand pump and fire axe at or
near the main entrance on the ground floor; five (5) gallon hand pump at or near the foot of all
basement stairways; two (2) pails in boiler room unless oil burner is used, then two and one-half
(21/2) gallon special chemical hand extinguisher just outside boiler room door; one-quart chemical
hand extinguisher on stage, and one-quart chemical hand extinguisher in lobby.
(D) Churches: One 5-gallon hand pump and fire axe at or near the main entrance on the ground floor;
same at the head of each stairway; and same in boiler room. (1968 Code, sec. 51-103)
It shall be unlawful to remove from its proper place any fire apparatus or appliances except for
inspection or in case of emergency. (1968 Code, sec. 51-105)
8-1-2-3: FIRE DRILLS:
It shall be the duty of the principal or person in charge of the pupils in every school in the city to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 188/396
establish and maintain a good and efficient fire drill which shall be practiced at least twice a month
during the time the building is used for school purposes. A written report shall be made by the
principal or person in charge of such building of each fire drill held, and of the time elapsed from the
first signal until the last person was out. (1968 Code, sec. 51-104)
8-1-2-4: DOORS:
All public buildings which may be or are used for church, school, opera performance, theater, lecture
room, hotel, public meeting or similar purposes, or which may be of or are used for the collection of
people for worship, amusement or instruction, and all buildings used for stores to which the public is
invited, shall be so built that all doors leading from the main hall or place of assembly shall open
outward; and all means of egress for persons within such buildings shall be by means of a door which
shall open outwards from the main hall and from the building. (1968 Code, sec. 51-106)
8-1-2-5: EXIT LIGHTS:
In all theaters and public meeting halls a red light illuminating the word "exit" shall be kept burning
over each regular and emergency exit while the theater or hall is occupied by an audience or by
patrons1. (1968 Code, sec. 51-107)
8-1-2-6: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provisions of this section 8-1-2 shall be fined as provided in section 1-4-1 of
this code. (1968 Code, sec. 51-108)
8-1-3: COMBUSTIBLE REFUSE; STORAGE RESTRICTIONS:
It shall be unlawful to permit or store any combustible refuse in such a way as to create a fire hazard,
or to store or throw away any refuse of any kind in any alley, street or other public place in the city.
(1968 Code, sec. 56-118)
8-1-4: FIRES REGULATED:
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to build or light any fire in connection with or in relation to the
demolition of any building or other structure. (Ord. 320, 8-6-1984)
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person to burn any trash, rubbish or kitchen or household garbage,
lumber, grass clippings, leaves, and brush out of doors anywhere in the city of Clinton. Nothing
contained herein shall prohibit the city, through its employees, from burning leaves and brush at
any time after a storm event. (Ord. 1098, 12-3-2007)
(C) It shall be unlawful to build or light any bonfire or fire close to any building or other structure so as
to endanger such building or structure or on any street or sidewalk pavement. For purposes of this
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 189/396
subsection, any bonfire or fire closer than ten feet (10') to any building or structure shall be
deemed to endanger said building or structure. (Ord. 791, 9-20-1999)
(D) For purposes of this subsection, the term "kitchen and household garbage" is defined in section 3-
6-1 of this code. The terms "rubbish" and "trash" are defined as refuse accumulations of paper,
excelsior, rags or wooden or paper boxes or containers, sweepings and all other accumulations of
a nature other than garbage which are usual to housekeeping and to the operation of stores,
offices and other business places including such garden trash as is capable of deposit in a trash
container. (Ord. 320, 8-6-1984)
(E) This section shall not prohibit the use of an outdoor fire for cooking or for recreation; provided,
however, it shall be unlawful to build or light any outdoor fire for cooking or recreation on any street
or sidewalk pavement. It is further provided that no outdoor fire for cooking or recreation shall be
started or permitted to burn or smolder after eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. (Ord. 320, 8-6-1984; amd.
Ord. 661, 8-19-1996)
(F) Any person violating any provision of this section shall be fined twenty five dollars ($25.00) per
occurrence. (Ord. 791, 9-20-1999)
8-1-5: FALSE ALARMS RESULTING FROM AUTOMATIC FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS:
(A) Definitions:
AUTOMATIC FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS: Any signaling device which is electronically operated and
which automatically sends visual and audible signals over a signal line to be registered by
indicators at a monitoring panel in a receiving terminal at the fire department of the city.
AUTOMATIC FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS; FALSE ALARMS: The activation of an automatic fire alarm
system through mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation or the negligence of the
owner or lessee of an automatic fire alarm system, or of his agents or employees. Automatic fire
alarm system false alarm, does not include alarm signals activated by violent conditions of nature,
telephone line interruptions, acts of God or other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably
subject to the control by the owner or lessee of an automatic fire alarm system.
(B) Automatic Fire Alarm System; False Alarm Service Charge: Any owner or lessee of an automatic
fire alarm system shall be charged a service charge of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for each
automatic fire alarm system false alarm in excess of one in any one 6-month period. (Ord. 565, 3-
15-1993)
Chapter 2
FIREWORKS AND EXPLOSIVES
8-2-1: FIREWORKS:
It shall be unlawful to sell, store, discharge or set off any fireworks or to give any pyrotechnic display in
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 190/396
the city, except in connection with public exhibitions as is herein provided.
No public exhibition of fireworks or pyrotechnics shall be given unless a permit therefor is first secured
from the mayor and city council. All such public display shall be under the supervision of a competent
person, and shall be supervised by the chief of the fire department or some member of the fire
department assigned to this duty by him.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale or keep for the purpose of selling any fireworks
in the city at any time. (1968 Code, sec. 49-101)
8-2-2: EXPLOSIVES:
It shall be unlawful to keep or store any nitroglycerine or the explosive commonly known as TNT in the
city in any quantities, excepting for medicinal or laboratory purpose and for such purposes no more
than one-fourth (1/4) ounce shall be stored in any one building or premises. (1968 Code, sec. 49-102)
8-2-3: STORAGE RULES:
All explosives must be stored or kept in accordance with the rules of the state fire marshal, subject to
the provisions of this chapter. (1968 Code, sec. 49-103)
8-2-4: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined as provided in section 1-4-1 of this
code. (1968 Code, sec. 49-104)
Title 9
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL SUBDIVISION PROVISIONS
9-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known and referred to as the CITY OF CLINTON, ILLINOIS, SUBDIVISION
REGULATION ORDINANCE. (Ord. 869, 11-5-2001)
9-1-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose and intent for the adoption of the provisions of this title are as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 191/396
(A) To provide minimum standards of design for the development of subdivisions for a desired living
environment and orderly growth of the community.
(B) To coordinate subdivision development with consideration given to the comprehensive plan
prepared for the city, the orderly extension of utilities, the present and future needs of the
community for public land for streets, alleys, parks, schools and other public use, the extension of
police and fire protection, and the promotion of favorable conditions to ensure the health, safety
and general welfare of persons living within the territory governed by this title.
(C) To outline procedures required of all developers, their responsibility to meet or exceed defined
minimum standards, and promote a favorable working relationship between the city and the
developer to safeguard the interest of the homeowner, subdivider, investor and the city.
(D) To establish standards for monumenting and platting to clearly delineate the limits of each and
every lot, permanent easement and lands dedicated for public use. (Ord. 869, 11-5-2001)
9-1-3: JURISDICTION:
Wherever any subdivision of land shall hereafter be laid out within the incorporated limits of the city, or
anywhere within contiguous territory not more than one and one-half (11/2) miles beyond the
incorporated limits of the city, the subdivider thereof or his agent shall submit the preliminary plan, final
subdivision plat and improvement plans to the planning commission. Said plat and plans and all
procedures relating thereto, shall in all respects be in full compliance with the requirements contained
in this title. (Ord. 869, 11-5-2001)
9-1-4: APPROVAL AND EXCEPTIONS:
(A) No land shall, after the adoption of these regulations, be subdivided or filed for record, nor any
street laid out, nor any improvements made to the land, until the plan or plans of the subdivision
shall have been certified to and approved by action of the city council, in accordance with the
procedure provided in this title; and no plat of a subdivision shall be approved without compliance
with the standards of design and required improvements provided in this title. This approval must
be in writing and placed on the plat and plans according to the procedures outlined herein.
(B) No lot, tract, or parcel of land within any such subdivision shall be offered for sale, contract for
sale, or option be made or given until such subdivision plans and plat have been properly reviewed
by the city and officially approved by the city council.
(C) No improvements, such as sidewalks, water supply, storm water drainage, sewerage facilities, gas
service, electric service or lighting, or grading, paving or surfacing of streets, shall hereafter be
made within any such subdivision by any owner or owners, or his or their agents, or by any public
service corporation at the request of such owner or owners, or his or their agents until the plans for
the subdivision and plans for improvements thereto have been formally approved by the city
council.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 192/396
(D) No plat will be approved for a subdivision which is subject to periodic flooding, or which contains
poor drainage facilities and which would make adequate drainage of lots and streets impossible.
However, if the subdivider agrees to make improvements which will, in the opinion of the
superintendent of public works, make the area safe for residential occupancy, provide adequate lot
and street drainage and not create adverse drainage conditions upstream or downstream, the
preliminary plan of the subdivision may be approved.
(E) All land offered to the city for use as streets, alleys, schools, parks and other public use shall be
referred to the planning commission for review and recommendation before being accepted by the
city council or by any other governing authority of the city.
(F) In all subdivision development, due regard shall be given to the preservation of historical sites and
natural features such as large trees, watercourses and scenic views.
(G) Whenever an area is subdivided into large lots which may at a later date be resubdivided,
consideration shall be given to the street and lot arrangement of the original subdivision so that
additional streets can be located to permit a logical arrangement of smaller lots.
(H) When preliminary plans for part of a tract or ownership is submitted for review and approval, the
planning commission or city council may require the owner to prepare at least a street plan of his
or their entire tract based upon proper topographic surveys before approval of any portion of such
tract.
(I) The city council may vary and make exceptions, as set forth herein, in instances where there is
sufficient evidence, in its opinion, of hardship caused by topographic conditions, or where any
other reasonable deterrents prevail. (Ord. 869, 11-5-2001)
9-1-5: INTERPRETATION:
(A) The provisions of this title shall be interpreted as minimum requirements.
(B) Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this title upon the use or development of the
land are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other
provision of this title or of any other official policy, law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of
any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive, or which impose higher standards or
requirements, shall govern.
(C) This title is not intended to abolish any easement, covenant, or any other private agreement;
provided, that where the regulations of this title are more restrictive or impose higher standards or
requirements than such easements, covenants, or other private agreements, then the
requirements of this title shall govern.
(D) If any chapter, section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this title is for any
reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 193/396
deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions of this title. (Ord. 869, 11-5-2001)
9-1-6: ENFORCING OFFICER:
The provisions of this title shall be administered by the planning commission acting in lieu of the city
council except as specifically provided in this title. The superintendent of public works is hereby
designated and authorized to enforce the provisions of this title under the direction of the planning
commission. (Ord. 869, 11-5-2001)
9-1-7: FEES:
In order to cover the costs of examining plans, and other expenses incidental to the approval of a
subdivision, the subdivider shall pay the following fees:
$25.00, plus $5.00 per lot, for review and approval of minor subdivision.
$25.00, plus $5.00 per lot, for review and approval of preliminary plan.
$25.00, plus $5.00 per lot, for review and approval of final plat.
(Ord. 869, 11-5-2001)
9-1-8: BUILDING PERMIT ISSUANCE, APPROVAL OF PLANS:
No building permit shall be issued providing for the improvement of any lot in a subdivision until the
final plat of subdivision and the plans and specifications for the public improvements have been
approved by the city council. (Ord. 869, 11-5-2001)
9-1-9: OCCUPANCY; UTILITY FACILITIES AND ROADWAYS REQUIRED:
Occupancy of any structure within any subdivision approved for platting or replatting will not be
allowed until required utility facilities have been installed and made ready to service the property, and
that roadways providing access to the subject lot or lots have been constructed. (Ord. 869, 11-5-2001)
9-1-10: ANNEXATION OF LANDS REQUIRED:
(A) All land included in a major subdivision, contiguous to the corporate boundary of the city, shall be
annexed to the city prior to approval of the final plat by the city council, unless otherwise directed
by the city council.
(B) Land being transferred by subdivision, classified as a minor subdivision, contiguous to the
corporate boundary of the city, shall be annexed to the city within sixty (60) days after approval is
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 194/396
granted for acceptance as a minor subdivision, unless otherwise directed by the city council. (Ord.
869, 11-5-2001)
9-1-11: VARIATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS:
(A) If the city council finds that because of unique conditions or because it is unlikely that the property
to be subdivided will be annexed to the city of Clinton within five (5) years or the suitability of public
utilities will not be available to the property within five (5) years, the city council may authorize
variation from the provisions of these regulations and allow the subdivision to fall under county
jurisdiction for development.
(B) In any instance where the city has granted approval of a preliminary plat of subdivision design or
subdivision improvements as shown on said preliminary plat are less restrictive than the
requirements of this title, the subdivider may apply in writing to the city council for permission to
proceed with subdivision as originally planned. The city council, upon review of the preliminary plat
as originally submitted, may then grant such permission. (Ord. 869, 11-5-2001)
9-1-12: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this title, the following words, terms, phrases and their derivations shall have the
meanings given in this section. The word "shall" is always mandatory and the word "may" is
permissive.
ALLEY: A public way along the side of or in the rear of properties intended to provide secondary
access to these properties.
BLOCK: The distance as measured along a street between intersecting streets from centerline to
centerline; and, where the context requires, it also means the enclosed area within the perimeter of
the streets or property lines enclosing it.
BUILDING LINE: A line within a lot so designated on the plat of the subdivision, between which line
and any street line upon which the lot abuts, the erection of a building is prohibited.
CERTIFICATE OF REVIEW: An official letter of notification written by the director of the planning
commission to the subdivider advising him of the review, approval or disapproval, with a statement of
deficiencies, if disapproved.
CIRCULATION PLAN: That portion of the comprehensive city plan providing and planning for the
present and future street and road system for the city.
COLLECTOR STREET: A street that serves as a connection between a thoroughfare and several
minor residential, industrial or commercial streets. The term includes the principal entrance streets of
a residential development and principal circulating streets within such development.
CROSSWALKWAY: A strip of land dedicated to public use, which is reserved across a block to
provide pedestrian access to adjacent areas.
CUL-DE-SAC: A street having one open end and being permanently terminated by a vehicular
turnaround.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 195/396
DOUBLE FRONTAGE: A lot which has a pair of opposite lot lines along two (2) substantially parallel
streets.
DRAINAGE COURSE: A natural or manmade watercourse for the drainage of surface waters.
EASEMENT: A grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of land by the general public, a
corporation, or a certain person or persons, for a specific purpose or purposes.
FINAL PLAT: The plat of a subdivision to be recorded in the DeWitt County recorder's office after the
procedures and requirements of this title have been met and the plat is approved by the city council.
HALF STREET: A street bordering one or more property lines of a tract of land in which the subdivider
has allocated only part of the ultimate right of way width.
IMPROVEMENTS: Those public improvements including site grading, streets, drainage, sanitary
sewers, water facilities, and sidewalks, and other required utilities to fully serve the proposed
subdivision.
LOT: A building site shown on a plat of subdivision as a numbered, identifiable tract to be offered as a
unit for sale or transfer of ownership, or for building development.
MAJOR STREET: A street designed to serve as a major traffic artery for movement of vehicles
through the city or between various parts of the city.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET: A street which is parallel and adjacent to a major street or highway,
and which provides access from the major street or highway to abutting properties and protection from
through traffic.
MINOR OR LOCAL STREET: A street intended primarily as access to abutting properties.
OFFICIAL PLAN: The composite of the functional and geographic elements of the comprehensive city
plan, or any segment thereof.
OWNER: Any individual, firm, association, partnership, trust, corporation or any other legal entity
having sufficient proprietary interest in land sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain
proceedings to subdivide the same under this title.
PARCEL: Refers broadly to a lot, trust or any other piece of land.
PLANNING COMMISSION: The planning commission of the city.
PREAPPLICATION CONFERENCE: A meeting between the subdivider and the planning
commission's staff and, when advisable, appropriate municipal officials and superintendent of public
works prior to subdividing.
PRELIMINARY PLAN: A tentative map, drawing or chart of a proposed subdivision or greater area
prepared in the manner and containing the data, documents and information required of this title for
preliminary review and preliminary approval by the planning commission and city council.
PRIVATE STREET: An undedicated street which is privately owned and maintained.
PROTECTIVE COVENANTS: Contracts entered into between private parties that constitute a
restriction on the use of all private property within a subdivision for the benefit of property owners, and
to provide mutual protection against undesirable aspects of development which would tend to impair
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 196/396
stability of values.
PUBLIC STREET: A street dedicated for public use.
RECORDER: The recorder of deeds of DeWitt County.
RESERVE STRIP: A tract of land intended to prohibit the use of a public right of way or access to a
public right of way by owners of adjacent properties. Reserve strips are not allowed under this title.
ROADWAY OR ROAD: Wherever the words "road" or "roadway" are used in this title, it shall be
deemed the paved area existing in the street right of way and not the street right of way width.
SUBDIVIDER: Any individual firm, association, partnership, trust, corporation or any other entity
commencing proceedings under this title for the subdivision of land for himself or for another.
SUBDIVISION: The division of land in two (2) or more parcels for the purpose, whether immediate or
future, of transfer of ownership or building development, including all public streets, alleys, easements
for public service facilities, parks, playgrounds, school grounds or other public grounds.
(A) The division of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of five (5) acres or more in size which
does not involve any new streets or easements of access;
(B) The conveyance of parcels of land or interests therein for use as right of way for railroads or
other public utility facilities which does not involve any new streets or easements of access;
(C) The conveyance of land owned by a railroad or other public utility which does not involve any
new streets or easements of access;
(D) The conveyance of land for highway or other public purposes or grants or conveyances relating
to the dedication of land for public use or instruments relating to the vacation of land impressed
with a public use;
(E) Conveyances made to correct descriptions in prior conveyances;
(F) The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining and contiguous land.
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR: Any subdivision that does not meet the requirements of a minor subdivision.
SUBDIVISION, MINOR: A proposed subdivision of land is a minor subdivision if the proposed division
of a parcel of land is along an existing public street; does not involve the opening, widening, or
extension of any street or road.
SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS: Shall be as defined in section 1-11-8 of this code. In the
absence of the superintendent of public works, the superintendent's duties shall be performed by the
administrative assistant in charge of infrastructure. (Ord. 869, 11-5-2001)
Chapter 2
MINOR AND MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS
9-2-1: MINOR SUBDIVISION, GENERAL PROCEDURE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 197/396
(A) The planning commission shall review minor subdivisions as defined in section 9-1-12 of this title,
and make recommendation to the city council for final approval or disapproval of the subdivision as
a minor subdivision and the conveyance of a parcel or parcels of land in the minor subdivision for
transfer without compliance with the requirement of a major subdivision under this title.
(B) Any person proposing to create a minor subdivision shall submit the following to the planning
commission:
1. A legal description of the parcel or parcels sought to be transferred, on a conveyance of said
parcel or parcels.
2. Two (2) copies of a private survey plat by a registered Illinois land surveyor of the parcel or
parcels sought to be transferred. The plat shall include the following:
(a) Show entire ownership including boundary dimensions and total acreage.
(b) Show streets (include names and right of way widths).
(c) Show boundary of part of ownership to be transferred with dimensions, angles or bearings,
acreage and monuments established.
(d) Description of monuments.
(e) North arrow.
(f) Names of adjoining owners.
(g) Acreages carried to three (3) decimal places.
(h) Linear measurements to one one-hundredth of a foot (1/100').
(i) Error of closure shall not exceed one five-thousandth (1/5,000).
(j) Sheet size of eight and one-half inches by fourteen inches (81/2" x 14") or multiple thereof.
(k) Drawing shall be on Mylar or linen.
(l) Surveyor's name, registration number and seal.
(m) Date, scale and name of owner.
(n) A statement by the zoning enforcement officer or his agent, that the parcel or parcels of land
created comply with existing city zoning regulations.
(o) Recommendation by the city zoning officer for approval of transfer in one of the following
forms:
(1) Approved for building sites, individual sewage systems have been approved; or
(2) Approved for transfer, no building site approval granted.
3. Minor subdivision fees are twenty five dollars ($25.00), plus five dollars ($5.00) per lot.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 198/396
4. Within thirty (30) days after submission of a minor subdivision or within a mutually agreed upon
extension, the city council shall approve or disapprove the application for transfer without
compliance with the requirements of a major subdivision under this title.
5. If the city council does not approve the transfer without plat, the applicant shall be notified in
writing of the reason for disapproval. If the city council approves the transfer without plat, the
conveyance shall be stamped "Approved by City of Clinton, no plat required", and the signature
of the mayor affixed with the date of such approval. The approval shall expire within sixty (60)
days, unless the conveyances are recorded in the office of the county recorder during such
period. (Ord. 869, 11-5-2001)
9-2-2: MAJOR SUBDIVISION, GENERAL PROCEDURE:
Major subdivisions shall be approved in four (4) stages: preapplication meeting stage, preliminary plan
stage, improvement plans and the final plat stage.
(A) The preapplication conference stage provides the subdivider the opportunity to discuss the
proposed subdivision with the appropriate agencies so that he can become familiar with
subdivision requirements, existing conditions, and future plans.
(B) The preliminary planning stage requires the subdivider to present all information needed to enable
the commission to determine that the proposed layout is satisfactory and will serve the public
interest. This stage also ensures that the subdivider will not be required to expend excessive
monies without some assurance that his plat will be finally approved.
(C) The improvement plan stage requires the subdivider to present all the information needed to
enable the superintendent of public works to check the drainage areas and to determine that the
storm sewers, sanitary sewers, water lines, and material proposed for street construction meets
the requirements of these regulations and the specifications of the superintendent of public works.
(D) The final planning stage requires the subdivider to present a complete survey plat to enable the
commission to determine that the subdivision fully complies with these regulations and conforms to
the approved preliminary plan. (Ord. 869, 11-5-2001)
Chapter 3
APPROVAL PROCEDURE
9-3-1: PREAPPLICATION CONFERENCE PROCEDURE:
(A) Preapplication Conference: Prior to the filing of an application for approval of the preliminary plan,
the subdivider may request a conference with the planning commission staff for preliminary
discussion of the proposed subdivision. This step does not require formal application, fee, or filing
of the plat.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 199/396
(B) Purpose: The purpose of the preapplication conference is to afford the subdivider an opportunity to
avail himself of the advice and assistance of the planning commission and to consult early and
informally with the planning commission staff before preparation of the preliminary plan and before
formal application for its approval to save time and money, and to make the most of his
opportunities.
(C) Consultation: The subdivider may also consult with the superintendent of public works and the city
zoning officer, and avail himself of the advice and assistance of these offices.
(D) Conference Recommended, But Not Mandatory: The preapplication conference is recommended
but is not a mandatory requirement of the subdivider. (Ord. 869, 11-5-2001)
9-3-2: PRELIMINARY PLAN PROCEDURE:
(A) The subdivider shall cause to be prepared a preliminary plan, together with supplementary
material as specified in this title.
(B) The subdivider shall make application to the city clerk for conditional approval of the preliminary
plan. All information required, as noted in chapter 4 of this title, shall be submitted as follows:
1. Two (2) copies of the application for preliminary plan approval.
2. Eight (8) copies of the preliminary plan, including a vicinity map.
3. Certificate of zoning compliance from the zoning enforcement officer endorsed on one copy of
the plan.
4. Any other data deemed necessary by the planning commission.
(C) At the time of filing for conditional approval of the preliminary plan, the application shall be
accompanied by a certified check or money order, payable to the city, to cover the cost of checking
and verifying the preliminary plan, in the amount of twenty five dollars ($25.00), plus five dollars
($5.00) per lot.
(D) Upon the acceptance of the application by the city clerk, the city clerk shall deposit the check or
money order in the general fund.
(E) The city clerk shall retain one copy of the preliminary plan.
(F) The remaining copies shall be forwarded to the city planning commission.
(G) The planning commission shall transmit copies to the superintendent of public works, city health
officer, supervisors of city owned utilities, utility companies, county engineer (if in an
unincorporated area of jurisdiction), school board, and others as deemed necessary.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 200/396
(H) The officials and agencies shall make their review and recommendations to the planning
commission within ten (10) days from the date of transmission.
(I) The planning commission may request additional copies of the preliminary plan, or additional
information deemed necessary.
(J) Upon determination by the planning commission that the preliminary plan has been properly
submitted, the preliminary plan shall be accepted as being officially filed.
(K) Following review of the preliminary plan and supporting material for conformity to these
regulations, and following negotiations with the subdivider on changes deemed advisable, and the
kind and extent of improvements to be made by him, the planning commission shall, within thirty
(30) days, express its approval as a conditional approval and shall state the conditions of such
approval, if any, or shall express its disapproval and its reasons therefor.
(L) The action of the planning commission shall be noted on three (3) copies of the preliminary plan,
referenced and attached to any conditions determined. One copy shall be returned to the
subdivider; one copy shall be forwarded, with a report, to the city council; and the other copy
retained by the planning commission.
(M) Conditional approval of a preliminary plan shall not constitute approval of the final plat. Rather, it
shall be deemed an expression of approval to the layout submitted on the preliminary plan as a
guide to the preparation of the final plat which will be submitted for approval of the planning
commission, and for recording upon fulfillment of the requirements of these regulations and the
conditions of the conditional approval, if any. (Ord. 869, 11-5-2001)
9-3-3: IMPROVEMENT PLAN PROCEDURE:
(A) After the planning commission approval of the preliminary plan, the subdivider shall cause to be
prepared detailed construction plans and specifications for the improvements for that portion or all
of the approved preliminary plan which he proposes to record and develop at the time; provided,
however, that such portion conforms to all requirements of these regulations.
(B) The plans and specifications shall be prepared by a registered Illinois professional engineer and
shall bear the seal of said engineer.
(C) Improvement plans and specifications shall be submitted in triplicate to the planning commission,
and shall include at least the following:
1. Detailed drawings of the grading plans, street improvement plans, drainage plans, sanitary
sewer plans, and water system improvement plans.
2. Plans and profiles shall be drawn at a scale not to exceed one inch equals one hundred feet
(1" = 100') horizontally, and one inch equals ten feet (1" = 10') vertically, and shall show
horizontal and vertical location of streets, sewers, appurtenances and grade, both existing and
proposed.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 201/396
3. Detailed material and construction specifications concerning the work to be performed, including
general conditions of the contract acceptable by the city.
(D) Upon receipt of these final plans, the planning commission shall refer same to the superintendent
of public works for his comments and corrections. The superintendent of public works shall review
these plans for compliance with the city requirements, and shall return them, together with his
recommendations, to the planning commission. The superintendent of public works may, at his
discretion, confer with the engineer for the developer concerning correction to the final plans prior
to his final approval. All final plans shall be submitted on twenty four inch by twenty four inch (24" x
24") paper, and shall bear the signature and seal of the Illinois registered professional engineer
under whose directions they were prepared.
(E) When the improvement plans and specifications are determined to be in compliance with the
requirements of this title and to the satisfaction of the superintendent of public works, the said
superintendent shall indicate his approval and the date of approval on one set of improvement
plans to be retained by the planning commission.
(F) The planning commission shall then send written notice to the subdivider and his engineer that the
improvement plans have been approved and the final subdivision plat can be submitted for
approval. (Ord. 869, 11-5-2001)
9-3-4: FINAL PLAT PROCEDURE:
(A) The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plan as approved; and, if desired by the
subdivider, it may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plan which he proposes
to record and develop at the time; provided, however, that such portion conforms to all
requirements of these regulations.
(B) The subdivider shall make application to the planning commission for approval of a final plat.
(C) All items as required by section 9-4-3 of this title shall be submitted to the planning commission as
follows:
1. Two (2) copies of the final plat application.
2. Original tracing and two (2) copies of final plat and vicinity map.
3. Final plat fees of twenty five dollars ($25.00), plus five dollars ($5.00) per lot.
4. One copy of financial guarantees approved by the city's attorney in an amount stated by the
superintendent of public works.
(D) The planning commission may request additional copies of any of the above items and any other
additional information deemed necessary. Within ten (10) working days after the date of
submission, the planning commission shall determine if all the items as required by section 9-4-3
of this title have been submitted. If all the required items have not been submitted, the planning
commission shall notify the subdivider of such omissions.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 202/396
(E) The original and two (2) copies of the final plat and other material required for approval shall be
prepared as specified in chapter 4 of this title and shall be submitted to the planning commission
within twelve (12) months after approval of the preliminary plan; otherwise, preliminary plan
approval shall become null and void, unless an extension of time to be indicated on a development
schedule is applied for and is granted by the planning commission.
(F) Within thirty (30) days after application for approval of the final plat, the plan commission shall
approve or disapprove it. If the planning commission approves, it shall affix its seal upon the plat,
together with the certifying signature of its chairman and secretary. If it disapproves, it shall set
forth its reasons in its own records and provide the applicant with a copy.
(G) Should the planning commission determine to disapprove the final plat, written notice of such
action, including reference to the regulations or regulation violated by the plat, shall be mailed to
the subdivider. The action shall also be entered on the official records of the planning commission.
(H) In the event the planning commission shall fail to act upon the final plat within thirty (30) days from
the date of its official filing, or within a mutually agreed upon extension, the final plat shall be
deemed to have been approved by said commission.
(I) After approval of the final plat by the planning commission and the fulfillment of the requirements of
these regulations, one tracing on the final plat of the subdivision, drawn in ink on tracing cloth or
other permanent base, shall be submitted to the city council for approval.
(J) Action must be taken by the city council within sixty (60) days after the final plat has been
submitted to them for approval.
(K) The city clerk shall also maintain a file of all approved plats and supporting materials. (Ord. 869,
11-5-2001)
Chapter 4
DRAWINGS AND DATA
9-4-1: PREAPPLICATION CONFERENCE:
Recommended but not mandatory:
(A) The purpose of the preapplication conference, arranged upon request of the subdivider, will permit
the subdivider an opportunity to determine whether or not the tract of land he proposes to
subdivide is proper for such development. The subdivider will receive assistance concerning the
relationship of the land he proposes for subdividing, with the comprehensive city plan and other
plans or public improvements which might affect the area.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 203/396
(B) General information prepared in advance of the preapplication conference by the subdivider, is
recommended as hereinafter set forth.
(C) Sketch plan, on a U.S. geological survey quadrangle map or other available topographic map,
should show in simple sketch form the proposed layout of streets, lots and other features in
relation to existing conditions. The proposed features may be in freehand sketch form. This
drawing should include the following information:
1. Location, tract boundaries, township, north arrow, scale and date.
2. Existing highways and proposed street layout on and adjacent to the tract.
3. Location of existing utilities and proposed extensions to serve the tract.
4. Information on method of sewage disposal and water supply.
5. Existing zoning districts for proposed tract and adjacent areas.
6. Existing topographic features, natural and manmade.
7. Subdivision name and name and address of subdivider, engineer and surveyor.
8. Location of schools, parks, playgrounds, shopping centers, and other significant community
features.
9. At least one reference point in state plane coordinate.
(D) The conference will be scheduled at the convenience of the planning commission, subdivider, and
other personnel attending this conference as requested by the planning commission.
(E) No fee will be required for the preapplication conference. (Ord. 869, 11-5-2001)
9-4-2: PRELIMINARY PLAN PREPARATION:
(A) Submit Copies: The subdivider shall submit eight (8) copies of the preliminary plan and one copy
of the "application for preliminary plan approval" with the required filing fee, to the city clerk.
(B) Preliminary Plan Requirements: The preliminary plan shall be prepared to show the following:
1. Identification And Description:
(a) The proposed name of the subdivision or the title under which it is to be recorded (not
duplicating a name of any plat heretofore recorded in DeWitt County).
(b) The names and addresses of the owner, subdivider, engineer and registered land surveyor.
(c) The north point, graphic (engineering) scale of one inch to one hundred feet (1" = 100').
(d) The date of preparation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 204/396
(e) A note stating "Preliminary Plan - Not to be recorded by the Recorder of Deeds".
2. Existing Conditions:
(a) The boundary line of the proposed subdivision clearly indicated and the total approximate
acreage therein.
(b) The locations, widths and names of all existing or previously platted streets or other public
ways, showing type of improvements, if any, railroad and utility rights of way, parks and other
public open spaces, permanent buildings and structures, easements, section and township
lines within the tract and to a distance of two hundred feet (200') beyond the proposed
subdivision.
(c) The location and size of existing sewers, water mains, culverts or other underground facilities
within the proposed subdivisions and to a distance of two hundred feet (200') beyond.
(d) Topographic data including existing contours at vertical intervals of not more than two feet
(2') unless a greater interval is required to properly depict rough terrain. Topographic data
shall refer to the United States geological North American datum - mean sea level elevation.
Watercourses, marshes, rock outcrops, other significant features and soil boring data at
location and depths as may be required by the planning commission.
(e) Zoning classification for, and adjacent to, the tract.
3. Subdivision Design Features:
(a) Layout of streets, showing right of way widths and street names. Public streets shall be
required in all subdivisions.
(b) Location and widths of alleys, pedestrianways, utility easements, lots and setback lines.
(c) Storm water drainage and detention/soil erosion and storm water management shall be
designed per city regulations.
(d) Areas intended to be dedicated or reserved for public use indicating, in each, the
approximate area in acreage.
(e) Layout, numbers and typical dimensions of lots to the nearest foot. Letters shall not be used
for identification of lots or blocks.
(f) Minimum front and side street building lines, with dimensions indicated.
(g) Areas other than streets, alleys, pedestrianways and easements intended to be dedicated or
reserved for public use; for each, the approximate area in acres shall be indicated.
4. Protective Covenants: An outline of any protective covenants for a proposed subdivision shall
accompany the preliminary plan: i.e., type of structures, architectural controls, etc.
(C) Special Problems: In the event that the preliminary plan involves special problems, or is in conflict
with the comprehensive plan, the planning commission shall inform the owner or subdivider of said
problems or conflict, and shall advise him of the time and place for a hearing before the staff of the
planning commission.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 205/396
(D) Preliminary Plan, Approval: If the planning commission shall find that such proposed plan satisfies
the requirements of this title, the planning commission shall endorse approval thereon in
substantially the following language:
The proposed plan of subdivision herein is approved and the Planning Commission now is ready to
receive the final plan of said subdivision for consideration. This is not an approval of the final plan.
DATED
CITY OF CLINTON PLANNING COMMISSION
BY
One print of the preliminary plan so endorsed shall be returned to the subdivider by personal
delivery or by mail, and one print so endorsed shall be retained on file in the office of the planning
commission.
(E) Preliminary Plan, Disapproval: If, at its next meeting after the subdivision committee review, the
planning commission as a whole, shall find that such proposed plan does not satisfy the
requirements and intentions of this title, it shall specify its objections by written findings and order,
and the planning commission may thereupon disapprove such preliminary plan or may recommend
approval thereof conditioned upon specific changes in the proposed plan to remove its objections.
(F) Findings To Planning Commission, Subdivider: One print of the proposed plan, together with the
findings and order of the planning commission upon the hearing, either disapproving the
preliminary plan or approving it upon condition as aforesaid, shall be retained by the planning
commission, and one print with said findings and order shall be delivered to the subdivider in
person or by mail.
(G) Amendatory Preliminary Plan: A subdivider may submit to the planning commission an amended
preliminary plan for the purpose of complying with any order of the planning commission. In such
event, prints thereof shall be so filed.
(H) Land Subject To Flooding Or Containing Poor Drainage Facilities: No plan shall be approved for
subdivision which is subject to periodic flooding or which contains extremely poor drainage
facilities. However, if the subdivider agrees to make improvements which shall, in the opinion of the
zoning office, make the area completely safe for residential occupancy, and provide adequate
drainage, the preliminary plan of the subdivision may be approved. (Ord. 869, 11-5-2001)
9-4-3: FINAL PLAT PREPARATION:
(A) Authority To Proceed: Receipt by the subdivider of print of the preliminary plan approved by the
planning commission shall constitute authority for the subdivider to proceed with further plans and
specifications for installation of required land improvements and the minimum design and layout
standards established by this title for submission to the planning commission.
(B) Time Limit: The final plat may, at the discretion of the subdivider, constitute only such portion of the
tract covered in the preliminary plan as the subdivider proposes to record and develop. The
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 206/396
remaining portion of the preliminary plan shall receive an automatic time extension of one year to
be submitted in final form after approval of the initial portion of the tract. A further extension of time
may be granted annually by the planning commission upon written request to continue approval of
the unrecorded portion of the original preliminary plan has been submitted within one year after the
preliminary plan is approved, said preliminary plan shall be resubmitted by the subdivider for
review and approval by the planning commission prior to submission of a final plat.
(C) Final Plat, Requirements: All information, except topographic data, required on the preliminary
plan shall be shown accurately, and drawn with black ink on heavy transparent tracing paper or
cloth in a manner that clear and legible contact prints or photostatic copies may be made. Said
final plat shall be drawn to a scale of not more than one inch to one hundred feet (1" = 100'), and
shall be submitted to the planning commission with three (3) additional prints thereof. It shall
contain one sheet having dimensions not to exceed eighteen inches by twenty four inches
(18" x 24").
(D) Final Plat, Details: Said final plat of the subdivision shall show:
1. The name of the subdivision, a graphic (engineering) scale, a north point, the name of the
owner(s) and the subdivider(s), and the date.
2. A correct legal description of the plat.
3. Boundary lines with accurate distances and angles.
4. Lines of all proposed streets and alleys with their width and names.
5. Line of departure of one street from another.
6. Names of streets and widths of proposed and adjoining streets and alleys.
7. All lots designated by number.
8. Location of all easements provided for public use, service or utilities. Easements shall include
anchor space for pole lines.
9. All dimensions, both linear and angular, necessary for locating the boundaries of the subdivision,
lots, streets, alleys, easements, and other areas for public or private use. Linear dimensions are
to be given to the nearest one-hundredth of a foot (1/100').
10. Radii, arcs or chords, points of tangency and central angles for all curvilinear street and radii
for rounded corners.
11. Location of all survey monuments and their description.
12. Accurate outline of any portions of the property intended to be dedicated or granted for public
use and the designation of such.
13. Protective covenants lettered on the final plat, or attached therewith.
14. Acknowledgment of the plat by the owner(s) and spouses(s), if any, or a duly authorized
attorney and a notary public. Sample certificates are as follows and may be included on the final
plan or attached thereto.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 207/396
15. Drainage certification signed by owner and engineer, in accordance with the requirements of
765 Illinois Compiled Statutes.
(E) Certificate Of Ownership:
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
COUNTY OF DEWITT) SS
This is to certify that the undersigned is the owner of the land described in the plat, and that he
(she) has caused the same to be surveyed and subdivided as indicated hereon, for the uses and
purposes herein set forth, and does hereby acknowledge and adopt the same under the style and
title hereon indicated.
Dated this day of A.D., 20 .
(Address)
(F) Certification By Notary Public:
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
COUNTY OF DEWITT) SS
I, , a Notary Public in and for the County of , in the State of , do hereby certify that whose names(s)
(is) (are) subscribed to the foregoing instrument, appeared before me this day in person and
(severally) acknowledged that he (they) signed, sealed and delivered said instrument as his (their)
free and voluntary act for the uses and purposes therein set forth.
Given under my hand and Notarial Seal this day of A.D., 20 .
Notary Public
(G) Certification By The Surveyor: Certification by a registered Illinois land surveyor attesting to the
accuracy of the survey and the correct location of all monuments, as follows:
Certification by the Surveyor:
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
COUNTY OF DEWITT) SS
This is to certify that I, , Illinois Land Surveyor No. , have surveyed and subdivided the following
described property: (legal description) as shown on this plat which is a correct representation of
said survey and subdivision. All distances are shown in feet and decimals thereof. I further certify
that all regulations enacted by the City of Clinton relative to plats and subdivisions have been
complied with in the preparation of this plan.
Given under my hand and seal at , Illinois, this day of A.D., 20 .
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 208/396
(H) Certificate By The County Clerk: Certification by the county clerk that all taxes and special
assessments have been paid up to date, as follows:
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
COUNTY OF DEWITT) SS
I, , County Clerk of DeWitt County, Illinois, hereby certify that I find no delinquent general taxes,
unpaid current general taxes, delinquent special assessments or unpaid current special
assessments against the tract of land described in the above plat.
Dated at Clinton, Illinois, this day of , 20 .
(I) Final Plat, Original Tracing; Approval: When the subdivider has filed with the planning commission
an original tracing of the final plat and three (3) prints thereof and the planning commission has
determined at its next regular meeting that the final plat conforms to the previously approved
preliminary plan, including any condition which may have been required by the planning
commission in approving said preliminary plan, the following shall be printed or stamped upon the
original tracing and prints thereof and signed by the city planning commission:
This final plat of subdivision is recommended to the City Council of Clinton, Illinois, for approval,
subject to certification by the Superintendent of Public Works, that all required improvements
stated in the City of Clinton, Illinois, have been constructed satisfactorily or that certified check or
satisfactory bond guaranteeing completion of such construction has been filed.
DATED
City of Clinton, Illinois, Planning Commission
By
The planning commission shall then transmit the endorsed original tracing of the final plat and two
(2) prints thereof to the city council, with a letter of transmittal in triplicate calling attention to any
variations or exceptions to the requirements of this title recommended by the planning commission,
and setting forth its reasons for recommending the same. One print of said final plat so endorsed,
and a copy of all certificates, shall remain on file in the office of the planning commission.
(J) Soil And Water Conservation District Certification; Approval Required: No final plat shall be
approved by the city council until the soil and water conservation district certifies that the required
improvements have been constructed or recommends that the city council accept a surety bond or
a certified check in lieu of the required improvements to be constructed. Said surety bond or
certified check shall be deposited with the city clerk for storm water drainage and detention and
soil erosion and sediment control, equal to the estimated cost of such required improvements, plus
twenty five percent (25%) thereof, assuring completion of said required improvements within a two
(2) year period from the date of posting the surety bond.
(K) Certification By The Soil And Water Conservation District: An appropriate certificate signed by the
soil and water conservation district, which will accompany the final plat, as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 209/396
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
COUNTY OF DEWITT) SS
I, , Soil and Water Conservation District for the County of DeWitt, Illinois, do hereby certify that the
attached final plat has been examined by me, and also that the subdivider's plans and
specifications comply with the required improvements as set forth in the County of DeWitt,
subdivision regulation ordinance.
I further certify that the required bond is posted with the City Clerk for the completion of the
required improvements covering stormwater drainage and detention and soil erosion and sediment
control in the amount of which is equal to the estimated cost of such required improvements plus
twenty five percent (25%) thereof.
Dated this day of A.D., 20
Soil and Water Conservation District
(L) Final Plat, City Council Action: Upon receipt of a final plat and prints thereof so endorsed by the
planning commission, the city council shall review said final plat and shall direct the city clerk to
send the original tracings and one print thereof with a copy of the letter of transmittal from the
planning commission to the superintendent of public works.
(M) Final Plat, Superintendent Of Public Works Action, Assurance Of Completion: The final plat shall
not be approved by the city council until the superintendent of public works has certified thereon
that the required improvements specified by this title have been constructed in a satisfactory
manner, in accordance with the minimum standards established by this title, or that, in lieu of such
prior construction, said subdivider has filed with the city clerk with the approval of the
superintendent of public works, a surety bond or certified check.
No final plat shall be approved by the city council until the superintendent of public works certifies
that the required improvements have been constructed or recommends that the city council accept
a surety bond or a certified check in lieu of the required improvements to be constructed. Said
surety bond or certified check shall be deposited with the city clerk for street grading, pavements,
sidewalks, curbs and gutters, signs, alley improvements and including storm sewer systems,
sewerage systems and water supply systems, in the amount equal to the estimated cost of such
required improvements, plus the amount equal to the estimated cost of such required
improvements plus twenty five percent (25%) thereof, assuring completion of said required
improvements within a two (2) year period from the date of posting the surety bond.
(N) Certification By The Superintendent Of Public Works: An appropriate certificate signed by the
superintendent of public works, which will accompany the final plat, as follows:
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
COUNTY OF DEWITT) SS
I, , Superintendent of Public Works for the City of Clinton, Illinois, do hereby certify that the
attached final plat has been examined by me, and also that the subdivider's plans and
specifications comply with the required improvements as set forth in the City of Clinton,
Subdivision Regulation Ordinance.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 210/396
I further certify that the required bond is posted with the City Clerk for the completion of the
required improvements covering street grading, pavements, sidewalks, curbs and gutters, signs,
alley improvements including storm sewer systems, sewerage systems, and water supply systems
in the amount of which is equal to the estimated cost of such required improvements plus twenty
five percent (25%) thereof.
Dated this day of A.D., 20
Superintendent of Public Works
(O) Completion Of Improvements: If the improvements are not completed within the two (2) year
period of time by the subdivider, owner or his contractor, the surety company shall be responsible
for the completion of the work within the next twelve (12) month period. Cash bonds shall be used
for the completion of the work as arranged by the city council. Any unexpended balance shall be
returned to the subdivider, or owner.
(P) Final Plat, Approval: When the city council determines that the final plat has been recommended
for approval by the planning commission, and that the superintendent of public works has executed
the certificate required in this section, and that the required improvements either have been
installed in the manner specified by this title, or that said surety bonds or certified checks are in a
form and amount sufficient to assure completion of said plat for and in the name of the city, then
the city clerk shall attest the same, and thereupon the original of said final plat shall be delivered to
the subdivider.
(Q) Final Plat, Recordation: When such final plat has been approved by the city council, and is signed
by the mayor and the city clerk, it shall be recorded in the office of the recorder of deeds of DeWitt
County, Illinois, along with a required filing fee.
(R) Acceptance Of Streets: In any plat of subdivision design containing streets or thoroughfares which
are therein reserved for dedication to public use, the approval of the final plat by the city council
shall constitute the acceptance of such streets or thoroughfares to the extent provided by "an act
to revise the law in relation to plats", approved March 21, 1974, 765 Illinois Compiled Statutes, as
amended.
(S) Certificate Of Approval: The city council shall, upon motion and majority vote, approve the final plat
and authorize the mayor and city clerk to sign the original drawing of the final plat. The certificates
on the final plat shall be in the following form with the signatures of the chairman of the county
board of supervisors and the county clerk to be necessary where the plat covers land in the
unincorporated one and one-half (11/2) mile fringe area:
Under the authority provided by chapter 65, Illinois Compiled Statutes, enacted by the State
Legislature of the State of Illinois, and ordinance adopted by the City Council of the City of Clinton,
Illinois, this plat was given approval by the City of Clinton.
Approved by the planning commission at a meeting held .
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 211/396
Chairman
Secretary
Approved by the City Council at a meeting held .
Mayor
City Clerk
Approved by the County Board of DeWitt County, Illinois, at a meeting held .
Chairman
County Clerk
(Ord. 869, 11-5-2001)
Chapter 5
DESIGN AND LAYOUT STANDARDS
9-5-1: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
(A) Application Of Provisions: The following standards for design and layout requirements shall apply
to all new subdivisions of land. In addition, all subdivisions shall be developed to conform with
Clinton's comprehensive plan and any future revisions made thereto.
The arrangement, character, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform to the city
highway system or plans for the opening, widening or extension of any street, road or major
thoroughfare as adopted by the city council in the public interest. Whenever a tract to be
subdivided includes any part of such thoroughfares as approved or shown on the adopted city
plan, such part shall be dedicated to the public for street purposes by the subdivider.
(B) Interpretation: The standards, provisions and specifications contained in this title are provided
herein to promote the best possible development and use of land for orderly growth of the
community. Exceptions from these standards, provisions and specifications may be granted when
shown conclusively and to the satisfaction of the city that such exceptions will bring about a more
logical and desirable result than would be obtained by strict compliance.
(C) Land Subject To Inundation: Land subject to flooding and land deemed by the reviewing
authorities to be uninhabitable shall not be platted for residential occupancy, nor for such other
uses as may increase danger to health, life or property, or aggravate the flood hazard, but such
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 212/396
land within the plat shall be set aside for such uses as shall not be endangered by periodic or
occasional inundation, or shall not produce unsatisfactory living conditions.
(D) Public Sites And Open Spaces: All proposed plats submitted for approval under the provisions of
this title shall allocate adequate areas for park, school, recreational and other public and
semipublic sites, wherever necessary, in conformity with the city's comprehensive plan and as
required by the city. The location, shape, extent and orientation of such areas shall be consistent
with existing and proposed topographical and other conditions, including, but not limited to, the
park, school, recreational and other public and semipublic needs of said proposed subdivisions.
Such areas shall be made available by one of the following methods:
1. Dedication to public use.
2. Reservation for the use of owners of land contained in said plat, by deed restriction or covenants
which specify how and under what circumstances the area or areas shall be developed and
maintained.
3. Reservation for purchase by a governmental unit or agency thereof within a period of two (2)
years, such reserved area to be released for private use:
(a) In the event no governmental unit or agency thereof proceeds with such purchase within two
(2) years after date of the recording of said plat; or
(b) If released by said governmental unit or agency prior to the expiration of the two (2) year
period.
4. Due regard shall be shown for preserving outstanding scenic, cultural or historic areas.
5. All areas within the subdivision not dedicated and accepted for public use shall be either: a)
included in a lot, or b) dedicated for the use of some or all owners, their heirs, successors and
assigns forever, or c) dedicated to a public entity presently in being who accepts title by
endorsement on the plat. (Ord. 869, 11-5-2001)
9-5-2: STREETS AND ALLEYS:
(A) Continuation Of Existing Streets: Proposed streets shall, as near as practicable, provide for the
continuation, connection or projection of streets in surrounding areas; or may conform to a plan for
one of Clinton's neighborhoods as may have been approved by the city.
(B) Circulation: The street pattern shall provide ease of circulation within the subdivision, but the local
streets therein shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic will be discouraged. Insofar as
practical, the street arrangement should provide proper access to schools, playgrounds,
transportation and other community features. New street openings shall generally be prohibited
within six hundred feet (600') of any major intersection or crossing such as those formed by a
railroad and a highway, two (2) or more highways, or from the head of any major bridge, grade
separation structure or like facilities, as measured along the centerline from the intersection or from
such structures.
(C) Topographical And Cultural Features: In sloping terrain, streets shall generally run parallel to the
contour of the land, or preferably cross at a slight angle therewith. The general objectives are to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 213/396
avoid steep street grades; heavy concentrations of storm surface runoff; abnormal differentials in
building elevations at opposite sides of the street; and excessive grading operations. Appropriate
treatment shall be given to encourage the preservation of existing views, wooded areas, creeks,
and other attractive natural features of the plat.
(D) Portion Of Tract: Where the plat to be submitted includes only a part of the tract owned by the
subdivider, the council should require topography and a sketch layout of the future street system
on the unsubdivided portion.
(E) Relation To Major Streets: Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial
street, involving heavy volumes of high speed vehicular traffic, the planning commission and city
council may require marginal access streets, or a reverse lot frontage with screening contained in
a nonaccess reservation along the rear property line, and such other treatment as may be
necessary for adequate protection of the proposed industrial, commercial or residential
development to assure separation of through and local traffic. Before requiring any marginal
streets or reverse frontage arrangements, the planning commission and city council shall take into
account and decide upon the physical location of the major public utility lines as they relate to the
existing and potential development along both sides of the highway.
(F) Marginal Streets (Reverse Frontage Arrangements): The planning commission and city council
shall take into account and decide upon the physical location of the major public utility lines as they
relate to the existing and potential development along both sides of the highway.
(G) Frontage Along Railroads: Where a subdivision borders on a railroad right of way, the planning
commission and city council may require a street approximately parallel to the side of such right of
way, and at a reasonable distance therefrom, dependent on the nature and intended use of the
subdivision. Such distance shall also be determined with due regard for the requirements of future
grade separation facilities and access roads or ramps thereto. The back lot line shall abut the
railroad right of way except in special cases determined acceptable by the city.
(H) Street Intersections: The angle of intersection at street intersections should intersect each other as
near to a right angle as possible and no intersection of streets at angles of less than sixty degrees
(60) shall be permitted.
(I) Street Jogs: Street jogs shall be avoided whenever possible. However, where permitted, the
minimum centerline offset distance between roads entering a common right of way from opposite
sides will be one hundred twenty five feet (125').
(J) Half Streets: Half streets shall be prohibited. In case a half street is adjacent to a tract to be
subdivided, the other half of the street shall be platted within such tract.
(K) Reserve Strips: Reserve ("spite" or "devil") strips controlling access to streets shall not be
permitted. Streets shall be located on the edge of, or one lot depth away from, the boundary of the
tract.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 214/396
(L) Dead End Streets: Dead end or stub end streets are prohibited. However, where it is necessary to
provide circulation to undeveloped property adjacent to the boundaries of the proposed
subdivision, a temporary cul-de-sac with a turnaround radius of not less than seventy five feet (75')
shall be provided within the subdivision and adjacent to its limit for what would otherwise be a stub
end street.
Provision will be made by the subdivider that when the right of way is extended into the adjacent
property that portion of the turnaround in excess of the right of way width will revert to the adjacent
property owner or owners, and curbs and gutters will be provided.
(M) Cul-De-Sacs: Cul-de-sacs, designed to be so permanently, shall not be longer than five hundred
feet (500'), and shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having an outside roadway
diameter of at least eighty feet (80'), and a street property line diameter of at least one hundred
feet (100'). No cul-de-sac may intersect with another cul-de-sac.
(N) Alleys: Alleys in residential developments will be prohibited. Service roadways will be required in
commercial and industrial developments, except where other provisions for suitable access and off
street loading and unloading is assured. Alleys may be provided at the rear of all lots or tracts
intended for multiple-family building use; however, they will not be encouraged.
(O) Right Of Way: In the case of the extension of an existing adjoining right of way, having a width less
than the minimum requirement, the planning commission may approve the extension thereof at the
same width.
(P) Street Names: Names of new streets shall not duplicate the names of existing streets of record.
New streets which are extensions of or in alignment with existing streets shall bear the name of the
existing streets. All names shall meet with the approval of the planning commission. (Ord. 869, 11-
5-2001)
9-5-3: MINIMUM STREET RIGHT OF WAY WIDTHS:
(A) The planning commission and city council shall determine the right of way widths where
topography or other conditions make dedication of a street or part thereof of the required minimum
width impractical and may also increase the minimum width to accommodate present and future
needs for additional vehicular lanes, parking lanes, left turn lanes, sidewalks, utilities and other
design features that may require right of way in addition to the minimum right of way widths
designated in this title.
(B) All rights of way shall conform to the following minimum dimensions:
Minimum right of way width for streets shall be in accordance with current bureau of local roads
administrative policies subject to city approval. (Ord. 869, 11-5-2001)
9-5-4: INTERSECTING RIGHT OF WAY LINES:
A minimum radius of twenty feet (20') is required where right of way lines intersect at street
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 215/396
intersections in residential areas. The radius at intersecting right of way lines for industrial subdivisions
and intersection of new streets with a major street shall be increased to thirty feet (30'), or as directed
by the planning commission and city council. (Ord. 869, 11-5-2001)
9-5-5: EASEMENTS:
(A) Easements shall be provided for any surface, underground, or overhead utility service, including
storm water drainage, where necessary. They shall have a width of fifteen feet (15') and shall be
established along the rear of each lot and along the side or front lot lines where necessary. The
easements shall be laid out with continuity from lot to lot and from block to block. No building shall
be constructed upon the easements.
(B) When a subdivision is traversed or bounded by a watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream,
there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage right of way conforming substantially
with the lines of such watercourse, and such further width or construction, or both, as will be
adequate for the purpose. It shall include an additional area of at least fifteen feet (15') wide
adjoining both edges of the established floodplain area as certified by the subdivider or his
engineer. Minimum floor elevations for structures may be required in areas which are or may
become subject to flooding by surface water. (Ord. 869, 11-5-2001)
9-5-6: BLOCK STANDARDS:
(A) The maximum length of blocks shall be one thousand two hundred feet (1,200'). All blocks over
eight hundred feet (800') will ordinarily require crosswalkways at the approximate centers. The use
of additional crosswalkways in any instance to provide safe and convenient access to schools,
parks or other similar destinations will be specified by the planning commission or the city council.
(B) No specific rule concerning the shape of blocks is made, but blocks must fit easily into the overall
plan of the subdivision, and their design must evidence consideration of lot planning, traffic flow
and public areas.
(C) Blocks intended for commercial and industrial use must be designated as such, and the plan must
show adequate off street areas to provide for parking, loading docks and such other facilities that
may be required to accommodate motor vehicles.
(D) The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to:
1. Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use
contemplated.
2. Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions.
3. Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic.
4. Limitations and opportunities of topography. (Ord. 869, 11-5-2001)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 216/396
9-5-7: LOT STANDARDS:
(A) The lot size, width, depth, shape, orientation, and the minimum building setback lines shall be
appropriate for the location of the subdivision and type of development and use contemplated.
(B) The minimum lot frontage, dimensions, sizes, and yard requirements shall be in accordance with
the minimum requirements for the zoning district in which the lot is located, as set forth in the
zoning regulations of the city; provided, however, that where the proposed subdivision plat is
proposed where city sanitary sewers are not available for connection to the lots in the proposed
subdivision, minimum lot dimensions for residential development shall be one hundred feet (100')
in average depth, and the required area of square footage for each lot shall be an area of sufficient
size to accommodate satisfactory private disposal systems in accordance with federal housing
authority regulations and subsequent provisions of this title, or twenty thousand (20,000) square
feet, whichever is the greater.
(C) Corner lots shall be sufficiently larger than interior lots to allow maintenance of building lines on
both streets. (Ord. 869, 11-5-2001)
(D) All lots shall abut on a publicly dedicated street and/or have an established access from said
publicly dedicated street. (Ord. 1153, 2-2-2009)
(E) Side lines of lots shall be approximately at right angles or radial to the street line.
(F) Double frontage lots are forbidden except where lots back upon a primary street (major
thoroughfare) and in such instances, vehicular access between the lots and the thoroughfare is
prohibited. (Ord. 869, 11-5-2001)
9-5-8: PARKS, SCHOOLS AND PUBLIC AREAS:
Where a proposed park, playground, school or other public use area, shown in the comprehensive
plan for the city, and adjacent unincorporated areas, is located in whole or in part in a subdivision, the
planning commission or the city council may require the dedication or reservation of such areas within
the subdivision in those cases in which the planning commission or the city council deems such
requirements to be reasonable. However, in no case shall the total amount of required public areas to
be dedicated or reserved, in addition to public streets, exceed ten percent (10%) of the total acreage
owned and proposed to be developed by a developer. In a development in which it may not be
feasible to establish a public area, the planning commission or city council may require a monetary
donation not to exceed ten percent (10%) of the value of the total acreage developed. The acquisition
of the additional area needed for parks, playgrounds, schools or other public uses, other than streets
and alleys, shall be secured by the proper governing body, or arrangements made for securing the
area from the owner within a period not to exceed ninety (90) days. (Ord. 869, 11-5-2001)
9-5-9: RESUBDIVISION AND REPLATTING:
The reviewing authority shall, in the performance of its plat approving function, be vigilant for
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 217/396
opportunities to encourage and facilitate the replatting of prematurely and inexpertly subdivided areas
which are not in sharp contrast to current standards of acceptability. Rehabilitation of these areas shall
be implemented through proper design considerations when adjacent unsubdivided land is proposed
for development. (Ord. 869, 11-5-2001)
Chapter 6
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
9-6-1: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
(A) Unless otherwise expressly indicated, the developer, through his engineer shall prepare and
furnish all plans, specifications, cost estimates, and other essential documents necessary for the
construction and installation of the required improvements. And, further, the subdivider shall agree,
at his own cost and expense, to do all the work and furnish all the materials and labor necessary to
construct and complete the required improvements in a good and substantial manner to the
satisfaction of the superintendent of public works.
(B) Unless otherwise specified, storm drainage improvements and street improvements, including curb
and gutters, pavement base and surface, sidewalks and site grading shall be constructed in
accordance with provisions of the current issue of the "Standard Specifications For Road And
Bridge Construction", adopted by the state of Illinois, department of transportation. Sanitary sewer
and water main improvements shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions of the current
issue of the "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction In Illinois". (Ord.
869, 11-5-2001)
9-6-2: APPROVAL PRIOR TO CONSTRUCTION:
The construction plans and specifications for the required improvements to complete the development
of the subdivision must be reviewed and approved by the city, with written notice of approval received
by the subdivider prior to commencement of construction of any part of the required improvements.
(Ord. 869, 11-5-2001)
9-6-3: INSPECTION AT SUBDIVIDER'S EXPENSE:
All required improvements to be installed under the provisions of this title shall be inspected at the
subdivider's expense. A registered professional engineer, approved by the city, as agent for the
subdivider or owner, shall be responsible for the inspection on the job during the process of
construction. When the work is completed, the registered professional engineer shall certify, in writing,
to the city that the work was constructed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications.
Also, the registered professional engineer shall prepare and submit to the city for their files, a
complete set of as built plans on reproducible paper, cloth or Mylar, and one complete copy of as built
specifications. The subdivider shall bear the cost of providing the as built plans and specifications.
(Ord. 869, 11-5-2001)
9-6-4: QUALIFICATIONS OF CONTRACTORS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 218/396
The developer shall file with the superintendent of public works a list of all contractors and
subcontractors who are to participate in the construction of public improvements. Such contractors
and subcontractors shall be subject to any and all licensing provisions of the city or county, and shall
be subject to disqualification by reason of faulty performance of prior construction work done in the
city or county. (Ord. 869, 11-5-2001)
9-6-5: TIME SCHEDULE:
All construction items shall be completed within two (2) years after receiving approval and the
recording of the final plat. (Ord. 869, 11-5-2001)
9-6-6: DEFAULT:
If the improvements are not completed within the specified time, the city council may use the
performance bond or any portion thereof, necessary to complete any remaining items of required
improvements. (Ord. 869, 11-5-2001)
9-6-7: STREET IMPROVEMENTS:
(A) Opening, Widening Or Expansion Of Streets: All grading, paving, surfacing, drainage structures or
other improvements required or involved in the opening, widening or expansion of any street, road
or public way shall be of such size, width, thickness, character and type deemed by the city
council, upon the recommendations of the superintendent of public works, to be suitable and
appropriate to the intended use and development, and consistent with the standards and
specifications set forth in these rules and regulations.
(B) Street Grades: Grades on major streets shall not exceed five percent (5%). Grades on other
streets shall not exceed eight percent (8%). Grades less than four-tenths percent (0.4%) will not be
allowed.
(C) Vertical Curves: Vertical curves will not be required where the intersecting street grades have an
algebraic difference of less than one percent (1%). Vertical curves shall be provided where the
intersecting street grades have an algebraic difference greater than one percent (1%). The profile
grades for major streets shall be connected by vertical curves of a minimum length equivalent to at
least twenty (20) times the algebraic difference between the rates of grade, expressed in feet per
hundred; for collector and local streets, at least fifteen (15) times.
(D) Roadway Width:
1. Minimum right of way width and pavement width for streets shall be in accordance with current
bureau of local roads administrative policies subject to city approval.
2. If the city requires additional width and/or thickness, then the city may participate in the
additional cost. (Ord. 869, 11-5-2001)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 219/396
9-6-8: MINIMUM PAVEMENT DESIGN:
(A) The minimum design for base and pavement of minor streets, marginal access streets, dead end
streets, and cul-de-sacs shall be:
1. Nine inch (9") (compacted thickness) aggregate base course type B with three inch (3")
(compacted thickness) bituminous concrete surface course, class I.
2. Six and one-half inch (6.5") nonreinforced concrete pavement with sawed contraction joints at
fifteen foot (15') intervals.
(B) Illinois bearing ratio tests and pavement analysis in accordance with current IDOT specifications
for design of local roads will be required on any roadway with a projected ADT of four hundred
(400) or more, or as deemed necessary by the city. The developer, through a registered
professional engineer, shall submit results of all tests and calculations to the city for review and
approval.
(C) Before any paving work is commenced, all street grading shall be properly completed as shown on
the grading plan submitted with the final plat of subdivision.
(D) After grading of the streets is completed and approved, and before the base course of the
roadway pavement is laid, all of the underground work, such as sewer, water and gas mains,
house service connections therewith, and any underground conduits for electric and telephone
lines, shall be completely installed in place and approved.
(E) The surface course of the roadway pavement shall not be laid out until the backfilling of all
trenches dug for the installation of the aforementioned utility services have completely settled, or
compacted, to the satisfaction of the superintendent of public works.
(F) Before the surface course of the roadway pavement is laid, all depressions in the base course
shall be properly filled and brought to the required grade so as to create a level surface. (Ord. 869,
11-5-2001)
9-6-9: ALLEY PAVEMENT; WIDTHS:
All alleys shall be improved with a roadway consisting of not less than eight inches (8") aggregate
base course type B (compacted thickness) of the following widths:
(A) Through residence blocks, not less than twelve feet (12').
(B) Through business areas, not less than sixteen feet (16'). (Ord. 869, 11-5-2001)
9-6-10: CURB AND GUTTER:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 220/396
(A) All streets shall have either type B 6.18 or 6.24 combination curb and gutter constructed in
accordance with current IDOT specifications as approved by the city.
(B) Curb and gutter requirement may be waived by the city council if deemed necessary by the city as
part of an overall project storm water management plan. (Ord. 869, 11-5-2001)
9-6-11: SIDEWALKS:
(A) If the property subdivided is located within the corporate limits of the city, or immediately adjacent
thereto, sidewalks shall be required by the planning commission.
(B) Sidewalks, whether required or optional, shall be constructed in accordance with the specifications
approved and used by the city for sidewalk construction.
(C) Sidewalks shall be constructed on the street right of way with the back of the sidewalk six inches
(6") from the property line, unless otherwise directed by the superintendent of public works.
(D) Sidewalks shall have a minimum width of four feet (4') and a thickness of five inches (5").
(E) During development of said subdivision, sidewalks shall be constructed as each lot is developed
upon. (Ord. 869, 11-5-2001)
9-6-12: STREET SIGNS:
The subdivision shall be provided with street signs of a type approved by and erected at locations and
in the manner prescribed by the city. (Ord. 869, 11-5-2001)
9-6-13: STORM DRAINS:
(A) An adequate system of storm water drainage designed for a 10-year maximum rain shall be
constructed and installed, consisting of pipes, tiles, manholes, inlets, catch basins or other
necessary facilities that will adequately drain the subdivision and protect roadway pavements and
will prevent the accumulation of storm water at any place under normal conditions. Such drainage
system shall be subject to approval by the superintendent of public works. All drain tiles shall be
maintained and connected to existing storm water facilities.
(B) Back yard swales may be permitted, subject to the following regulations:
1. Maximum and minimum slopes and general design criteria of the federal housing
administration's "minimum property requirements" will be acceptable, except as herein modified.
2. No continuous swale shall have a length exceeding six hundred feet (600') without provisions for
storm water collection and discharge to a suitable outlet.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 221/396
3. Minimum grade of the flow line shall be five-tenths percent (0.5%).
(C) A drainage certification, signed by both the owner of the subdivision and his engineer, in
accordance with the provisions of 765 Illinois Compiled Statutes shall be submitted with the
application for preliminary plan approval.
(D) Provisions for storm water retention shall be included in the required improvements for the
subdivision, when conditions deem it necessary.
(E) Filling in or reducing the volume of water storage of a floodplain below the high water elevation for
a 100-year storm in any manner shall be discouraged and not allowed unless detailed calculations
are certified by the owner's engineer, and submitted to and approved by the city to the effect that
proposed changes in the floodplain will not increase the flood hazard, both upstream and
downstream from the proposed subdivision. (Ord. 869, 11-5-2001)
9-6-14: SANITARY SEWERS:
(A) A complete system of sanitary sewers shall be constructed throughout the entire subdivision in
such a manner as to service every lot. The superintendent of public works shall specify sizes for all
sewer lines.
(B) If no city sewer main is available to said subdivision within a reasonable distance, as determined
by the city, application for the use of a private disposal system may be made to the city council.
Upon an affirmative vote of the majority of the city council, a private sewer system comprising
septic tanks and tile seepage fields may be used; provided, however, that they shall conform with
the following conditions:
1. Septic tanks and tile fields shall not be permitted on any lot less than twenty thousand (20,000)
square feet in area.
2. A seepage test shall be made for each acre of ground to be subdivided and shall show the area
to be suitable for septic tanks and tile fields. A written report of such tests made by a registered
professional engineer shall be submitted with the final plat.
3. If, after septic tanks have been in use in any subdivision, a sewer main is installed capable of
serving the subdivision and the lots therein, it shall thereafter be unlawful to utilize septic tanks
for the disposal of sewage, and all properties utilizing septic tanks shall discontinue their use and
make connection to the sanitary sewer for disposal of sewage.
4. The private sewer system shall comply with the provisions of the state of Illinois, department of
health "Private Sewage Disposal Licensing Act And Code" and the requirements herein.
(C) Where a sanitary sewer system is provided, six inch (6") service sewers shall be provided to each
lot, extended to a minimum distance of four feet (4') beyond the street right of way line.
(D) Sanitary sewers shall be constructed in accordance with the "Standard Specifications For Water
And Sewer Main Construction In Illinois" and requirements of the environmental protection agency.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 222/396
(E) The city shall make its sewer facilities available to all real estate now or hereafter located therein
according to the following rules:
1. The property owners shall pay reasonable tap-on connection charges, the same being
determined by resolution duly adopted by the mayor and the city council of the city from time to
time.
2. The property owner shall provide sewer connections between his building and the mains.
3. Subdividers and developers shall be exempt from all tap-on, connection and permit fees, except
those provided for in subsection (E)6 of this section, provided:
(a) They shall construct and donate to the city all extension mains including transmission mains
made necessary by such extensions of the sewage collection systems including interceptor
sewers, and lift stations, if any.
(b) That the same be constructed in accordance with this code relative thereto, and in a manner
satisfactory to the superintendent of public works.
4. The city shall, in all instances, determine the appropriate sizing of mains and the required
capacity of proposed water and sewer facilities necessary to serve any proposed subdivision.
5. If the city desires to increase the size or capacity of any portion or all of the sanitary sewer
proposed by the subdivider or developer in order to provide service to areas not located within or
beyond the limits of said subdivision, the cost thereof in excess of the cost of the subdivider's or
developer's proposed installation shall be refunded by the city to the subdivider or developer on
the following basis:
(a) Prior to construction, the subdivider or developer and the city shall agree upon the location
and acreage of the land which the excess capacity is designed to serve, and shall agree on
the total excess cost in dollars.
(b) Any subdivider, developer or property owner in the area as established according to this
subsection (E)5, for which the said excess capacity has been provided, shall pay to the city
the dollar cost of such excess capacity in the same proportion that the acreage of said
subdivision, development or land bears to the total acreage for which the excess capacity was
provided; whereupon the city shall refund a like amount to the subdivider or developer
providing said excess capacity.
6. All persons connecting directly to any city water and/or sewer main shall pay a reasonable
inspection fee for so doing, which fee shall be determined by resolution of the mayor and city
council; said fee to approximate as closely as practical the cost to the city of making necessary
inspections. (Ord. 869, 11-5-2001)
9-6-15: WATER SUPPLY:
(A) When located within the service area of a public water supply system, cast iron water mains not
less than six inches (6") in diameter shall be constructed throughout the entire subdivision in such
manner as to serve adequately all lots and tracts with connection to such public system, together
with shut off valves and fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be installed throughout the entire water
system at intervals of not exceeding four hundred feet (400'). All fire hydrants shall be of the type
and meet the requirements of the city water department and fire department.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 223/396
(B) House services shall be constructed to connect with the utility service mains constructed within
any street or thoroughfare to serve each adjoining lot, tract or building site; such house services
shall extend from the main to a point at least four feet (4') beyond the right of way lines of the
street, and at least one foot (1') beyond the right of way lines of proposed alley.
(C) All such house services connected with utility mains constructed within any street or thoroughfare
shall be located at the approximate centerline of each lot, and no deviation shall be made from this
requirement, except upon prior approval by the superintendent of public works. House services
shall be minimum three-fourths inch (3/4") copper, installed in accordance with std. dwg. no. 17, of
the "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Construction In Illinois".
(D) Upon completion of the construction in place of all such house service connections with utility
mains, an accurate map or maps showing the exact location of all such mains, together with
manholes, shut off valves and other similar facilities being a part thereof, by distances in feet from
street lines, and of all such house service connections in distances in feet from the side lot lines,
approved by the superintendent of public works, shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. (Ord.
869, 11-5-2001)
9-6-16: MONUMENTS:
(A) Permanent monuments shall be placed at all corners and at points of tangency of curve lines
along the boundary of the subdivision. Permanent monuments shall be of concrete with minimum
dimensions of four inches by four inches (4" x 4"), and thirty inches (30") long, with copper dowel
three-eighths inch (3/8") in diameter, at least two and one-half inches (21/2") in length, embedded
so that the top of the dowel shall be flush with the surface and at the center of the monument, with
minimum one-half inch (1/2") galvanized pipe or reinforcing rod, thirty inches (30") long.
(B) All lot corners not marked by concrete monuments shall be marked by galvanized or wrought iron
pipe or iron or steel bars at least twenty four inches (24") in length and not less than one-half inch
(1/2") in diameter. The top of the pipe or bar is to be set level with the established grade of the
ground. (Ord. 869, 11-5-2001)
9-6-17: STREET LIGHTING REQUIREMENTS:
Street lighting shall be required and shall be installed in accordance with current minimum standards
as set forth by the American Society of Illuminating Engineers. Such installation shall be completed
within one year after the completion of subdivision construction, where deemed necessary by the
planning commission. (Ord. 869, 11-5-2001)
9-6-18: PUBLIC UTILITIES:
If required under the discretion of the planning commission, all public utility lines for telephone and
electric services shall be placed underground entirely throughout a subdivided area. Said conduits or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 224/396
cables shall be placed in dedicated public ways or easements, when necessary, in a manner which
will not conflict with other underground services. Further, all transformer boxes shall be located so as
not to be unsightly or hazardous to the public. (Ord. 869, 11-5-2001)
Title 10
MULTI-FAMILY, COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL
DEVELOPMENT
Chapter 1
ADMINISTRATION, GENERAL PROVISIONS
10-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known and referred to as the CITY OF CLINTON, ILLINOIS, MULTI-FAMILY,
COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE. (Ord. 868, 11-19-2001)
10-1-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose and intent for the adoption of the provisions of this title are as follows:
(A) To outline procedures and data required for submittal, review and approval by the city prior to
issuance of a building permit by the city.
(B) To provide minimum standards of design for the construction of utilities and other site
improvements required for multi-family, commercial and industrial developments.
(C) To coordinate individual developments with other planned developments with consideration given
to the city's comprehensive plan, the orderly extension of utilities, the present and future needs of
the community for streets, drainage, and other public use and the promotion of favorable
conditions to ensure the health, safety and general welfare of all persons living within the territory
governed by this title.
(D) To supplement the applicable portions of existing ordinances and codes adopted by the city. (Ord.
868, 11-19-2001)
10-1-3: APPROVAL AND EXCEPTIONS:
(A) No lot, block, parcel or tract of land shall, after adoption of this title, be developed for multi-family,
commercial or industrial use, nor any improvements made to the land, until all requirements of this
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 225/396
title, the requirements of the city zoning regulations, and approval and issuance of the building
permit is granted by the city.
(B) No lot, block, parcel or tract of land will be approved for multi-family, commercial or industrial
development which is subject to periodic flooding or which contains poor drainage facilities, and
which would make adequate drainage of the area to be developed, impossible.
(C) Severe flooding experienced along the major watercourses and their tributaries in and adjacent to
the city makes it essential that special attention be directed to title 12, chapter 4, article L, "O-FP
Floodplain Overlay District", and also title 12, chapter 15, "Special Flood Hazard Areas", of this
code.
(D) Filling in or reducing the volume of water storage of a floodplain below the high water elevation for
a 100-year storm or other higher elevation that may be established by the city, shall not be
approved. Both upstream and downstream properties shall be protected from increased flood
hazard.
(E) All land offered to the city for use as streets, alleys, schools, parks and other public use, shall be
referred to the plan commission for review and recommendation before being accepted by the city
council, or by any other governing authority of the city.
(F) In all site development, due regard shall be given to the preservation of historical sites and natural
features such as large trees, watercourses and scenic views.
(G) The city council may vary and make exceptions, as set forth herein, in instances where there is
sufficient evidence, in its opinion, of hardship caused by topographic conditions, or where any
other reasonable deterrents prevail. (Ord. 868, 11-19-2001)
10-1-4: INTERPRETATION:
(A) The provisions of this title shall be interpreted as minimum requirements.
(B) Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this title upon the use of development of the
land are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other
provision of this title or of any other official policy, law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of
any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive, or which impose higher standards or
requirements, shall govern.
(C) This title is not intended to abolish any easement, covenant, or any other private agreement;
provided, that where the regulations of this title are more restrictive or impose higher standards or
requirements than such easements, covenants or other private agreements, then the requirements
of this title shall govern.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 226/396
(D) If any chapter, section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this title is for any
reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions of this title. (Ord. 868, 11-19-2001)
10-1-5: ENFORCING OFFICER:
The provisions of this title shall be administered by the building and public safety officer acting in lieu
of the city council, except as specifically provided in this title. (Ord. 868, 11-19-2001)
10-1-6: BUILDING PERMITS, APPROVAL AND ISSUANCE:
10-1-6-1: BUILDING PERMIT ISSUANCE; COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
No building permit shall be issued providing for the improvement of any lot, block, parcel or tract of
land for multi-family, commercial or industrial use until all requirements of this title have been fulfilled.
(Ord. 868, 11-19-2001)
10-1-6-2: PREAPPLICATION CONFERENCE:
(A) Prior to the filing of an application for approval, the owner may arrange to meet with the city
building and public safety officer for preliminary discussions of the proposed development. This
step does not require formal application or fee.
(B) The purpose of this meeting is to afford the owner an opportunity to avail himself of advice and
assistance before preparation of the required drawings and data, and before formal application for
approval to save time and money, and to make the most of his opportunities.
(C) The preapplication conference is recommended, but is not a mandatory requirement of the owner.
(Ord. 868, 11-19-2001)
10-1-6-3: DRAWINGS AND DATA:
The owner shall cause to be prepared, the following drawings and supplemental material in
accordance with the requirements of this title:
(A) Building plans and specifications.
(B) Site development plan and specification. (Ord. 868, 11-19-2001)
10-1-6-4: APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 227/396
(A) The owner shall make application to the city clerk for approval and granting of permit. All
information, as noted in chapter 2 of this title shall be submitted as follows:
1. Three (3) copies of the detailed building plans and specifications.
2. Eight (8) copies of the site development plans.
3. Three (3) copies of the site development specifications.
4. Building permit fee.
5. Any other data deemed necessary by the city.
(B) The building permit fee shall be that which is noted in section 12-11-7 of this code.
(C) Upon the acceptance of the application by the city clerk, the city clerk shall deposit the filing fee in
the general fund.
(D) The city clerk shall retain one copy of the submitted drawings and data, and forward the remaining
copies to the city building and public safety officer.
(E) The building and public safety officer shall transmit one copy of the site development plans and
specifications to the superintendent of public works for review and recommendations, and one
copy of the site development plans to the supervisors of city owned utilities, utility companies,
planning commission and others as deemed necessary.
(F) The building and public safety officer may request additional copies of the submitted drawings and
data, or additional information deemed necessary.
(G) Following review of the submitted drawings and supporting materials for conformity to these
regulations, the zoning administrator shall, in the case of any application involving a structure eight
thousand (8,000) cubic feet or more in size, within thirty (30) days, submit his recommendations to
the planning commission indicating approval and any conditions for such approval, or disapproval
and the reasons therefor. In applications involving structures of under eight thousand (8,000) cubic
feet in size, the zoning administrator is authorized to issue a building permit without authorization
of the planning commission.
(H) The planning commission shall act on the recommendations of the building and public safety
officer at the next regularly scheduled meeting, to approve and authorize issuance of the required
permit, or disapproval and reasons therefor.
(I) The building and public safety officer shall notify the owner, in writing, of the action taken by the
planning commission, and issue the building permit, if so authorized. (Ord. 868, 11-19-2001)
10-1-7: ANNEXATION OF LAND REQUIRED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 228/396
All land included in the multi-family, commercial or industrial development contiguous to the corporate
boundary of the city shall be annexed to the city prior to final approval by the city council, unless
otherwise directed by the city council. (Ord. 868, 11-19-2001)
10-1-8: VARIATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS:
When the owner of the development can show that a provision of those regulations, if strictly adhered
to, would cause unnecessary hardship because of unique site conditions, the planning commission
may recommend variations to the city council. The owner shall apply in writing for such variations.
(Ord. 868, 11-19-2001)
10-1-9: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this title, the following words, terms, phrases and their derivations shall have the
meanings given in this section. The word "shall" is always mandatory and the word "may" is
permissive.
ALLEY: A public way along the side of, or in the rear of properties intended to provide secondary
access to these properties.
ALTER: To change the size, shape, or use of a structure.
BLOCK: The distance as measured along a street between intersecting streets from centerline to
centerline; and, where the context requires, it also means the enclosed area within the perimeter of
the streets or property lines enclosing it.
BUILDING: Any covered structure permanently affixed to land designed or used to shelter persons or
chattels.
COMMERCIAL USE/ESTABLISHMENT: Any use or establishment wherein goods are purchased or
sold, whether to the consuming public (retail) or to other businesses (wholesale).
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The plan or any portion thereof, adopted by this municipality to guide and
coordinate the physical and economic development of the community. The "comprehensive plan"
includes, but is not limited to, plans and programs regarding the location, character, and extension of
highways; bridges, public buildings or uses; utilities, schools, residential, commercial or industrial land
uses; parks, drainage facilities, etc.
CONFORMING: In compliance with the applicable provisions of this title.
DEVELOP: To erect any structure or to install any improvements on a tract of land, or to undertake
any activity (such as grading) in preparation therefor.
DRAINAGE COURSE: A natural or manmade watercourse for the drainage of surface waters.
DRIVEWAY: A minor way commonly providing vehicular access to a garage or off street parking.
EASEMENT: A grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of land by the general public, a
corporation, or a certain person or persons, for a specific purpose or purposes.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 229/396
FLOOD ELEVATION, REGULATORY: The elevation of the most severe flood that, on the basis of
corps of engineers' data, may be expected to occur once every one hundred (100) years.
FLOODPLAIN AREA: The area adjacent to a watercourse and its tributaries having an elevation equal
to or lower than the regulatory flood elevation. Tracts of land less than ten (10) acres in area that,
naturally or by landfill, have an elevation higher than the regulatory flood elevation shall be included in
the floodplain area if they are surrounded by land in the floodplain area.
IMPROVEMENTS: Those public improvements including site grading, streets, drainage, sanitary
sewers, water facilities and sidewalks, and other required utilities to fully serve the proposed
development.
INTERSECTION: The point at which two (2) or more public rights of way (generally streets) meet.
LOT: A tract of land intended as a unit for the purpose of transfer of ownership or development. A "lot"
may or may not coincide with a "lot of record".
MULTI-FAMILY: Two (2) or more families having separate living accommodations, but enclosed within
one building.
OWNER: Any individual, firm, association, partnership, trust, corporation, or any other legal entity
having sufficient proprietary interest in land sought to be developed, to commence and maintain
proceedings to improve the same under this title.
PARCEL: Refers broadly to a lot, trust, or any other piece of land.
PUBLIC STREET: A street dedicated for public use.
ROADWAY OR ROAD: The paved area existing in the street right of way and not the street right of
way width.
SCREENING: Trees, shrubs, walls, solid fences, etc., used as a means of visual and noise control.
SIGN: Any words, letters, figures, numerals, phrases, sentences, emblems, devices, designs, trade
names, or trademarks by which information is made known and which are used to advertise or
promote an individual, firm, association, corporation, profession, business, commodity, or product, and
which is visible from any public street, highway or pedestrianway.
STREET: A public or private way for motor vehicle travel. The term "street" includes a highway,
thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, pike, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, drive, court, and
similar designations; but excludes an alley or a way for pedestrian use only.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected on the ground, or attached to something having a
fixed location on the ground. All buildings are structures, but not all structures are buildings.
SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS: As defined in section 1-11-8 of this code. In the absence
of the superintendent of public works, the superintendent's duties shall be performed by the
administrative assistant in charge of infrastructure.
USE: The purpose or activity for which land or a structure thereon is designed, arranged, intended,
occupied, or maintained.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 230/396
VARIANCE: A relaxation of the strict application of the lot size, setbacks, or other bulk requirements
applicable to a particular lot or structure. (Ord. 868, 11-19-2001)
Chapter 2
REQUIRED DRAWINGS AND DATA
10-2-1: BUILDING PLAN AND SPECIFICATIONS:
(A) The owner shall cause to be prepared a building plan and specifications governing the
construction of a new building or structure, or part thereof, or to rebuild, structurally alter, add to or
relocate any building or structure, or part thereof.
(B) The building plan shall be a scaled drawing with sufficient dimensions and details, accompanied
by detailed specification adequate to provide for a complete review for compliance with the building
code adopted by the city.
(C) The building plan and specifications shall also state the existing and/or intended use of such
building or buildings, and supply such other information as may be required by the building and
public safety officer. (Ord. 868, 11-19-2001)
10-2-2: SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN AND SPECIFICATIONS:
(A) The owner shall cause to be prepared a site development plan and specifications for the
improvements necessary to serve the new building, structure, alteration or relocation, and
complete the development for its intended use.
(B) The site development plan shall consist of one or more drawings, as required, and shall be
prepared to show the following:
1. Identification And Description:
(a) The proposed name of the development or title indicating intended use.
(b) The names and address of the owner, architect, engineer.
(c) North point, scale, date of preparation and seal of architect and/or engineer, as may be
required.
2. Existing Conditions:
(a) Boundary line and dimensions thereof for the lot, block, parcel or tract of land to be
developed.
(b) The locations, widths, and names of adjacent platted streets or other public ways, showing
type of improvements, if any, railroad and utility rights of way, existing buildings or structures
or other improvements thereon and within proposed development and present use of adjacent
property.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 231/396
(c) The location and size of existing sanitary sewers, water mains, drainage courses, pipes and
structures, and other underground or overhead utilities on the site or intended for extension to
serve the new development.
(d) Topographic data including existing contours at vertical intervals of not more than two feet
(2') unless a greater interval is required to properly depict rough terrain. Topographic data
shall refer to the United States geological North American datum - mean sea level elevation
water, in state plane coordinate.
(e) Zoning classification for any land adjacent to the land to be developed.
3. Proposed Improvements:
(a) The exterior size, shape and location of existing building or structure, new building(s),
alteration or relocation referenced by dimension to boundary lines of lot, block, parcel or tract
of land being developed.
(b) The proposed drives, parking areas, street entrances, sidewalks, retaining walls, curbing,
screening, landscaping, sanitary sewers, water mains, gas mains, drainage, electrical service
and telephone service with proposed elevations, type of materials and details.
(c) Proposed finished contours and method of erosion control to be provided.
(d) Profiles for sanitary sewer extensions, drainage improvements and water main extensions
when required.
(e) Circulation plan for vehicular traffic entering, exiting and within the development.
(f) Detailed material and construction specifications for the site improvements to be constructed.
(g) Additional information deemed necessary by the building and public safety officer. (Ord. 868,
11-19-2001)
Chapter 3
DESIGN STANDARDS FOR SITE IMPROVEMENTS
10-3-1: DRIVES AND PARKING AREAS:
(A) Drives and parking areas shall be designed to provide favorable circulation within the
development, uninterrupted flow of vehicular traffic along the public street or streets adjacent to the
development, and adequate visibility for the safety of both vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
Separate (one-way) drives for ingress and egress may be required when safety and circulation will
be more adequately provided.
(B) The location of drives for ingress and egress shall be determined with full consideration given to
existing topographical features; the classification, right of way needs, volume and speed of traffic
along adjacent public streets or highways; the location of the area to be developed with reference
to the location of intersections, retaining walls, drainage structures, and other features that may
affect location and design, and proposed public street or highway improvements.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 232/396
(C) Where a development abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street, involving heavy
volumes of high speed vehicular traffic, the city may require marginal access streets, or a reverse
frontage with restricted and controlled access to the arterial street.
(D) In cases where the development is adjacent to an arterial street and expected volume of vehicular
traffic entering the development is significant, the city may require the owner to construct and bear
the expense of left turn and/or right turn lane improvements on the public arterial street to provide
for continuous and uninterrupted flow of traffic along the arterial street.
(E) Driveway improvements for ingress and egress constructed on public right of way from existing
street surface to right of way line shall meet or exceed the following minimum acceptable
pavement base and surface designs:
1. Nine inch (9") (compacted thickness) aggregate base course type B, with three inch (3")
(compacted thickness) bituminous concrete surface, class I.
2. Six and one-half inch (6.5") nonreinforced concrete pavement, with sawed contraction joints at
fifteen foot (15') intervals.
(F) The longitudinal slope on drives exiting on or entering from the public street or highway shall not
exceed ten percent (10%).
(G) Where driveway improvements connect to exiting on or entering from the public gutters, the
driveway shall be constructed with concrete curbing along both sides of the driveway base and
surface with the top of the curb at the same height as the top of the street curb and tapered to zero
height at the front edge of the sidewalk. Curbs shall be constructed with ten foot (10') radius,
unless otherwise directed by the superintendent of public works.
(H) The concrete used in the construction of the concrete curb and concrete driveway pavement shall
have an air content of not less than four percent (4%) or more than seven percent (7%) of the
volume of the concrete and shall have a minimum compressive strength of three thousand five
hundred (3,500) pounds per square inch at the age of twenty eight (28) days. (Ord. 868, 11-19-
2001)
10-3-2: SIDEWALKS:
(A) Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the specifications approved and used by the
city for sidewalk construction.
(B) Sidewalks shall be constructed in the street right of way with the back of the sidewalk six inches
(6") from the property line, unless otherwise directed by the superintendent of public works.
(C) Sidewalks shall have a minimum width of four feet (4') and a thickness of five inches (5").
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 233/396
(D) During development of said subdivision, sidewalks shall be constructed as such lot is developed
upon. (Ord. 868, 11-19-2001)
10-3-3: ALLEYS:
All alleys shall be improved with a roadway consisting of not less than eight inches (8") aggregate
base course type B (compacted thickness) of the following widths:
(A) Through residence blocks, not less than twelve feet (12').
(B) Through business areas, not less than sixteen feet (16'). (Ord. 868, 11-19-2001)
10-3-4: DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENTS:
(A) Multi-family, commercial and industrial developments proposed within areas subject to flooding will
not be allowed, as noted in subsections 10-1-3(B) through (D) of this title.
(B) An adequate system of storm water drainage shall be provided to collect and carry the flow of
surface water runoff to a suitable outlet. The storm water system shall consist of pipes, tiles,
manholes, inlets, catch basins or other necessary facilities that will adequately drain the
development, protect adjacent roadway pavements, and prevent the accumulation of storm water
at any place under normal conditions. Concentrated flow of surface water crossing sidewalks will
not be allowed.
(C) Proposed drainage systems shall be subject to approval by the superintendent of public works.
(D) Storm water drainage and detention/soil erosion and storm water management should be
designed per city regulations. (Ord. 868, 11-19-2001)
10-3-5: SANITARY SEWER:
(A) All multi-family, commercial and industrial developments shall be connected to a public sanitary
sewer system or private treatment facility provided by the owner, meeting the approval and
requirements of the city of Clinton, state of Illinois, department of health and environmental
protection agency.
(B) The minimum size of pipe for sanitary sewer main extensions shall be eight inches (8"). The
minimum size of pipe for sanitary service sewers (from sewer main to building) shall be six inches
(6").
(C) Sanitary sewer sizes shall be increased in cases where the flow from a proposed development
exceeds the capacity of the above mentioned minimum sizes.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 234/396
(D) If the city desires to increase the size or capacity of any portion or all of the sanitary sewer
proposed by the owner in order to provide service to areas not located within or beyond the limits
of said development, the cost thereof in excess of the cost of the owner's proposed installation
shall be refunded by the city to the owner on the following basis:
1. Prior to construction, the owner and the city shall agree upon the location and acreage of the
land which the excess capacity is designed to serve, and shall agree on the total excess cost in
dollars.
2. Any subdivider, developer or property owner in the area as established according to this
subsection (D), for which the said excess capacity has been provided, shall pay to the city the
dollar cost of such excess capacity in the same proportion that the acreage for which the excess
capacity was provided; whereupon the city shall refund a like amount to the owner providing said
excess capacity.
(E) Sanitary sewers shall be constructed in accordance with the "Standard Specifications For Water
And Sewer Main Construction In Illinois" and requirements of the environmental protection agency.
(F) The owner shall be responsible for obtaining the required permits for the installation and operation
of sewers prior to start of construction.
(G) The owner shall pay reasonable tap-on or connection charges, the same being determined by
resolution duly adopted by the city council of the city from time to time.
(H) All sanitary sewers shall be tested and shall meet the requirements for allowable leakage, as
required by the "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction In Illinois". Test
results properly certified by the owner's engineer, shall be submitted to the city prior to final
acceptance of the sanitary sewer improvements, by the city. (Ord. 868, 11-19-2001)
10-3-6: WATER SUPPLY:
(A) All multi-family, commercial and industrial developments shall be connected to the city water
supply system. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to contact both the city and the
environment protection agency to determine the availability of a water supply to serve the needs of
the development and whether the environmental protection agency will grant the required permit
for any required extension of water mains to serve the development. It is recommended that this
action be taken by the owner in the first stage of planning.
(B) Water main extensions shall be constructed with cast iron pipe (schedule 52), not less than six
inches (6") in diameter. Fire hydrants shall be installed at intervals not exceeding four hundred feet
(400'). At least one fire hydrant shall be installed on, or immediately adjacent to, each multi-family,
commercial or industrial development unless otherwise directed by the city.
(C) All water main extensions shall be extended to form a connection to an existing water main at both
ends whenever and wherever practical. When terrain or other factors make it necessary to end a
water main extension without connection to an existing water main, a fire hydrant shall be located
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 235/396
to provide for flushing out the dead end main as may periodically be required. Fire hydrants shall
be of the type to meet the requirements of the city water department and fire department.
(D) If the city desires to increase the size or capacity of any portion or all of the water main proposed
by the owner in order to provide service to area not located within or beyond the limits of said
development, the cost thereof in excess of the cost of the owner's proposed installation shall be
refunded by the city to the owner on the following basis:
1. Prior to construction, the owner and the city shall agree upon the location and acreage of the
land which the excess capacity is designed to serve, and shall agree on the total cost in dollars.
2. Any subdivider, developer or property owner in the area, as established according to this
subsection, for which the said excess capacity has been provided, shall pay to the city the dollar
cost of such excess capacity in the same proportion that the acreage of said subdivision,
development of land bears to the total acreage for which the excess capacity was provided,
whereupon the city stall refund a like amount to the owner providing said excess capacity.
(E) Water mains and water service lines to buildings shall be constructed in accordance with the
requirements of the "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction In Illinois".
(Ord. 868, 11-19-2001)
10-3-7: SCREENING:
Provisions shall be included in developments adjacent to a residential district to provide visual and
noise control in the form of trees, shrubs, walls, solid fencing, earth berms or other methods
determined acceptable and suitable. The type of screening for each particular area shall be subject to
approval by the city. (Ord. 868, 11-19-2001)
10-3-8: EROSION CONTROL AND LANDSCAPING:
(A) Erosion control will be required during construction to prevent the eroding away of soil as a result
of a storm water runoff and buildup of soil on sidewalks, roadways or adjacent ownership.
(B) Retaining walls shall be provided where necessary to avoid steep earth slopes that would be
difficult to maintain and control erosion.
(C) After completion of grading operations and the finish surface is shaped to a smooth contour and
the surface is shaped for proper drainage, fertilizer, seed and mulch shall be applied and
maintained to support growth of vegetation.
(D) The planting of various types of trees, bushes and shrubs is encouraged to enhance the
appearance of both the development and the city as required in section 12-5-21 of this code. (Ord.
868, 11-19-2001)
10-3-9: SIGNS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 236/396
(A) Illumination And Projection Of Signs: Signs permitted in residential district shall be nonflashing and
nonself-illuminated. No sign shall project beyond the property line into the public way, nor project
higher than one story or twenty feet (20') above the curb level, whichever is lower. Business and
advertising signs pertaining to districts C-1, C-2, C-3, I-1, and I-2 are permitted subject to the
following:
1. Illumination of all signs shall be diffused or indirect and shall be arranged so as not to reflect or
direct rays of light into adjacent resident districts or into the public way.
2. Any sign located in the direct line vision of any traffic control signal shall not have flashing,
intermittent, red, green or amber illumination.
3. Any sign located in any part of a C-1 and C-2 district and that portion of a C-3 district more than
one-half (1/2) mile from U.S. Route 51 bypass, shall not exceed a maximum size of one square
foot of sign per one linear foot of property width. Any sign located in that portion of the C-3
district that lies within one-half (1/2) mile of U.S. Route 51 bypass shall not exceed a maximum
size of two hundred (200) square feet.
(B) Signs Accessory To Parking Areas: Signs accessory to parking areas are subject to the following:
1. Signs designating entrances or exits to or from parking areas are limited to one sign for each
exit or entrance and a maximum size of three (3) square feet each shall be allowed. One sign
per parking area designating the conditions of use or identity of such parking area and limited to
a maximum size of eight (8) square feet shall be permitted; provided, that on a corner lot two (2)
such signs, one facing each street, shall be permitted.
2. No sign shall project higher than eight feet (8') above curb level.
(C) Signs Allowed In All Districts: Signs allowed in all districts without a permit:
1. Public Signs: Signs of a public, noncommercial nature, including safety signs, danger signs,
trespassing signs, traffic signs, signs indicating scenic or historical points of interest, memorial
plaques, and the like, and all signs erected by or on order of a public officer in the performance
of a public duty.
2. Identification Signs: Signs which identify the business, owner, manager, or resident and set forth
the address of the premises where the sign is located, and which contain no other material.
3. Integral Signs: Names of buildings, dates of construction, commemorative tablets and the like,
when carved into stone, concrete, or similar material or made of bronze, aluminum, or other
permanent type of construction and made an integral part of the building or structure.
4. Institutional Signs: Any sign or bulletin board setting forth or denoting the name of or simple
announcement for any public, charitable, educational, or religious institution, when located on
the premises of such institution, provided such sign or bulletin board, or both, shall not exceed a
total of twenty four (24) square feet in display surface. If building mounted, these signs shall be
flat wall signs, and shall not project above the roofline or front facade of the building. If
freestanding, the total height shall not exceed six feet (6').
5. Private Traffic Direction Signs And Related Signs: Signs directing traffic movement onto a
premises or within a premises, when such signs are located on the premises, do not exceed five
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 237/396
(5) square feet in area for each sign and, if freestanding, do not exceed eight feet (8') in total
height. Directional signs flush with paved areas are exempt from these standards.
6. Community Event Signs: Signs advertising a public entertainment or event of public interest and
which are unlighted. These signs shall remain in place for no more than twenty one (21) days
before and three (3) days after the event for which they were erected.
7. Political Campaign Signs: Signs or posters announcing the candidates seeking public political
office and/or political issues, and data pertinent thereto, up to an area of ten (10) square feet.
These signs shall be confined to private property, and shall be removed within three (3) days
after the event for which they were erected.
8. Individual Property Sale Or Rental Signs: Any on premises sign announcing the name of the
owner, manager, realtor, or other person directly involved in the sale or rental of the property, or
announcing the purpose for which it is being offered. Such signs may be freestanding or wall
mounted only. Signs may not be illuminated. There shall be not more than one such sign per lot;
except, on a corner lot two (2) signs, one facing each street, shall be permitted. No such sign
shall exceed ten (10) square feet in area nor be closer than eight feet (8') to another zoning lot.
9. Home Occupation Signs: Home occupation signs, either wall mounted or freestanding, shall not
exceed one per premises, and not exceed four (4) square feet in area.
10. Underground Public Utility Warning Signs: Standard types of warning signs marking the routes
of underground public utility pipes, conduits, and cables.
11. House Or Building Address: Any sign which sets forth the house or building address.
12. Window Signs: Signs which are affixed to windows temporarily identifying a product, and
permanently affixed signs with the name, monogram, logo, address and telephone number of
the person or firm occupying the premises.
13. Subdivision Sign: Any sign announcing the names of architects, engineers, contractors, or
other individuals or firms, involved with the subdivision of property (but not including any
advertisement of any product) or announcing the character of the subdivision or the purpose for
which it is intended. Such signs shall be of a temporary nature and be removed after one year
and replaced with a permanent sign if the owner of the subdivision plans to erect such a sign.
14. Construction Signs: Any sign announcing the names of architects, engineers, contractors, or
other individuals or firms involved with the construction, alteration or repair of a building (but not
including any advertisement of any product) or announcing the character of the building
enterprise or the purpose for which the building is intended, or to indicate the presence of
underground public utility structures to avoid damage to structures by excavation. Such signs
shall be confined to the site of the construction, alteration or repair, and shall be removed within
thirty (30) days after completion of the work.
Signs which refer to businesses no longer in existence or operation at the location advertised
shall be removed within ninety (90) days after the effective date of discontinuance of the
business at the location(s) advertised.
Signs which make use of words such as "stop", "look", "danger", or any other words, phrases,
symbols or characters, in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic are
strictly prohibited. (Ord. 868, 11-19-2001)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 238/396
Title 11
MOBILE HOME COMMUNITIES
Chapter 1
ADMINISTRATION, GENERAL PROVISIONS
11-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This title shall be known and may be cited as the CITY OF CLINTON MOBILE HOME COMMUNITY
ORDINANCE1. (Ord. 45, 3-19-1973)
11-1-2: FINDINGS AND POLICY:
(A) The city council finds that properly planned and operated mobile home communities:
1. Promote the safety and health of the residents of such communities and of other nearby
communities.
2. Encourage economical and orderly development of such communities and other nearby
communities.
(B) It is, therefore, declared to be the policy of the city to eliminate and prevent health and safety
hazards and to promote the economical and orderly development and utilization of land by
providing for planning and operating mobile home communities and by providing for the standards
and regulations necessary to accomplish these purposes. (Ord. 45, 3-19-1973)
11-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: Any structural addition to the mobile home which includes awnings,
cabanas, carports, Florida rooms, porches, ramadas, storage cabinets and similar appurtenant
structures.
BUILDING: A roofed structure erected for permanent use.
COMMON AREA: Any area or space designed for joint use of tenants occupying mobile home
developments.
COMMUNITY MANAGEMENT: The person who owns or has charge, care or control of the mobile
home development.
COMMUNITY SYSTEM (Water Or Sewerage): A central system which serves all living units and is not
publicly owned.
DENSITY: The number of mobile homes or mobile home stands per gross acre.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 239/396
DRIVEWAY: A minor private way used by vehicles and pedestrians on a mobile home lot or for
common access to a small group of lots or common facilities.
DWELLING: See definition of Living Unit.
EASEMENT: A vested or acquired right to use land, other than as a tenant, for specific purposes; such
right being held by someone other than the owner who holds title to the land.
ENFORCING AGENCY: The health authority, as provided for by section 1-11-7 of this code, or other
agencies of the state or the political subdivision charged by law with the duty to enforce the provisions
of this chapter.
HEALTH AUTHORITY: The state department of health or its authorized representative of the
appropriate political subdivision, which for the city is the health officer appointed in accordance with
said section 1-11-7 of this code.
HOUSING: Living units, dwellings and/or other structures that shelter or cover.
LICENSE: A written document issued by the enforcing agency allowing a person to operate and
maintain a mobile home development under the provisions of this chapter.
LIVING UNIT: A residential unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one family
including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
LOT AREA: The total area reserved for exclusive use of the occupants of a mobile home.
LOT LINE: A line bounding the lot as shown on the accepted plot plan.
MOBILE HOME: See chapter 210, sections 115/2.1 et seq., of the Illinois Compiled Statutes.
MOBILE HOME COMMUNITY: A mobile home development of five (5) or more independent mobile
homes and related utilities and facilities, including the mobile homes and all of the people living within
the development.
MOBILE HOME DEVELOPMENT: A contiguous parcel of land which has been planned and improved
for the placement of mobile homes.
MOBILE HOME LOT: A parcel of land for the placement of a mobile home and the exclusive use of its
occupants.
MOBILE HOME STAND: That part of an individual mobile home lot which has been reserved for the
placement of a mobile home.
OCCUPIED AREA: That area of an individual mobile home lot which has been covered by a mobile
home and its accessory structures.
PERMANENT BUILDING: A building, except a mobile home accessory structure.
PERMIT: A written document issued by the enforcing agency permitting the construction, alteration or
expansion of a mobile home development.
PLAT: Any map, plan or chart of a city, town, section or subdivision, indicating the location and
boundaries of individual properties.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 240/396
PLOT: A parcel of land consisting of one or more lots or portions thereof which is described by
reference to a recorded plat or by metes and bounds.
POWER SUPPLY ASSEMBLY: The conductors, including the grounding conductors, insulated from
one another, the connectors, attachment plugs, caps and all other fittings, grommets or devices
installed for the purpose of delivering energy from the service equipment to the distribution panel
within the mobile home.
PRIVATE STREET: A private way which affords principal means of access to abutting individual
mobile home lots and auxiliary buildings.
PROPERTY: A plot with any buildings or other improvements located thereon.
PROPERTY LINE: A recorded boundary of a plot.
PUBLIC STREET: A public way which affords principal means of access to abutting properties.
PUBLIC SYSTEM (Water Or Sewerage): A system which is owned and operated by a local
governmental authority or by an established public utility company which is adequately controlled by a
governmental authority. Such systems are usually existing systems serving a municipality, a township,
an urban county or a water or sewer district established and directly controlled under the laws of a
state.
RIGHTS OF WAY: The area, either public or private, over which the right of passage exists.
SERVICE BUILDING: A building housing toilet, lavatory and such other facilities as may be required
by this chapter.
SERVICE EQUIPMENT: The necessary equipment, usually consisting of circuit breaker or switch and
fuses and their accessories located near the point of entrance of supply conductors to or in a building
or mobile home and intended to constitute the main control and means of cutoff for the supply to that
mobile home or building.
SEWER CONNECTION: A connection consisting of all pipes, fittings and appurtenances from the
drain outlet of the mobile home to the inlet of the corresponding sewer riser pipe of the sewerage
system serving the mobile home development.
SEWER RISER PIPE: That portion of the sewer lateral which extends vertically to the ground
elevation and terminates at each mobile home lot.
SHALL: Indicates that which is required.
SHOULD: Indicates that which is recommended but not required.
SITE: A parcel of land consisting of one or more lots or portions thereof which is described by
reference to a recorded plat or by metes and bounds.
WATER CONNECTION: A connection consisting of all pipes, fittings and appurtenances from the
water riser pipe to the water inlet pipe of the distribution system within the mobile home.
WATER RISER PIPE: That portion of the water supply system serving the mobile home development
which extends vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at a designated point at each mobile
home lot. (Ord. 45, 3-19-1973)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 241/396
11-1-4: PERMITS REQUIRED:
(A) Application:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, alter or extend any mobile home development
within the areas of the city, or that under its jurisdiction, unless he holds a valid permit issued by
the enforcing agency in the name of such person for the specific construction, alteration or
extension proposed.
2. All applications for permits to the city shall be the same as that required by the Illinois Compiled
Statutes, chapter 210, section 115/4.
(B) Fee: All applications shall be accompanied by the deposit of a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00).
(C) Issuance: When, upon review of the application, the enforcing agency is satisfied that the
proposed plan meets the requirements of this chapter, a permit shall be issued. (Ord. 45, 3-19-
1973)
11-1-5: LICENSES REQUIRED:
(A) Annual Licenses: It shall be unlawful for any person to administer any mobile home community in
the areas of the city unless he holds a valid license issued annually by the enforcing agency in the
name of such person for the specific mobile home community. All applications for licenses shall be
made to the enforcing agency, who shall issue a license upon compliance by the applicant with
provisions of this chapter.
(B) Transfer, Sale Of License: Every person holding a license shall give notice in writing to the
enforcing agency within twenty four (24) hours after having sold, transferred, given away or
otherwise disposed of interest in or control of any mobile home community. Such notice shall
include the name and address of the person succeeding to the ownership or control of such mobile
home community. Upon application in writing for transfer of the license and deposit of a fee of
twenty five dollars ($25.00), the license shall be transferred if the mobile home community is in
compliance with all applicable provisions of this chapter.
(C) Application For License; Fee: Applications for original licenses shall be in writing, signed by the
applicant, accompanied by an affidavit of the applicant as to the truth of the application and by the
deposit of a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00), and shall contain: the name and address of the applicant;
the location and legal description of the mobile home community showing all mobile home stands,
structures, roads and other service facilities.
(D) Renewal Licenses: Applications for renewal of licenses shall be made in writing by the holders of
the licenses, shall be accompanied by the deposit of a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) and shall contain
any change in the information submitted since the original license was issued or the latest renewal
granted.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 242/396
(E) Hearing On Denial: Any person whose application for a license under this chapter has been
denied may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the enforcing agency
under the procedure provided by subsection 11-1-7(A) of this chapter.
(F) Suspend Or Revoke License For Cause: Whenever, upon inspection of any mobile home
community, the enforcing agency finds that conditions or practices exist which are in violation of
this chapter, the enforcing agency shall give notice in writing in accordance with subsection 11-1-
7(A) of this chapter to the person to whom the license was issued that unless such conditions or
practices are corrected within a reasonable period of time specified in the notice by the enforcing
agency, the license shall be suspended. At the end of such period the enforcing agency shall
reinspect such mobile home community and, if such conditions or practices have not been
corrected, he shall suspend the license and give notice in writing of such suspension to the person
to whom this license is issued. Upon receipt of notice of such suspension, such person shall cease
administration of such mobile home community except as provided in subsection 11-1-7(B) of this
chapter. (Ord. 45, 3-19-1973)
11-1-6: INSPECTIONS:
(A) The enforcing agency is hereby authorized and directed to make such inspections as are
necessary to determine satisfactory compliance with this chapter.
(B) The enforcing agency shall have the power to enter at reasonable times upon any private or public
property for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions relating to the enforcement of
this chapter.
(C) The enforcing agency shall have the power to inspect the register containing a record of all
residents of the mobile home community.
(D) It shall be the duty of every resident of a mobile home community to give the management thereof,
or his designated agent, access to any part of such mobile home development at reasonable times
for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with
this chapter. (Ord. 45, 3-19-1973)
11-1-7: NOTICES, HEARINGS AND ORDERS:
(A) Whenever the enforcing agency determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that
there has been a violation of any provision of this chapter, the enforcing agency shall give notice of
such alleged violation to the person to whom the permit or license was issued, as hereinafter
provided. Such notice shall:
1. Be in writing;
2. Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
3. Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 243/396
4. Be served upon the owner or his agent, as the case may require; provided, that such notice or
order shall be deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or agent when a copy
thereof has been sent by registered mail to his last known address, or when he has been served
with such notice by any method authorized or required by the laws of this state;
5. Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance with the provisions
of this chapter.
(B) Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection with the enforcement of
any provision of this chapter may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the
enforcing agency; provided, that such person shall file in the office of the enforcing agency a
written petition requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor
within ten (10) days after the notice was served. The filing of the request for a hearing shall
operate as a stay of the notice and of the suspension except in the case of an order issued under
subsection (D) of this section. Upon receipt of such petition, the enforcing agency shall set a time
and place for such hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. At such hearing the
petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show why such notice should be
modified or withdrawn. The hearing shall be commenced not later than ten (10) days after the day
on which the petition was filed; provided, that upon application of the petitioner the enforcing
agency may postpone the date of the hearing for a reasonable time beyond such ten (10) day
period when in the agency's judgment the petitioner has submitted good and sufficient reasons for
such postponement.
(C) After such hearing the enforcing agency shall make findings as to compliance with the provisions
of this title and shall issue an order in writing sustaining, modifying or withdrawing the notice which
shall be served as provided in subsection (A)4 of this section. Upon failure to comply with any
order sustaining, modifying or withdrawing a notice, the license of the mobile home development
affected by the order shall be revoked.
(D) Whenever the enforcing agency finds that an emergency exists which requires immediate action to
protect the public health, the agency may, without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the
existence of such an emergency and requiring that such action be taken as may be deemed
necessary to meet the emergency including the suspension of the permit or license.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this title, such order shall be effective immediately. Any
person to whom such an order is directed shall comply therewith immediately, but upon petition to
the enforcing agency shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible. The provisions of subsection
(C) of this section shall be applicable to such hearing and the order issued thereafter. (Ord. 45, 3-
19-1973)
11-1-8: EXEMPTIONS:
(A) Where the enforcing agency finds that compliance with provisions of this title would result in undue
hardship, an exemption may be granted by the enforcing agency without impairing the intent and
purpose of this title. Deviations from design, construction and installation provisions shall be
brought into compliance within one of two (2) periods of time. Either a period of time hereinafter
referred to as a "minimum period" not to exceed five (5) years or a period of time hereinafter
referred to as a "maximum period" not to exceed twenty five (25) years. Factors to be considered
in determining the length of time and the given period in which to correct any deviation in and from
standards shall include, but not be limited to, the economic feasibility of improvement, nature,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 244/396
significance and extent of the deviation, depreciation of materials, improvements, the existing
layout and other factors.
(B) Such period shall begin after the enforcing agency has given notice of a certain and specific
deviation from this title to the person to whom the permit or certification was issued.
(C) Gradual improvements to a higher degree of conformity shall be permissive, provided that there
shall be complete conformity at the end of a period prescribed by the enforcing agency. (Ord. 45,
3-19-1973)
11-1-9: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this title shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine as
provided in section 1-4-1 of this code; and each day's failure to comply shall constitute a separate
violation. The imposition of any such fine shall not bar any other relief or penalties otherwise
applicable. (Ord. 45, 3-19-1973)
Chapter 2
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
11-2-1: ENVIRONMENTAL, OPEN SPACE AND ACCESS REQUIREMENTS:
11-2-1-1: GENERAL:
(A) A mobile home development shall be located only upon property designated for that use by the
appropriate public planning agency.
(B) No part of any park shall be used for nonresidential purposes, except such uses that are required
for the direct servicing and well being of park residents and for the management and maintenance
of the park. Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed as prohibiting the sale of the mobile
home located on a mobile home stand and connected to the pertinent utilities.
(C) Condition of soil, ground water level, drainage and topography shall not create hazards to the
property or the health and safety of the occupants. The site shall not be exposed to objectionable
smoke, dust, noise, odors or other adverse influences and no portion which would expose persons
or property to hazards. (Ord. 45, 3-19-1973)
11-2-1-2: OBJECTIVES:
Site planning improvements shall provide for:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 245/396
(A) Facilities and amenities appropriate to the needs of the occupants.
(B) Safe, comfortable and sanitary use by the occupants under all weather conditions.
(C) Practical and efficient operation and maintenance of all facilities at reasonable costs. (Ord. 45, 3-
19-1973)
11-2-1-3: DENSITY REQUIREMENTS:
(A) The maximum density of mobile homes shall be regulated by separation requirements, occupied
lot area ratios and recreation area requirements as set forth in this standard. Density will vary in
accommodating different sizes of mobile home units with its accessory structures used in the
locality and in the type of layout proposed.
(B) Each mobile home site shall be separated from other mobile home spaces by a yard of not less
than ten feet (10').
(C) Mobile home stands shall not occupy an area in excess of one-fourth (1/4) of the respective lot
area. The accumulated occupied area of the mobile home and its accessory structures on a mobile
home lot, shall not exceed one-half (1/2) of the respective lot area. (Ord. 45, 3-19-1973)
11-2-1-4: RECREATION AREAS:
Not less than eight percent (8%) of the gross site area shall be devoted to recreational facilities,
generally provided in a central location; provided, however, that this requirement shall not be less than
one-half (1/2) acre for each one hundred (100) sites and the minimum area in any development shall
be not less than one-half (1/2) acre. In larger developments recreation facilities can be decentralized
with at least one area large enough for a small softball park (2/3 of an acre). Recreation areas may
include space for community buildings and community use facilities, such as indoor recreation areas,
swimming pools, hobby and repair shops and service buildings. (Ord. 45, 3-19-1973)
11-2-1-5: REQUIRED SETBACKS, BUFFER STRIPS AND SCREENING:
(A) All mobile homes shall be located at least forty feet (40') from the exterior property boundary line,
except where greater distances are required by the zoning regulations (title 12 of this code). All
mobile homes shall be set back at least twenty five feet (25') from the right of way line of any
internal public or private street system of the park (development).
(B) There shall be a minimum distance of twenty five feet (25') between the mobile home stand and
the abutting street.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 246/396
(C) All mobile home developments shall be provided with screening such as fences or natural growth
along the property boundary line separating the development and adjacent land uses. (Ord. 45, 3-
19-1973)
11-2-1-6: STREETS:
(A) General: All mobile home developments shall be provided with safe and convenient vehicular
access from abutting public streets or roads to each mobile home lot. Such access shall be
provided by streets, driveways or other means.
(B) Entrance Streets: Entrances to mobile home developments shall have direct connections to a
public street and shall be designed to allow free movement of traffic on such adjacent public
streets. No parking shall be permitted on the entrance streets for a distance of one hundred feet
(100') from its point of beginning.
(C) Circulation: The street system should provide convenient circulation by means of minor streets
and properly located collector streets. Dead end streets shall be limited in length to one thousand
feet (1,000') and their closed end shall be provided with an adequate turnaround (80 foot diameter
cul-de-sac).
(D) Pavement Widths: Pavements should be of adequate widths to accommodate the contemplated
parking and traffic load in accordance with the type of street with ten foot (10') minimum moving
lanes for collector streets, nine foot (9') minimum moving lanes for minor streets, seven foot (7')
minimum lane for parallel parking, and in all cases shall meet the minimum requirements of the
subdivision regulations and master plan component.
(E) Street Grades: Grades of all streets shall be sufficient to ensure adequate surface drainage and
shall further be in conformance with the subdivision regulations of the city (title 9 of this code).
(F) Compliance With Subdivision Regulations: With respect to paving materials, curbs and gutters,
intersections, offsets and radii of curvature, the provisions of the subdivision regulations (title 9 of
this code) shall apply to private streets and streets to be dedicated.
(G) Streetlights: Lighting shall be designed to produce a minimum of one-tenth (0.1) foot-candle
throughout the street system. Potentially hazardous locations, such as major street intersections
and steps or stepped ramps, shall be individually illuminated with a minimum of three-tenths (0.3)
foot-candle. (Ord. 45, 3-19-1973)
11-2-1-7: WALKS:
(A) General Requirements: All mobile home developments shall be provided with safe, convenient, all
season pedestrian access of adequate width for intended use, durable and convenient to maintain.
Sudden changes in alignment and gradient shall be avoided.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 247/396
(B) Common Walk System: A common walk system shall be provided and maintained between
locations where pedestrian traffic is concentrated. Such common walks shall have a minimum
width of three and one-half feet (31/2').
(C) Individual Walks: All mobile home stands should be connected to common walks, streets,
driveways or to parking spaces. Such individual walks shall have a minimum width of two feet (2').
(Ord. 45, 3-19-1973)
11-2-1-8: MOBILE HOME LOTS:
(A) General: The limits of each mobile home lot should be marked on the ground by suitable means.
Locations of lot limits on the ground should be the same as shown on accepted plans.
(B) Mobile Home Stands: The mobile home stand shall be improved to provide adequate support for
the placement and tie down of the mobile home. The stand shall not lean, shift or settle unevenly
under the weight of the mobile home due to frost action, inadequate drainage, vibration, wind or
other forces acting on the structure. Anchors or tie downs should be provided, such as cast in
place concrete "dead men", eyelets imbedded in concrete crew augers or arrowhead anchors and
placed at each corner of the mobile home stand and at intervals of at least twenty feet (20'). Each
device shall be able to sustain a minimum load of four thousand eight hundred (4,800) pounds.
(C) Driveways: Improved driveways should be provided on lots where necessary for convenient
access to mobile homes. The minimum width shall be ten feet (10').
(D) Parking Spaces: A minimum of two (2) improved off street parking spaces shall be provided for
each mobile home lot.
(E) Outdoor Living Area: Each mobile home lot should be provided with an outdoor living and service
area. Such area should be improved as necessary to assure reasonable privacy and comfort. The
minimum area should be not less than two hundred (200) square feet with a least dimension of ten
feet (10'). (Ord. 45, 3-19-1973)
11-2-2: UTILITIES AND OTHER SERVICES:
11-2-2-1: WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM:
(A) General Requirements: An accessible, adequate, safe and potable supply of water shall be
provided in each mobile home development. Where a public supply of water of satisfactory
quantity, quality and pressure is available at the site or at the boundary of the site, connection shall
be made thereto and its supply used exclusively. When a satisfactory public water supply is not
available, a private water supply system may be developed and used as approved by the enforcing
agency.
(B) Source And Volume Of Supply:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 248/396
1. The water supply shall be capable of supplying a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) gallons per
day per mobile home.
2. Every well or suction line of the water supply system shall comply with appropriate regulations of
the health authority.
3. No well casings, pumping machinery or suction pipes shall be placed in any pit, room or space
extending below ground level nor in any room or space aboveground which is walled in or
otherwise enclosed, unless such rooms, whether above or below ground, have free drainage by
gravity to the surface of the ground.
4. The treatment of a private water supply shall be in accordance with applicable laws and
regulations.
(C) Water Storage Facilities: All water storage reservoirs shall be covered, watertight and constructed
of impervious material. Overflows and vents of such reservoirs shall be effectively screened.
Manholes shall be constructed with overlapping covers, so as to prevent the entrance of
contaminated materials. Reservoir overflow pipes shall discharge through an acceptable air gap.
(D) Water Distribution System:
1. All water piping, fixtures and other equipment shall be constructed and maintained in
accordance with state and local regulations and requirements and shall be of a type and in
locations approved by the health authority.
2. The water piping system shall not be connected with nonpotable or questionable water supplies
and shall be protected against the hazards of backflow or back siphonage.
3. The system shall be so designed and maintained as to provide a pressure of not less than
twenty (20) pounds and not more than eighty (80) pounds per square inch, under all normal
operating conditions at each mobile home stand. Also, the system shall be capable of supplying
e.g., fifty (50) mobile homes with a demand load of one hundred (100) gpm, one hundred (100)
mobile homes with one hundred eighty (180) gpm, and three hundred (300) mobile homes with
three hundred seventy (370) gpm. Greater design values may be required when the system is to
provide fire hydrants. In such event the water supply system shall permit the operation of a
minimum of two (2) 11/2-inch hose streams. Each of two (2) nozzles, held four feet (4') above the
ground, shall deliver at least seventy five (75) gallons of water per minute at a flowing pressure
of at least twenty (20) pounds per square inch at the highest elevation point of the development.
4. Fire hydrants, if provided, shall be located within five hundred feet (500') of any mobile home,
service building or other structure in the development.
5. Water mains, if installed parallel to sewer lines, shall be separated, whenever possible, at least
ten feet (10') horizontal from sanitary sewer, storm sewer or sewer manhole. In case of unusual
conditions, separation requirements can be waived, provided the sewer is constructed of
materials and with joints that are equivalent to water main standards of construction and shall be
pressure tested to assure watertightness prior to backfilling.
(E) Individual Water Riser Pipes And Connections:
1. Individual water riser pipes shall be located within the area of the mobile home stand and
approximately thirty feet (30') from the front of such stand.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 249/396
2. Water riser pipes shall extend at least four inches (4") above ground elevation. The pipe
diameter shall be at least three-fourths inch (3/4"). The water outlet shall be capped when a
mobile home does not occupy the lot.
3. Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent freezing of service lines, valves and riser pipes
and to protect risers from thawing actions of ground during freezing weather. Surface drainage
shall be diverted away from the location of the riser pipe.
4. A shutoff valve below the frost line shall be provided near the water riser pipe on each mobile
home lot.
5. Underground stop and waste valves shall not be installed on any water service. (Ord. 45, 3-19-
1973)
11-2-2-2: SEWAGE DISPOSAL:
(A) General Requirements: An adequate and safe sewerage system shall be provided in all mobile
home developments for conveying and disposing of all sewage. Whenever feasible, connection
shall be made to a public system. All new improvements shall be designed, constructed and
maintained in accordance with state and local laws1.
(B) Sewer Lines: All sewer lines shall be located in trenches of sufficient depth to be free of breakage
from traffic or other movements and shall be separated from the development water supply system
at a safe distance (see section 11-2-2-1(D)5 of this chapter). Sewers shall be at a grade which will
ensure a velocity of two feet (2') per second when flowing full. The system shall be designed
adequate for a minimum flow of one hundred fifty (150) gallons per day per mobile home lot. All
sewer lines shall be constructed of materials approved by the enforcing agency, shall be
adequately vented and shall have watertight joints.
(C) Individual Sewer Connections:
1. Each mobile home stand shall be provided with a four inch (4") diameter sewer riser pipe. The
sewer riser pipe shall be located within the area of the mobile home stand, and approximately
forty feet (40') from the front of such stand.
2. The "sewer connection" (see definition in section 11-1-3 of this title) shall have a nominal inside
diameter of three inches (3"), and the slope of any portion thereof shall be at least one-fourth
inch (1/4") per foot. The sewer connection shall consist of one pipeline only without any branch
fittings. All joints shall be watertight.
3. All materials used for sewer connections shall be semirigid, corrosive resistant, nonabsorbent
and durable. The inner surface shall be smooth.
4. Provisions shall be made for adequately sealing the sewer riser pipe when a mobile home does
not occupy the lot. Surface drainage shall be diverted away from the riser. The rim of the riser
pipe shall extend at least four inches (4") above ground elevation.
(D) Sewage Treatment And/Or Discharge: Where the sewer lines of the mobile home development
are not connected to a public sewer, all proposed sewage disposal facilities shall be approved by
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 250/396
the enforcing agency prior to construction. Effluents from sewage treatment facilities shall be
discharged only as permitted by the enforcing agency. (Ord. 45, 3-19-1973)
11-2-2-3: ELECTRICAL DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM:
(A) Definition: "Mobile home development electrical wiring system" shall mean all of the electrical
wiring, fixtures, equipment and appurtenances related to electrical installations within a mobile
home development, up to the mobile home service entrance conductor, or if none, the mobile
home service equipment.
(B) Compliance With Adopted Code: Except as otherwise permitted or required by this standard, all
electrical installations in mobile home developments shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the applicable electrical code adopted by the enforcing agency.
(C) Distribution System: The mobile home development secondary electrical distribution system to
mobile home lots shall be single phase, 120/240 volts.
(D) Calculated Load:
1. Mobile home development electrical wiring systems shall be calculated on the basis of not less
than sixteen thousand (16,000) watts (at 120/240 volts) per each mobile home service. The
demand factors which are set forth in the following table are the minimum allowable demand
factors which may be used in calculating load on feeders and service.
Number Of Mobile Home Lots Demand Factor (Percent)
1 100
2 55
5 33
10 27
20 25
50 23
100 and over 22
2. For the purpose of this subsection, where the development service exceeds two hundred forty
(240) volts, transformers and secondary distribution panel boards shall be treated as services.
3. Mobile home lot feeder circuit conductors shall have adequate capacity for the loads supplied,
and shall be rated at not less than one hundred (100) amperes at 120/240 volts.
(E) Mobile Home Service Equipment:
1. Mobile home service equipment shall be rated at not less than one hundred (100) amperes.
Provision may be made for connecting a mobile home power supply assembly by a permanent
wiring method which may have fifty (50) ampere receptacles conforming to applicable electrical
codes.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 251/396
2. Mobile home service equipment may also be provided with a means for connecting a mobile
home accessory building or structure or additional electrical equipment located outside a mobile
home by a permanent wiring method.
3. Additional receptacles may be provided for connection of electrical equipment located outside
the mobile home.
4. The point of the electrical connection for the mobile home will be within the area of the mobile
home stand and approximately forty feet (40') from the front of such stand. (Ord. 45, 3-19-1973)
11-2-2-4: GAS DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM:
(A) General: Gas equipment and installations within a mobile home development shall be designed
and constructed in accordance with the applicable codes adopted by the enforcing agency. Where
the city does not assume jurisdiction, such installation shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the appropriate provision of the American National Standards Institute, ANSI-Z
21, 30 and Z 106.1.
(B) Required Gas Supply: The minimum hourly volume of gas required at each mobile home lot outlet
or any section of the mobile home development gas piping system shall be calculated as follows:
Natural LPG
For the most remote mobile home lot outlet on any branch or main 125 cfh 50 cfh
For the second most remote outlet on any branch or main 100 cfh 40 cfh
For the third most remote outlet on any branch or main 75 cfh 30 cfh
After the third most remote outlet subsequent branch or main line loadings may be computed using a
value of fifty (50) cubic feet per hour for natural gas and twenty (20) cubic feet per hour for liquefied
petroleum gas.
(C) Installation: All gas piping installed below ground shall have a minimum earth cover of eighteen
inches (18"). Gas piping shall not be installed under any mobile home.
(D) System Shutoff Valve: A readily accessible and identified shutoff valve controlling the flow of gas
to the entire gas piping system shall be installed near the point of connection to the service piping
or supply connection of the liquefied petroleum gas tank.
(E) Mobile Home Lot Shutoff Valve: Each mobile home lot shall have an approved gas shutoff valve
installed upstream of the mobile home lot gas outlet and located on the outlet riser at a height of
not less than four inches (4") above grade. Such valve shall not be located under any mobile
home. Whenever the mobile home lot outlet is not in use, the outlet shall be equipped with an
approved cap or plug to prevent accidental discharge of gas.
(F) Mobile Home Connector: Each mobile home shall be connected to the mobile home lot outlet by
an approved three-fourths inch (3/4") mobile home connector not more than six feet (6') in length.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 252/396
Approved pipe and fittings may be used between the flexible connector and the mobile home lot
gas outlet when the distance between the mobile home lot gas outlet and the mobile home gas
service connection exceeds that required to make a safe installation with only a mobile home
connector.
(G) Mechanical Protection: All gas outlet risers, regulators, meters, valves or other exposed
equipment shall be protected from mechanical damage by vehicles or other causes.
(H) Location: The mobile home gas connection shall be installed at the edge of the mobile home
stand, approximately thirty feet (30') from the front of such stand, and located as not to terminate
beneath the mobile home. (Ord. 45, 3-19-1973)
11-2-2-5: FUEL OIL DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS:
(A) Distribution systems shall be installed and maintained in accordance with applicable codes and
regulations governing such systems. Piping installed belowground shall have a minimum earth
cover of eighteen inches (18").
(B) All piping from outside fuel storage tanks or cylinders to mobile homes shall be permanently
installed and securely fastened in place.
(C) All fuel oil storage tanks or cylinders should be installed underground and shall not be located
inside or beneath any mobile home or accessory structure, or less than five feet (5') from any
mobile home exit.
(D) Every tank shall be vented by a vent not less than one and one-fourth inches (11/4") iron pipe size,
so designed and installed to prevent entrance of rain or debris.
(E) A shutoff valve located immediately adjacent to the gravity feed connection of a tank shall be
installed in the supply line to the mobile home.
(F) Fuel oil connectors from the tank to the mobile home shall be brass or copper tubing or approved
flexible metal hose, not smaller than three-eighths inch (3/8") iron pipe size or tubing, and shall be
protected from physical damage. Aluminum tubing shall not be used.
(G) Valves and connectors shall be listed standard fittings maintained liquid tight to prevent spillage of
fuel oil on this ground. (Ord. 45, 3-19-1973)
11-2-2-6: TELEPHONE AND TELEVISION SERVICE:
(A) When telephone service to mobile home stands is provided, the distribution system shall be
underground, unless economically impractical.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 253/396
(B) Where central television antenna systems are to be installed as part of the property to be covered
by mortgage insurance, a warranty shall be obtained to assure satisfactory service. Distribution to
mobile home stands may be overhead or underground, but shall be in general accord with the
placement of the electrical distribution system. (Ord. 45, 3-19-1973)
11-2-3: SERVICE BUILDING; OTHER COMMUNITY FACILITIES:
11-2-3-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
The requirements of this section shall apply to service buildings, recreation buildings and other
community service facilities such as:
(A) Management offices, repair shops and storage areas;
(B) Sanitary facilities;
(C) Laundry facilities;
(D) Indoor recreation areas;
(E) Commercial uses supplying essential goods or services for the exclusive use of development
occupants. (Ord. 45, 3-19-1973)
11-2-3-2: COMMUNITY SANITARY FACILITIES:
Every development shall be provided with the following emergency sanitary facilities: for each one
hundred (100) mobile home lots or fractional part thereof there shall be one flush toilet and one
lavatory. The building containing such emergency sanitary facilities shall be accessible to all mobile
homes. (Ord. 45, 3-19-1973)
11-2-3-3: PERMANENT BUILDINGS:
(A) All portions of the structure shall be properly protected from damage by ordinary uses and by
decay, corrosion, termites and other destructive elements. Exterior portions shall be of such
material and be so constructed and protected as to prevent entrance or penetration of moisture
and weather.
(B) All rooms containing sanitary or laundry facilities shall:
1. Have sound resistant walls extending to the ceiling between male and female sanitary facilities.
Walls and partitions around showers, bathtubs, lavatories and other plumbing fixtures shall be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 254/396
constructed of dense, nonabsorbent waterproof material or covered with moisture resisting
material.
2. Have at least one window or skylight facing directly to the outdoors. The minimum aggregate
gross area of windows for each required room shall be not less than ten percent (10%) of the
floor area served by them.
(C) Toilets shall be located in separate compartments equipped with self-closing doors, and shower
stalls shall be of the individual type. The rooms shall be screened to prevent direct view of the
interior when the exterior doors are open.
(D) Illumination levels shall be maintained as follows:
1. General seeing tasks, five (5) foot-candles;
2. Laundry room work area, forty (40) foot-candles;
3. Toilet room, in front of mirrors, forty (40) foot-candles.
(E) Hot and cold water shall be furnished to every lavatory, sink, bathtub, shower and laundry fixture
and cold water shall be furnished to every water closet and urinal. (Ord. 45, 3-19-1973)
Footnote 1: See title 7, chapter 9 of this code.
Chapter 3
MAINTENANCE REGULATIONS
11-3-1: RESPONSIBILITIES OF MANAGEMENT:
(A) The person to whom a license for a mobile home community is issued shall provide adequate
supervision to maintain the community in compliance with this title and to keep its facilities and
equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition.
(B) The management shall notify the community residents of all applicable provisions of this title and
inform them of their duties and responsibilities under this title.
(C) The management shall supervise the placement of each mobile home on its mobile home stand
which includes securing its stability and installing all utility connections.
(D) The management shall maintain a register containing the names of all community residents
identified by lot number or street address. Such register shall be available to any authorized
person inspecting the community.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 255/396
(E) The management shall notify the enforcing agency immediately of any suspected communicable
or contagious disease within the community. (Ord. 45, 3-19-1973)
11-3-2: RESPONSIBILITIES OF RESIDENT:
(A) The resident shall comply with all applicable requirements of this title and shall maintain his mobile
home lot, its facilities and equipment in good repair and in clean and sanitary condition.
(B) The resident shall be responsible for proper placement of his mobile home on its mobile home
stand and proper installation of all utility connections in accordance with the instructions of the
management.
(C) Pets, if permitted in the community, shall be prohibited to run at large or to commit any nuisance
within the limits of any mobile home lot.
(D) Skirting, porches, awnings and other additions shall be installed only if permitted and approved by
the management. When installed, they shall be maintained in good repair. The space immediately
underneath a mobile home shall be used for storage only if permitted by the management. If
permitted, the following conditions shall be satisfied:
1. The storage area shall be provided with a base of impervious material.
2. Stored items shall be located so as not to interfere with the underneath inspection of the mobile
home.
3. The storage area shall be enclosed by skirting.
(E) The resident shall store and dispose of all his rubbish and garbage in a clean, sanitary and safe
manner. The garbage container shall be rodentproof, insectproof and watertight.
(F) First aid fire extinguishers for class B and C fires shall be kept at the premises and maintained in
working condition. (Ord. 45, 3-19-1973)
11-3-3: ACCESSORY STRUCTURES:
(A) Accessory structures remain, as per definition, dependent upon the mobile home and shall not be
used as complete independent living units with permanent provisions for sleeping, cooking and
sanitation. Such structures shall be erected, constructed and occupied on a mobile home lot as
directed by the management of the mobile home development, as required by applicable state or
local standards and as specified in this title.
(B) Accessory structures shall be designed in a manner that will enhance the appearance of the
mobile home development.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 256/396
(C) Accessory structures shall not obstruct required openings for light and ventilation of the mobile
home and shall not prevent inspection of mobile home equipment and utility connections.
(D) Construction and electrical installations shall comply with the applicable regulations of the city.
(E) Electrical circuits supplying the accessory structure shall be independent of the circuit supplying
the mobile home. (Ord. 45, 3-19-1973)
11-3-4: MOBILE HOME PLACEMENT AND ANCHORAGE:
(A) The mobile home shall be properly placed on its foundation and its stability shall be affirmed.
(B) The mobile home shall be properly secured against high wind velocities. Overturning, sliding or
uplift shall be prevented through anchors, tie downs or similar devices.
(C) Placement and anchorage shall be provided in accordance with subsections 11-3-1(C) and 11-3-
2(B) of this chapter. (Ord. 45, 3-19-1973)
11-3-5: SOLID WASTE HANDLING:
(A) The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the mobile home community shall be so
conducted as to create no health hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding areas, accident or
fire hazards or air pollution.
(B) All refuse containing garbage shall be collected at least once weekly. Where suitable collection
service is not available from municipal or private agencies, the management shall provide this
service1. All refuse shall be collected and transported in covered vehicles or covered containers.
(C) Where municipal or private disposal service is not available, the management shall dispose of the
refuse by incineration or transporting to a disposal site approved by the health authority.
(D) Refuse incinerators, if provided, shall be constructed in accordance with engineering plans and
specifications which shall be reviewed and approved by the health authority or other authority
having jurisdiction.
(E) Incinerators shall be operated only when attended by some person specifically authorized by the
management. (Ord. 45, 3-19-1973)
11-3-6: INSECT AND RODENT CONTROL:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 257/396
(A) Grounds, buildings and structures shall be maintained free of insect and rodent harborage and
infestation. Extermination methods and other measures to control insects and rodents shall
conform with the requirements of the enforcing agency.
(B) The community shall be maintained free of accumulations of debris which may provide rodent
harborage or breeding places for flies, mosquitoes and other pests.
(C) Storage areas shall be so maintained as to prevent rodent harborage. Lumber, pipe and other
building materials shall be stored at least one foot (1') above the ground.
(D) Where the potential for insect and rodent infestation exists, all exterior openings in or beneath any
structure shall be appropriately screened with wire mesh or other suitable materials.
(E) The growth of brush, weeds and grass shall be controlled to prevent harborage of ticks, chiggers
and other noxious insects. The community shall be so maintained as to prevent the growth of
ragweed, poison ivy, poison oak, poison sumac and other noxious weeds considered detrimental
to health. Open areas shall be maintained free of heavy undergrowth of any description. (Ord. 45,
3-19-1973)
11-3-7: FUEL SUPPLY AND STORAGE:
(A) Liquefied petroleum gas containers installed on a mobile home lot shall be securely but not
permanently fastened to prevent accidental overturning. Such containers shall be not less than
twenty five (25) nor more than one hundred (100) pounds LP gas capacity.
(B) No liquefied petroleum gas vessel shall be stored or located inside or beneath any storage
cabinet, carport, mobile home or any other structure, unless such installations are approved by the
enforcing agency.
(C) All fuel oil storage tanks or cylinders shall be securely fastened in place and shall not be located
inside or beneath any mobile home or less than five feet (5') from any mobile home exit. (Ord. 45,
3-19-1973)
11-3-8: FIRE PROTECTION:
(A) Mobile home communities shall be kept free of litter, rubbish and other flammable materials.
(B) Portable fire extinguishers rated for classes B and C shall be kept in service buildings and at other
locations conveniently and readily accessible for use by all occupants and shall be maintained in
good operating condition. Their UL or factory mutual rating shall not be less than six (6).
(C) Fires shall be made only in stoves, incinerators and other equipment intended for such purposes.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 258/396
(D) Fire hydrants, if provided, shall comply with section 11-2-2-1 of this title. (Ord. 45, 3-19-1973)
Title 12
ZONING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
TITLE
12-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known and may be cited as the CITY OF CLINTON ZONING ORDINANCE, and will
be referred to herein as this title. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
Chapter 2
CONSTRUCTION OF LANGUAGE AND DEFINITIONS
12-2-1: CONSTRUCTION OF LANGUAGE:
The following rules of construction apply to the text of this title:
(A) The particular shall control the general.
(B) In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this title and any caption or
illustration, the text shall control.
(C) The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary. The word "may" is permissive.
(D) Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words used in the singular number
shall include the plural, and the plural and the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the
contrary.
(E) A "building" or "structure" includes any part thereof.
(F) The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for", "designed for", "intended for", "maintained for", or
"occupied for".
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 259/396
(G) The word "person" includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an incorporated
association, or any other similar entity.
(H) Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation involves two (2) or more
items, conditions, provisions, or events connected by the conjunction "and", "or", "either...or", the
conjunction shall be interpreted as follows:
1. "And" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply.
2. "Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events may apply singly or in
any combination.
3. "Either...or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply
singly but not in combination.
(I) Terms not herein defined shall have the meanings customarily assigned to them. (Ord. 867, 11-5-
2001)
12-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
ABUTTING: Having a common border with or being separated from such a common border by a right
of way, alley, or easement.
ACCESSORY BUILDING: A building or portion of a building subordinate to a main building on the
same lot occupied by, or denoted exclusively to, an accessory use.
ACCESSORY USE, OR ACCESSORY: A structure or use that: a) is clearly incidental to and
customarily found in connection with a principal building or use; b) is subordinate to and serves a
principal building or a principal use; c) is subordinate in area, extent or purpose to the principal
building or principal use served; d) contributes to the comfort, convenience, or necessity of occupants,
business or industry in the principal building or principal use served; and e) is located on the same lot
as the principal building or use served.
ADDITION: An extension or increase in floor area or height of a building or structure.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT USES: Any use of land, whether vacant or combined with structures or
vehicles thereon by which said property is devoted to displaying or exhibiting material for
entertainment, a significant portion of which includes matter or actions depicting, describing or
presenting specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
(A) "Adult entertainment uses" shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
1. Adult Motion Picture Theater: An enclosed building with a capacity of fifty (50) or more
persons used for presenting material which has a significant portion of any motion picture or
other display depicting or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical
areas" for observation by patrons therein.
2. Adult Mini-Motion Picture Theater: An enclosed building with a capacity for less than fifty
(50) persons used for presenting material which has as a significant portion of any motion
picture or other display depicting, describing or presenting "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas".
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 260/396
3. Adult Motion Picture Arcade: Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein
coin or slug operated or electronically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture
machines, projectors, or other image producing devices are maintained to show images to five
(5) or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where a significant portion of images
so displayed depict, describe or relate to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical
areas".
4. Adult Bookstore: A use which has a display containing books, magazines, periodicals,
slides, pictures, cassettes, or other printed or recorded material which has as a significant
portion of its content or exhibit matter or actions depicting, describing or relating to "specified
sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" or an establishment with a (substantial)
segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such material.
5. Adult Cabaret: A nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances
by topless and/or bottomless dancers, "go-go" dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, or similar
entertainers, where a significant portion of such performances show, depict or describe
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
6. Adult Motel: A motel wherein matter, actions or other displays are presented which contains
a significant portion depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas".
7. Adult Massage Parlor: Any place where for any form of consideration or gratuity, massage,
alcohol rub, administration of fomentations, electric or magnetic treatment or any other
treatment or manipulation of the human body occurs as part of, or in connection with,
"specified sexual activities" or where any person providing such treatment, manipulation or
service related thereto exposes "specified anatomical areas".
8. Adult Model Studio: Any place where, for any form of consideration or gratuity, figure models
who display "specified anatomical areas" are provided to be observed, sketched, drawn,
painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by persons paying such
considerations or gratuities, except that this provision shall not apply to any bona fide art
school or similar education institution.
9. Adult Sexual Encounter Center: Any business, agency, or person who, for any form of
consideration or gratuity, provides a place where three (3) or more persons, not all members
of the same family may congregate, assemble or associate for the purpose of engaging in
"specified sexual activities" or exposing "specified anatomical areas".
(B) "Significant portion" as used in the above definitions, shall mean and include:
1. Any one or more portions of the display having continuous duration in excess of five (5)
minutes; and/or
2. The aggregate of portions of the display having a duration equal to ten percent (10%) or
more of the display; and/or
3. The aggregate of portions of the collection of any materials or exhibits composing the
display equal to ten percent (10%) or more of the display.
(C) "Display" as used in the above definitions, shall mean any single motion or still picture,
presentation, dance or exhibition, live act, or collection of visual materials such as books, films,
slides, periodicals, pictures, video cassettes or any other printed or recorded matter which is
open to view or available to the general population whether for free or otherwise.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 261/396
(D) "Specified sexual activities":
1. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
2. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy;
3. Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast.
(E) "Specified anatomical areas":
1. Less than completely and opaquely covered: a) human genitals, pubic region; b) buttock;
and c) female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and
2. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
ADULT FOSTER CARE FACILITY: A governmental or nongovernmental establishment subject to
state licensing procedures as may be required having as its principal function the receiving of adults
for foster care. It includes facilities and foster care family homes for adults, who are aged, emotionally
disturbed, developmentally disabled, or physically handicapped who require supervision on an
ongoing basis, but who do not require continuous nursing care. "Adult foster care facility" does not
include a nursing home, a home for the aged, an alcohol or a substance abuse rehabilitation center, a
hospital for the mentally ill, or similar facilities.
ADULT FOSTER CARE FAMILY HOME: A private residence with the approved capacity to receive not
more than six (6) adults who shall be provided foster care for five (5) or more days per week, and for
two (2) or more consecutive weeks. The adult foster care family home licensee shall be a member of
the household and a full time occupant of the residence.
ADULT FOSTER CARE LARGE GROUP HOME: An adult foster care facility with the approved
capacity to receive at least thirteen (13), but not more than twenty (20) adults who shall be provided
foster care.
ADULT FOSTER CARE SMALL GROUP HOME: An adult foster care facility with the approved
capacity between seven (7) and twelve (12) adults who shall be provided foster care.
ALLEY: Any dedicated public way affording a secondary means of access to abutting property, and
not intended for general traffic circulation.
ALTERATIONS: Any change, addition, or modification in construction or type of occupancy, or in the
structural members of a building, such as walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, the
consummated act of which may be referred to herein as "altered" or "reconstructed".
APARTMENTS: A suite of rooms or a room in a multiple-family building arranged and intended for a
place or residence of a single-family or a group of individuals living together as a single housekeeping
unit.
ARCADE: Any place of business or establishment whose principal use shall be the housing of
mechanical or electronic amusement devices. Mechanical amusement devices include any machine,
which, upon the insertion of any coin, slug, token, plate or disc, or which, for a fee paid to the operator
or owner, may be operated by the public generally for use as a game, entertainment or amusement,
whether or not registering a score. It shall include such devices as marble machines, skill ball,
mechanical grab machines, television display devices or machines, and all games, operations or
transactions similar thereto, whether operated principally by mechanical means or electrical means or
a combination thereof, under whatever name they may be indicated or called.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 262/396
ARCHITECTURAL FEATURES: Architectural features of a building or a structure shall include
cornices, eaves, gutters, belt courses, sills, lintels, bay windows, chimneys, and decorative
ornaments.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR: The general repair, engine rebuilding, rebuilding or reconditioning of motor
vehicles; collision service, such as body, frame, or fender straightening and repair; tire recapping;
overall painting and undercoating of automobiles.
BASEMENT: That portion of a building which is partly or wholly below grade, but so located that the
vertical distance from the average grade to the floor is greater than the vertical distance from the
average grade to the ceiling. A basement shall not be counted as a story.
BED AND BREAKFAST INN: A use which is subordinate to the principal use of a dwelling unit as a
one-family dwelling unit and a use in which transient guests are provided a sleeping room and board
in return for payment.
BLOCK: The property abutting one side of a street and lying between the two (2) nearest intersecting
streets (crossing or terminating), or between the nearest such street and railroad right of way,
unsubdivided acreage, lake, river, or live stream; or between any of the foregoing and any other
barrier to the continuity of development, or corporate boundary lines of the municipality.
BOARDING HOUSE: A dwelling where meals, or lodging and meals, are provided for compensation
and where one or more rooms are occupied by persons by prearrangement for definite periods of not
less than one month. A boarding house is to be distinguished from a hotel, motel, bed and breakfast
establishment, or a convalescent, nursing, or group home.
BUFFER AREA: An area, usually landscaped, intended to separate and partially obstruct the view of
two (2) adjacent land uses or properties from one another.
BUILDING: A structure erected on site, a mobile home or mobile structure, a premanufactured or
precut structure, above or below ground, having a roof or walls and built for, or capable of, the shelter
or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance from grade to the top of parapet wall in the case of a flat
roof, to the deck line for mansard roofs, to the mean height level between eaves and ridge for gable,
hip, and gambrel roofs. The height of detached accessory structures shall be the distance from grade
to the top of a parapet wall in the case of a flat roof, and to the peak of the roof for mansard, gable,
hip, and gambrel roofs.
BUILDING LINE: A line formed by the face of the building, and for the purposes of this title, a
minimum building line is the same as a front setback line.
BUILDING OFFICIAL (INSPECTOR): The administrative official designated by the city with the
responsibilities of administering and enforcing this title.
BUSINESS CENTER: Any two (2) or more businesses which:
(A) Are located on a single parcel, or
(B) Are under one common ownership or management and have a common arrangement for the
maintenance of the grounds, or
(C) Are connected by common walls, partitions, canopies, other structural members, or walkways,
to form a continuous building or group of buildings, or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 263/396
(D) Share a common parking area, or
(E) Otherwise present the appearance of a single continuous business area.
CAR WASH: An area of land and/or structure with machine or hand operated facilities used principally
for the cleaning, washing, polishing, or waxing of motor vehicles.
CLINIC: An establishment where human or animal patients who are not lodged overnight are admitted
for examinations and treatment by a group of physicians, dentists, veterinarians, or similar
professionals.
CLUB, PRIVATE FACILITIES: Any nonprofit facility established to provide recreational or social
activities for the sale and exclusive use of its members, their families, and guests.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT: A development design technique that concentrates buildings in specific
locations on a site to allow the remaining land to be used for recreation, common open space, and
preservation of environmentally sensitive areas.
CONVALESCENT OR NURSING HOME: A structure with sleeping rooms, where persons are housed
or lodged and are furnished with meals, nursing, and medical care.
DAYCARE CENTER: A school, kindergarten, or adult care facility wherein daycare, or daycare and
education are provided.
DEVELOPMENT: The construction of a new building or other structure on a zoning lot, the relocation
of an existing building on another zoning lot, or the use of open land for a new use.
DISTRICT: A portion of the incorporated area of the municipality within which certain regulations and
requirements or various combinations thereof apply under the provisions of this title.
DWELLING, MOBILE HOME: A detached residential dwelling unit with a body width greater than eight
feet (8'), of not less than forty feet (40') in length, and designed for transportation, after fabrication, on
streets or highways, on its own wheels, and arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as a dwelling
complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly
operations, location on jacks, or other temporary or permanent foundations, connections to utilities,
and the like. A mobile home shall not be considered a travel trailer, motor home, or any other type of
recreational vehicle. In addition, mobile homes, which do not conform to the standards for one-family
dwellings, of this title, shall not be used for dwelling purposes within the city unless located within a
mobile home park or unless used for temporary residence purposes as hereinafter provided.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A building containing three (3) or more dwelling units designed for
residential use and conforming in all other respects to the standards set forth for one-family dwellings.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY: A building designed exclusively for one family for residential use.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A building containing not more than two (2) separate dwelling units
designed for residential use and conforming in all other respects to the standards set forth for onefamily
dwellings.
DWELLING UNIT: A building, or portion thereof, designed for occupancy by one family for residential
purposes and having cooking and sanitary facilities.
DWELLING UNIT, MANUFACTURED: A dwelling unit, which is substantially built, constructed,
assembled, or finished off the premises upon which it is intended to be located.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 264/396
DWELLING UNIT, SITE BUILT: A dwelling unit which is substantially built, constructed, assembled,
and finished on the premises which is intended to serve as its final location. Site built dwelling units
shall include dwelling units constructed of precut materials and panelized wall, roof and floor sections,
when such sections require substantial assembly and finishing on the premises, which is intended to
serve as its final location.
EARTH BERM: A mound of earth planted with ground cover, grass, trees, or other landscaping
material intended to minimize the view of parking areas and reduce noise and dust from adjacent uses
and passersby.
EASEMENT: A property right, such as a right of way, less than fee title, over, above, on, and/or under
real property for the use by the easement owner.
ELDERLY HOUSING: A building or group of buildings containing dwellings where the occupancy of
the dwellings is restricted to persons sixty (60) years of age or older, or couples where either spouse
is sixty (60) years of age or older. This does not include a foster care, home for the aged, or nursing
home.
ERECTED: To have built, constructed, altered, reconstructed, moved upon, or any physical operations
on the premises which are required for construction, excavation, fill, drainage and the like, shall be
considered a part of erection.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES: A public utility or municipal department utilizing underground, surface, or
overhead gas, electrical, steam, fuel, or water transmission or distribution systems, collection,
communication, supply or disposal system, but not including buildings.
EXCAVATION: Any breaking of ground, except common household gardening and ground care.
FAMILY/SINGLE-FAMILY: (A) One or more individuals living together in a one-dwelling unit who are
related by blood, marriage, or adoption; or
(B) One or more individuals, unrelated by blood, marriage, or adoption, living together in a onedwelling
unit in a nontransient domestic relationship as a single housekeeping unit; or
(C) An "adult foster care family home", as defined in this section.
"Family/single-family" specifically excludes clubs, fraternities, sororities, motels, hotels, boarding
houses, and adult foster care large group homes and adult foster care small group homes, as defined
in this section.
FENCE: Any permanent or seasonal partition, structure, or gate erected upon or near, but not limited
to, the dividing line between adjoining property owners, for the purpose of separating, screening,
enclosing or protecting property. Hedges, ornamental shrubs, trees and bushes shall be considered
fences when placed in a manner or position to serve as such and to prevent passage across.
FLOODPLAIN (FLOOD PRONE AREA): Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from
an existing watercourse such as a stream, river, or drainage/ponding area.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of the building
measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two (2)
buildings. The "floor area" of a building shall not include the basement floor area except when more
than one-half (1/2) of the basement height is above grade. "Floor area" shall include elevator shafts
and stairwells at each floor, floor space used for mechanical equipment (except equipment, open or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 265/396
enclosed, located on the roof), attic space having headroom of seven feet ten inches (7'10") or more,
interior balconies, and mezzanines. Any space devoted to off street parking or loading shall not be
included in "floor area".
FLOOR AREA, RESIDENTIAL: For the purpose of computing the minimum allowable floor area in a
residential dwelling unit, the sum of the horizontal areas of each story of the building shall be
measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two (2)
dwellings. The floor area measurement is exclusive of areas of basements, unfinished attics, attached
garages, breezeways, and enclosed and unenclosed porches.
FOSTER CARE: The provision of supervision, personal care, and protection in addition to room and
board, for twenty four (24) hours per day, five (5) or more days per week, and for two (2) or more
consecutive weeks of compensation.
FRONTAGE: That portion of a lot, which abuts a public right of way or private road.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: An accessory building or portion of a main building designed or used solely for
the storage of motor driven vehicles, boats, similar vehicles and household items owned and used by
the occupants of the building to which it is accessory.
GARAGE, SERVICE: Any premises used for the storage or maintenance of motor driven vehicles, or
where any such vehicles are equipped for operation, repaired, or kept for remuneration, hire, or sale.
GASOLINE SERVICE STATION: A place for the dispensing, sale, or offering for sale of motor fuels
directly to users of motor vehicles, together with the sale of minor accessories and services for motor
vehicles, but not including automobile repair.
GOVERNMENTAL AGENCY: Any department, commission, independent agency, or instrumentality of
the United States, of a state, county, incorporated or unincorporated municipality, authority, district, or
governmental unit.
GRADE: The ground elevation established for the purpose of regulating the number of stories and the
height of buildings. The building grade shall be the level of the ground adjacent to the walls of the
building, if the finished grade is level. If the ground is not entirely level, the grade shall be determined
by averaging the elevation of the ground for each face of the building, measured at a distance four
feet (4') out from the edge of the building.
GREENBELT: A strip of land of definite width and location reserved for the planting of shrubs and/or
trees to serve as an obscuring screen or buffer strip in carrying out the requirements of this title.
HEALTHCARE FACILITY (HOSPITAL): A facility or institution, whether public or private, principally
engaged in providing services for health maintenance, diagnosis and treatment of human disease,
pain, injury, deformity or physical condition allowing overnight stay, including, but not limited to, a
general hospital, special hospital, mental hospital, public health center, diagnostic center, treatment
center, rehabilitation center, extended care facility, tuberculosis hospital, chronic disease hospital,
maternity hospital.
HISTORIC DISTRICT: An area containing buildings or places in which significant and notable historic
events occurred or which has special public value because of notable architectural or other features
relating to the cultural or artistic heritage of the community; these events or features having such
significance to warrant conservation and preservation.
HOME FOR THE AGED: A supervised personal care facility, other than a hotel, adult foster care
facility, hospital, nursing home, or county medical care facility, that provides room, board, and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 266/396
supervised personal care to twenty one (21) or more unrelated, nontransient, individuals sixty (60)
years of age or older. "Home for the aged" includes a supervised personal care facility for twenty (20)
or fewer individuals sixty (60) years of age or older when the facility is operated in conjunction with
and as a distinct part of a licensed nursing home.
HOME OCCUPATION: An accessory use of a dwelling that constitutes either entirely or partly, the
livelihood of a person living in the dwelling, said use shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling
and carried on by the inhabitants therein and having no external effects.
HOTEL: A building or part of a building, with a common entrance or entrances, in which the dwelling
units or rooming units are used primarily for transient occupancy, and in which one or more of the
following services are offered: maid service, furnishing of linen, telephone, secretarial, or desk service,
and bellboy service. A hotel may include a restaurant or cocktail lounge, public banquet halls,
ballrooms, or meeting rooms.
JUNKYARD: An area where waste, used or secondhand materials are bought and sold, exchanged,
stored, baled, packed, disassembled, or handled including, but not limited to: scrap iron and other
metals, paper, rags, rubber tires, and bottles. A "junkyard" includes automobile wrecking yards and
includes any open area of more than two hundred (200) square feet for storage, keeping, or
abandonment of junk.
KENNEL: Any lot or premises on which three (3) or more dogs, cats, or other household pets are
either permanently or temporarily boarded.
LOADING SPACE: An off street space on the same lot with a building, or group of buildings, for the
temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading and unloading merchandise or materials.
LOT: A measured portion of a parcel or tract of land, which is legally described and recorded.
LOT AREA: The total horizontal area within the lot lines of the lot.
LOT, CORNER: A lot abutting on and at the intersection of two (2) or more streets.
LOT COVERAGE: The part or percent of the lot occupied by buildings including accessory buildings.
LOT DEPTH: The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured along the median
between the side lot lines.
LOT, INTERIOR: Any lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINES: The lines bounding a "lot" as defined in this section.
(A) Front Lot Line: In the case of an interior lot, is that line separating said lot from the streets. In
the case of a corner lot, both lot lines abutting street frontage shall be considered front lot lines.
(B) Rear Lot Line: That lot line opposite the front lot line. In the case of a lot pointed at the rear, the
rear lot line shall be an imaginary line parallel to the front lot line, not less than ten feet (10') long
lying farthest from the front lot line and wholly within the lot. In the case of a corner lot, the rear
lot line shall be the lot line opposite the front lot line.
(C) Side Lot Line: Any lot line other than the front or rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot
from a street is a side street lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot or lots is an
interior side lot line.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 267/396
LOT OF RECORD: A lot which actually exists in a subdivision plat as shown on the records of the
county register of deeds, or a lot or parcel described by metes and bounds, the description of which
has been so recorded. Whenever an owner has combined two (2) or more lots as contained on any
recorded plat or described by metes and bounds into a single building site, said combination of lots
shall be deemed to be a single "lot of record" for the purposes of this title.
LOT, THROUGH: Any interior lot having frontage on two (2) more or less parallel streets as
distinguished from a corner lot.
LOT WIDTH: The horizontal straight line distance between the side lot lines, measured between the
two (2) points where the front setback line intersects the side lot lines or in the case of a corner lot, the
side lot line and opposite lot line.
LOT, ZONING: A single tract of land, which may include one or more lots of record, which conforms
with this title with respect to area, size, dimensions and frontage in the district.
MAIN BUILDING: A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot upon which it is situated.
MAJOR THOROUGHFARE: An arterial street which is intended to serve as a large volume trafficway
for both the immediate municipal area and the region beyond, and is designated as a major
thoroughfare, parkway, freeway, expressway, or equivalent term on the major thoroughfare plan to
identify those streets comprising the basic structure of the major thoroughfare plan.
MASTER PLAN: The comprehensive plan prepared and adopted by the city pursuant to law.
MEZZANINE: An intermediate floor in any story occupying space not to exceed one-third (1/3) of the
floor area of such story.
MINIWAREHOUSE (SELF-STORAGE FACILITY): A facility consisting of a building or a group of
buildings in a controlled access compound, where individual stalls or lockers are rented out to different
tenants for the dead storage of customers' goods and wares.
MOBILE HOME PARK: A parcel of land, which has been planned and improved for the placement of
mobile homes for residential use.
MOTEL: A series of attached, semidetached, or detached rental units containing a bedroom and
bathroom, and that provides for overnight lodging and are offered to the public for compensation and
cater primarily to the public traveling by motor vehicle.
MOTORIZED HOME: A self-propelled motor vehicle, which provides some or all of the amenities of
day to day living, while used as a means of transportation for recreational or travel purposes.
MUNICIPALITY: The city of Clinton, DeWitt County, Illinois.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING: A building or portion thereof lawfully existing at the effective date
hereof, or amendments thereto, and that does not conform to the provisions of this title in the district in
which it is located.
NONCONFORMING LOT: Any lot, outlet, or other parcel of land, which does not meet the land area or
dimension requirements of this title.
NONCONFORMING USE: A use which lawfully occupied a building or land at the effective date
hereof, or amendments thereto, and that does not conform to the use regulations of the district in
which it is located.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 268/396
NORMAL GRADE LEVEL: Normal grade shall be construed to be the lower of: a) the existing grade
prior to construction; or b) the newly established grade after construction, exclusive of any filling,
berming, mounding, or excavating solely for the purpose of locating the fence. In cases in which the
normal grade cannot reasonably be determined, the fence height shall be computed on the
assumption that the elevation of the normal grade at the base of the fence is equal to the elevation of
the nearest point of the crown of a public street or the grade of the land at the principal entrance to the
principal structure on the zoning lot, whichever is lower.
NURSERY, PLANT MATERIALS: A space, building or structure, or combination thereof, for the
storage of live trees, shrubs or plants offered for retail sale on the premises including products used
for gardening or landscaping.
NURSING HOME: A nursing care facility, including a county medical care facility, but excluding a
hospital, which provides organized nursing care and medical treatment to seven (7) or more unrelated
individuals suffering or recovering from illness, injury, or infirmity.
OCCUPIED: To be, or intended to be, arranged, designed, built, altered, converted to, rented or
leased.
OFF STREET PARKING FACILITY: A facility providing vehicular parking spaces, off the public right of
way, with adequate drives and aisles for maneuvering, so as to provide access and exit for the parking
of more than three (3) vehicles.
OPEN AIR BUSINESS USE: An open air business use, as used herein, shall be deemed to include
any business when said business is not conducted from a wholly enclosed building.
OPEN FRONT STORE: A business establishment so developed that service to the patron may be
extended beyond the walls of the structure, not requiring the patron to enter the structure. The term
"open front store" shall not include automobile repair or gasoline service stations.
OVERNIGHT LODGING FACILITY (Hotel/Motel/Motor Inn): An establishment or building(s) providing
a number of bedrooms, baths, etc., for the accommodation of travelers or other transient guests.
PARKING SPACE: An area of definite length and width, for the purpose of parking motor vehicles,
said area shall be exclusive of drives, aisles or entrances giving access thereto, and shall be fully
accessible for the parking of permitted vehicles.
PLANNED COMMERCIAL OR SHOPPING CENTER: A group of commercial establishments,
connected or on single parcel or lot, planned, constructed, and managed as a total entity with
customer and employee parking provided on site, provision for goods delivery separated from
customer access, aesthetic considerations and protection from the elements.
PORCH: A projection on a building or structure containing a floor, which may be either totally enclosed
or open.
PRINCIPAL USE: The main use to which the premises are devoted.
PUBLIC BUILDING: A building that is owned by the public is all, or a part thereof, designated for and
open to use by members of the general public, and not including patios and appurtenances.
PUBLIC UTILITY: A person, firm, or corporation, municipal department, board or commission duly
authorized to furnish and furnishing under federal, state, or municipal regulations to the public: gas,
steam, electricity, sewage disposal, communication, transportation or water.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 269/396
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle, other than an automobile, which moves one or more persons
over the ground, air, water, ice, or snow, and which is either self-propelled or connects to a vehicle
which is self-propelled, and is intended for use off the public road system, and/or for recreational use.
Excluded are private automobiles and commercial trucks and trailers.
RESTAURANT: (A) Standard Restaurant: Any establishment whose principal business is the sale of
foods, frozen desserts, or beverages to the customer in a ready to consume state, and whose design
or principal method of operation includes the consumption of food on the premises.
(B) Carryout Restaurant: Any establishment whose principal business is the sale of foods, frozen
desserts, or beverages to the customer in a ready to consume state, and whose design or
method of operation encourages the consumption of food off site or it may permit incidental
consumption on the premises.
(C) Drive-In/Drive-Through Restaurant: Any establishment whose principal business is the sale of
foods, frozen desserts, or beverages to the customer in a ready to consume state, and whose
design, method of operation, includes one or both of the following characteristics:
1. Foods, frozen desserts, or beverages are served directly to the customer in a motor vehicle,
either by a carhop, or by other means, which eliminate the need for the customer to exit the
motor vehicle.
2. The consumption of foods, frozen desserts, or beverages within a motor vehicle parked
upon the premises, within the restaurant building, or at other facilities on the premises outside
the restaurant building, is permitted.
RIGHT OF WAY: The right or privilege, acquired through accepted usage or contract, to pass over a
designated portion of the property of another. A right of way may be either public or private and
usually is occupied or intended to be occupied by a road, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission
lines, oil or gas pipeline, water line, sanitary storm sewer or other similar uses.
ROOM: For the purpose of determining lot area requirements and density in a multiple-family district,
a "room" is a living room, dining room, great room, or the like, or a bedroom equal to at least eighty
(80) square feet in area. A "room" shall not include the area in kitchen, sanitary facilities, utility
provisions, corridors, stairways, hallways, and storage. Plans presented showing one, two (2), or three
(3) bedroom units and including a "den", "library", or other extra room shall count such extra room as a
bedroom for the purpose of computing density.
SETBACK: The distance required to obtain minimum front, side, or rear yard open space provisions of
this title.
SIGN: See section 10-3-9 of this code for definitions regarding signs.
SPECIAL USE: Any use of land listed as a principal use permitted subject to special conditions, which,
due to its potential effect on adjacent lands, in particular, and the overall city in general, requires
approval, by the city council according to the standards as provided in this title.
STORY: That part of a building, except a "mezzanine" as defined herein, included between the
surface of one floor and the surface of the next floor, or if there is no floor above, then the ceiling next
above. A basement shall not be counted as a story.
STORY, HALF: An uppermost story lying under a sloping roof having an area of at least two hundred
(200) square feet with a clear height of seven feet (7'). For the purposes of this title, the usable floor
area is only that area having at least five feet (5') clear height between floor and ceiling.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 270/396
STREET: A public dedicated right of way, other than an alley.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or
attachment to something having location on the ground.
SWIMMING POOL: Any permanent pool used for swimming or bathing having a depth in excess of
twenty four inches (24") or a surface area exceeding one hundred sixty (160) square feet.
TEMPORARY USE OR TEMPORARY BUILDING: A use or building permitted by the board of appeals
to exist temporarily during a specified period of time or until a specific event occurs.
USE: The purpose for which land or a building is arranged, designed or intended, or for which land or
a building is or may be occupied.
VARIANCE: Permission to depart from the literal requirements of the zoning ordinance.
VARIANCE, NONUSE: A departure, other than use or usage, from the provisions of the zoning
ordinance relating to setbacks, side yards, frontage requirements, lot size, parking, signage, and other
requirements of the applicable zoning district.
VARIANCE, USE: A variance granted for a use or structure that is not permitted in the applicable
zoning district.
WALL, OBSCURING: A structure of definite height and location to serve as an obscuring screen in
carrying out the requirements of this title.
YARDS: That portion of a lot between the outermost boundaries and the main building thereon, and as
defined herein:
(A) Front Yard: An open space extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum
horizontal distance between the front lot line and the nearest point of the main building. In the
case of corner lots, front yard shall be deemed to exist along each street frontage.
(B) Rear Yard: An open space extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum
horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the nearest point of the main building. In the
case of a corner lot, the rear yard may be opposite either street frontage.
(C) Side Yard: An open space between a main building and the side lot line, extending from the
front yard to the rear yard, the width of which is the horizontal distance from the nearest point on
the side lot line to the nearest point of the main building.
ZONING DISTRICT: A zoning district is a portion of the city within which, on a uniform basis, certain
uses of land and buildings are permitted and within which contain yard, open spaces, lot area, and
other requirements are established by this title. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001; amd. correspondence dated 6-
4-2007)
Chapter 3
ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAPS
12-3-1: DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 271/396
For the purpose of this title, the city of Clinton is hereby divided into the following districts:
A-1 agricultural district
R/C-1 recreation/conservation district
R-1 one-family residential district
R-4 multiple-family residential district
C-1 central business district
C-2 service/business district
C-3 highway business district
I-1 research/industrial district
I-2 industrial manufacturing district
O-FP floodplain overlay district
(Ord. 867, 11-5-2001; amd. Ord. 1130, 9-15-2008)
12-3-2: DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
The boundaries of these districts are hereby established as shown on the zoning districts map, city of
Clinton zoning ordinance, which accompanies said zoning ordinance and which map with all notations,
references, and other information shown thereon shall be as much a part of this title as if fully
described herein. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-3-3: DISTRICT BOUNDARIES INTERPRETED:
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts as shown on the
zoning districts map, the following rules shall apply:
(A) Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways, or alleys,
shall be construed to follow such centerlines.
(B) Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following
such lot lines.
(C) Boundaries indicated as approximately following corporate limits shall be construed as following
actual corporate limits.
(D) Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be the midway between the
main tracks.
(E) Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to follow such shorelines, and in
the event of change in the shoreline shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline;
boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerline of streams, rivers, canals, or other
bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 272/396
(F) Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subsections (A) through
(E) of this section shall be so construed. The scale of the map shall determine distances not
specifically indicated on the official zoning map.
(G) Where physical or natural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the
official zoning map, or in other circumstances not covered by subsections (A) through (F) of this
section, the board of appeals shall interpret the district boundaries.
(H) Insofar as some or all of the various districts may be indicated on the zoning map by patterns
which, for the sake of map clarity, do not cover public rights of way it is intended that such district
boundaries do extend to the center of any public right of way. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-3-4: ZONING OF VACATED AREAS:
Whenever any street, alley or other public way, within the city of Clinton shall be vacated, such street,
alley or other public way or portion thereof, shall automatically be classified in the same zoning district
as the property to which it attaches. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-3-5: ZONING OF ANNEXED AREAS:
Wherever any area is annexed to the city of Clinton, the following will apply:
Land that is annexed into the city shall be classified as being in the zoning district, as set forth in the
annexation ordinance. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
Chapter 4
REGULATIONS FOR SPECIFIC DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. A-1 AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
12-4A-1: INTENT:
This zoning district is intended to allow areas of the city to be retained in agriculture use; prevent
scattered nonfarm growth; preserve woodlands and wildlife areas, and retain open space in its natural
state. The requirements of the district are designed so as to prevent unwarranted premature urban
development from encroaching upon legitimate agricultural areas, thus disrupting the agriculture
resources, environment, and economy. It is essential that development in areas which are
predominantly agricultural be based on sound principles which realize the importance of such
activities to the economy and welfare of the city. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-4A-2: PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 273/396
Land, buildings, and structures in this zoning district may be used for the following purposes only:
(A) Farms for both general and specialized crop farming, together with farm dwellings and buildings
and other installations necessary to such farms including temporary housing for migratory workers,
provided such housing and its sanitary facilities are in conformance with all requirements of the
DeWitt County health department and/or any other federal, state and/or local regulating agency
having jurisdiction.
(B) Greenhouses, nurseries, orchards, vineyards, apiaries, and berry farms.
(C) Riding stables, where horses are boarded and/or rented.
(D) Single-family residential dwelling units. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-4A-3: SPECIAL USES:
The following special conditions uses shall be permitted, subject to the conditions hereinafter required
for each use, subject to any and all reasonable conditions which may be imposed in accordance with
65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-13-1.1, Illinois state bar edition 1998, as may be amended, and
further subject to the review and approval by the planning commission and city council as specified in
sections 12-6-2, "Review And Approval Of Special Uses", and 12-6-1, "Review And Approval Of Site
Plans", of this title:
(A) Home occupations in accordance with section 12-5-15 of this title when authorized as a special
use by the planning commission. In consideration of such authorization, the planning commission
shall consider the following standards:
1. The nature of the home occupation;
2. The effect of the home occupation of the surrounding neighborhoods;
3. The environmental effects of the home occupation;
4. The nature of the surrounding neighborhood;
5. Potential traffic congestion as a result of the home occupation; and
6. Provision for parking for traffic or clientele, which may result from the operation of the home
occupation.
(B) Removal and processing of topsoil, sand, gravel, or other such minerals.
(C) Kennels.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 274/396
(D) Roadside stands when authorized as special uses by the planning commission. In considering
such authorization, the planning commission shall consider the following standards:
1. The proposed location of the roadside stand;
2. The size, nature, and character of the building and/or structure to be utilized for the roadside
stand;
3. The type and kind of produce and goods to be sold at the roadside stand;
4. The proximity of the roadside stand to adjoining properties;
5. The time and/or season during which the roadside stand will operate;
6. The parking facilities provided for the roadside stand;
7. Any traffic congestion or hazards which would result from the roadside stand; and
8. The effect of the roadside stands on adjoining properties and the surrounding neighborhood.
(E) Campgrounds when authorized as a special use by the planning commission. In considering such
authorization, the planning commission shall consider the following standards:
1. The location of the proposed campground in respect to whether the land is presently being
utilized or is capable of being utilized or is capable of being used for the production of
agricultural crops;
2. The location of the proposed campground in respect to whether it could interfere with or
substantially hinder any existing or potential future farming operations or activity within the
immediate area;
3. The present and future ability of the township and county to provide adequate vehicular access,
public safety and other necessary public services to the proposed campgrounds;
4. Campgrounds shall not be located closer than one thousand feet (1,000') from an area zoned as
an R-1 one-family residential district, R-2 one-family residential district, R-3 one-family
residential district, and R-4 multiple-family residential district. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-4A-4: REQUIRED CONDITIONS:
For all nonresidential uses allowed in the district, the setbacks shall equal the height of the main
building, or the setbacks required in chapter 9 of this title, whichever is greater. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-4A-5: AREA AND SIZE REQUIREMENTS:
See chapter 9, "Schedule Of Regulations", of this title, limiting the height and size of buildings, the
minimum size of lot permitted by land use, and providing minimum yard setback requirements. (Ord.
867, 11-5-2001)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 275/396
ARTICLE B. R/C-1 RECREATION/CONSERVATION
DISTRICT
12-4B-1: INTENT:
The value to the public of certain open areas of the city is represented in their natural, undeveloped or
unbuilt condition. It is recognized by this title that the principal use of certain open areas is and ought
to be the development, management, and utilization of the natural resource base possessed by these
areas. In order that this value be maintained and this use encouraged, this zoning district is designed
to regulate the location of buildings and structures and the use of parcels and lots, in order to protect
and enhance the natural resources, natural amenities, natural habitats of wildlife, watershed and
reservoir areas, agricultural capabilities, public recreation areas, and the public health, safety and
welfare. These regulations will reduce the hardship and financial burdens imposed upon the city by
the destruction of resources, the improper and wasteful use of open land, wooded areas, and the
periodic flooding and overflow of public waters. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-4B-2: PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED:
The following buildings and structures, and uses of parcels, lots, buildings and structures are
permitted in this district:
(A) Public or private forest preserve, game refuge, golf course, park, playground, or other recreation
purpose.
(B) Public and private conservation areas and structures for the development, protection and
conservation of open space, watersheds, water, soil, forest, and wildlife resources.
(C) Public, parochial, and other private schools offering courses in general education, and not
operated for profit.
(D) Public, municipal office buildings such as a municipal hall or public safety facility, library, or
museum.
(E) The raising or growing of plants, trees, shrubs and nursery stock.
(F) Transmission and distribution lines and structures, not including buildings, of essential services,
when located within an existing public or utility right of way.
(G) Publicly owned and operated parks, parkways, and recreation facilities. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-4B-3: SPECIAL USES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 276/396
The following special conditions uses shall be permitted, subject to the conditions hereinafter required
for each use, subject to any and all reasonable conditions which may be imposed in accordance with
65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-13-1.1, Illinois state bar edition 1998, as may be amended, and
further subject to the review and approval by the planning commission and city council as specified in
sections 12-6-2, "Review And Approval Of Special Uses", and 12-6-1, "Review And Approval Of Site
Plans", of this title:
(A) Essential services, provided that:
1. No storage of materials, equipment, vehicles, or supplies shall be located on the premises, and
2. No personnel shall be quartered or employed on the premises, and
3. The structure shall be designed, erected, and landscaped in such a manner as to conform to the
character of the surrounding area and this district.
(B) A lot may be used for general and specialized nonlivestock farming and agricultural activities
including the raising or growing of crops and foodstuffs; provided that any lot that is kept vacant or
as idle cropland shall be so treated as to prevent soil erosion by wind or water and so treated as to
prevent excessive growth of obnoxious weeds and shrubs.
(C) One-family detached dwellings, occupied by a single family, as defined in this title.
(D) Home occupations in accordance with section 12-5-15 of this title when authorized as a special
use by the planning commission. In consideration of such authorization, the planning commission
shall consider the following standards:
1. The nature of the home occupation;
2. The effect of the home occupation of the surrounding neighborhoods;
3. The environmental effects of the home occupation;
4. The nature of the surrounding neighborhood;
5. Potential traffic congestion as a result of the home occupation; and
6. Provision for parking for traffic or clientele, which may result from the operation of the home
occupation. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-4B-4: AREA AND SIZE REQUIREMENTS:
See chapter 9, "Schedule Of Regulations", of this title, limiting the height and size of buildings, the
minimum size of lots permitted by land use, the maximum density permitted and providing minimum
yard setback requirements. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
ARTICLE C. R-1 ONE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 277/396
12-4C-1: INTENT:
The one-family residential districts are established as districts in which the principal use of land is for
one-family dwellings. For the one-family residential districts, in promoting the general purpose of this
title, the specific intent is:
(A) To encourage the construction of, and the continued use of the land for one-family dwellings.
(B) To prohibit business, commercial or industrial use of the land, and to prohibit any other use which
would substantially interfere with development or continuation of one-family dwellings in the
district.
(C) To encourage the discontinuance of existing uses that would not be permitted as new uses under
the provisions of this title.
(D) To discourage any land use which would generate traffic on minor or local streets other than
normal traffic to serve the residences on those streets.
(E) To discourage any use which, because of its character or size, would create requirements and
costs for public services, such as fire and police protection, water supply and sewerage,
substantially in excess of such requirements and costs if the district were developed solely for onefamily
dwellings. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-4C-2: PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED:
In a one-family residential district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected
except for one or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this title:
(A) One-family detached dwellings, occupied by a single family, as defined in this title.
(B) Publicly owned and operated parks, parkways and recreational facilities.
(C) Cemeteries, which lawfully occupied land at the time of adoption of this title.
(D) Public, parochial and other private schools offering courses in general education and not operated
for profit.
(E) Bed and breakfast operations in accordance with section 12-5-16 of this title. (Ord. 867, 11-5-
2001)
(F) Two-family dwelling units. (Ord. 1130, 9-15-2008)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 278/396
12-4C-3: SPECIAL USES:
The following special uses shall be permitted, subject to the conditions hereinafter required for each
use, subject to any and all reasonable conditions which may be imposed in accordance with 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-13-1.1, Illinois state bar edition 1998, as may be amended, and further subject
to the review and approval by the planning commission and city council as specified in sections 12-6-
2, "Review And Approval Of Special Uses", and 12-6-1, "Review And Approval Of Site Plans", of this
title:
(A) Churches and other facilities normally incidental thereto subject to the following conditions:
1. The principal buildings on the site shall be set back from abutting properties zoned for
residential use not less than fifteen feet (15').
2. Buildings of greater than the maximum height allowed in chapter 9, "Schedule Of Regulations",
of this title, may be allowed provided front, side, and rear yards are increased above the
minimum required yards by one foot (1') for each foot of building height that exceeds the
maximum height allowed.
3. All access to the site shall be in accordance with section 12-5-17, "Access To A Major
Thoroughfare Or Collector Street", of this title.
(B) Public utility buildings and uses (without storage yards) when operating requirements necessitate
the locating of said building within the district in order to serve the immediate vicinity. Further, no
building and/or structure shall be located in any required yard.
(C) Daycare centers including adult daycare use (not including dormitories); provided, that for each
person so cared for, there shall be provided and maintained a minimum of one hundred fifty (150)
square feet of open space. Such space shall have a total minimum area of not less than five
thousand (5,000) square feet and shall be fenced and screened from any adjoining lot in any
residential district.
(D) Home occupations in accordance with section 12-5-15 of this title when authorized as a special
use by the planning commission. In consideration of such authorization, the planning commission
shall consider the following standards:
1. The nature of the home occupation;
2. The effect of the home occupation on the surrounding neighborhoods;
3. The environmental effects of the home occupation;
4. The nature of the surrounding neighborhood;
5. Potential traffic congestion as a result of the home occupation; and
6. Provision for parking for traffic or clientele, which may result from the operation of the home
occupation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 279/396
(E) Any other use, which is determined by the planning commission to be of the same general
character as, and compatible with, the above permitted uses. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
(F) Three-family dwelling units.
(G) General hospitals with no maximum height restrictions, when the following conditions are met:
1. All such hospitals shall be developed only on sites consisting of at least three (3) acres in area.
2. All access to the site shall be in accordance with section 12-5-17 of this title.
3. The minimum distance of any main or accessory building from bounding lot lines or streets shall
be at least fifty feet (50') for front, rear, and side yards for all two-story structures. For each story
above two (2), the minimum yard distance shall be increased by at least twenty feet (20').
4. Ambulance and delivery areas shall be obscured from all residential view with an obscuring wall
or fence six feet (6') in height. (Ord. 1130, 9-15-2008)
12-4C-4: REQUIRED CONDITIONS:
For all nonresidential uses allowed in the residential districts, the setbacks shall equal the height of the
main building, or the setbacks required in chapter 9 of this title, whichever is greater. (Ord. 867, 11-5-
2001)
12-4C-5: AREA AND SIZE REQUIREMENTS:
See chapter 9, "Schedule Of Regulations", of this title, limiting the height and size of buildings, the
minimum size of lot permitted by land use, and providing minimum yard setback requirements. (Ord.
867, 11-5-2001)
ARTICLE D. R-2 ONE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
(Rep. by Ord. 1130, 9-15-2008)
ARTICLE E. R-3 ONE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
(Rep. by Ord. 1130, 9-15-2008)
ARTICLE F. R-4 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
DISTRICT
12-4F-1: INTENT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 280/396
The R-4 multiple-family residential district is designed to provide sites for multiple-family dwelling
structures, and related uses, which will generally serve as a transitional land use between
nonresidential districts and lower density one-family districts. The multiple-family district is further
provided to serve the limited needs for the apartment type of unit in an otherwise medium density,
one-family community. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-4F-2: PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED:
In a multiple-family residential district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be
erected except for one or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this title:
(A) All uses as in the R-1 one-family residential, R-2 one-family residential, and R-3 one-family
residential districts permitted and as regulated under articles C through E of this chapter.
(B) Multiple-family dwellings.
(C) Boarding houses. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-4F-3: SPECIAL USES:
The following special uses shall be permitted subject to the conditions hereinafter required for each
use, subject to any and all reasonable conditions which may be imposed in accordance with 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-13-1.1, Illinois state bar edition 1998, as may be amended, and subject to the
review and approval by the planning commission and city council as specified in sections 12-6-2,
"Review And Approval Of Special Uses", and 12-6-1, "Review And Approval Of Site Plans", of this
title:
(A) All special uses as in the R-1 one-family residential, R-2 one-family residential, and R-3 one-family
residential districts permitted and as regulated under articles C through E of this chapter.
(B) General hospitals, with no maximum height restrictions, when the following conditions are met:
1. All such hospitals shall be developed only on sites consisting of at least three (3) acres in area.
2. All access to the site shall be in accordance with section 12-5-17 of this title.
3. The minimum distance of any main or accessory building from bounding lot lines or streets shall
be at least fifty feet (50') for front, rear, and side yards for all two-story structures. For each story
above two (2), the minimum yard distance shall be increased by at least twenty feet (20').
4. Ambulance and delivery areas shall be obscured from all residential view with an obscuring wall
or fence six feet (6') in height.
(C) Convalescent or nursing homes when the following conditions are met:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 281/396
1. The building shall not exceed a building height of two (2) stories.
2. The minimum lot size shall be three (3) acres.
3. No building shall be closer than forty feet (40') to any property line.
4. All access to the site shall be in accordance with section 12-5-17 of this title.
5. There shall be provided on the site, not less than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet
of open space for each bed in the home. The one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of
land area shall provide for landscape setting, off street parking, service drives, loading space,
yard requirement and accessory uses, but shall not include the area covered by main or
accessory buildings.
(D) Housing for the elderly when the following conditions are met:
1. All housing for senior (elderly) citizens shall be constructed on parcels of at least three (3) acres
and may provide for the following:
(a) Cottage type one-story dwellings and/or apartment type dwelling units.
(b) Common service containing, but not limited to, central dining rooms, recreational rooms,
central lounge, and workshops.
2. Minimum dwelling unit size shall be three hundred fifty (350) square feet per unit (not including
kitchen and sanitary facilities).
3. Total coverage of all buildings (including dwelling units and related service buildings) shall not
exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the total site not including any dedicated public right of way.
4. Buildings of greater height than the maximum height allowed in chapter 9, "Schedule Of
Regulations", of this title, may be allowed provided front, side, and rear yards are increased
above the minimum required yards by one foot (1') for each foot of building height that exceeds
the maximum height allowed.
(E) Home for the aged (congregate care facility) or adult foster care facility for more than six (6) adults
when the following conditions are met:
1. Minimum lot size shall be three (3) acres.
2. All access to the site shall be in accordance with section 12-5-17, "Access To A Major
Thoroughfare Or Collector Street", of this title.
3. No structure shall be located closer than forty feet (40') to any property line.
4. The site shall be so developed as to create a land to building ratio on the lot or parcel whereby
for each one bed in the facility there shall be provided not less than one thousand five hundred
(1,500) square feet of open space. The one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of land
area per bed shall provide for landscaped setbacks, off street parking, service drives, loading
space, yard requirements, and space required for accessory uses. The one thousand five
hundred (1,500) square feet requirement is over and above the building coverage area.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 282/396
(F) Home occupations in accordance with section 12-5-15 of this title when authorized as a special
use by the planning commission. In consideration of such authorization, the planning commission
shall consider the following standards:
1. The nature of the home occupation;
2. The effect of the home occupation of the surrounding neighborhoods;
3. The environmental effects of the home occupation;
4. The nature of the surrounding neighborhood;
5. Potential traffic congestion as a result of the home occupation; and
6. Provision for parking for traffic or clientele, which may result from the operation of the home
occupation.
(G) Mobile home parks when authorized as a special use by the planning commission and in accord
with the state of Illinois mobile home park act 210 Illinois Compiled Statutes 115/1-27 (state bar
edition) and as amended. In consideration of such authorization, the planning commission shall
consider:
The traffic impact of the mobile home park on the adjacent street system as determined by a traffic
impact study. The study should consider the ability of the adjacent street system to safely
accommodate the additional traffic volume.
(H) Any other use, which is determined by the planning commission to be of the same general
character as, and compatible with, the above permitted uses. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-4F-4: REQUIRED CONDITIONS:
(A) The maximum horizontal length of any one building shall be one hundred eighty feet (180')
measured along any front, side, rear, or other exterior elevation.
(B) Within any yard setback or area between buildings, an area equivalent to seventy percent (70%) of
any required yard or any required minimum area between buildings must be landscaped and
developed as usable open space or recreation area available to the residents of the development,
and further, said areas shall be kept free of all vehicular uses.
(C) On sites which are four (4) acres or larger in size, the open land area shall include a landscaped
greenbelt of a minimum ten foot (10') width, located and continually maintained, along any property
boundary adjoining a residential district or fronting on a public road right of way. (Ord. 867, 11-5-
2001)
12-4F-5: AREA AND SIZE REQUIREMENTS:
See chapter 9, "Schedule Of Regulations", of this title, limiting the height and size of buildings, the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 283/396
minimum size of lot permitted by land use, maximum density permitted and providing minimum yard
setback requirements. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
ARTICLE G. C-1 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
12-4G-1: INTENT:
The C-1 Central Business District, is designed to cater to the needs of the local and regional
consumer population. It is generally characterized by an integrated cluster of establishments serviced
by a common parking area, and generating large volumes of pedestrian traffic and ancillary vehicular
trips. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-4G-2: PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED:
In the Central Business District, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected
except for one or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this title:
(A) Office type business related to executive, administrative, or professional occupations including, but
not limited to, offices of a lawyer, accountant, insurance/real estate agent, architect, engineer, and
similar occupation.
(B) Clinics, except veterinary clinics having outdoor runs.
(C) Medical, dental, and optical laboratories that provide testing services or provide medical or dental
devices such as artificial limbs, teeth, eyeglasses, etc.
(D) Banks, credit unions, savings and loan associations, and similar uses, not offering drive-through
facilities.
(E) Business service establishments such as typing services, photocopying services; quick printing
establishments, office supply stores, and similar establishments.
(F) Any retail business whose principal activity is the sale of merchandise in an enclosed building,
such as, but not limited to: groceries, meats, dairy products, baked goods or other foods, drugs,
dry goods, clothing and notions or hardware.
(G) Personal service establishments which perform services on the premises, such as, but not limited
to: repair shops (watches, radio, television, shoe, etc.), tailor shops, beauty parlors or barbershops,
photographic studios, and self-service laundries and dry cleaners.
(H) Standard or carryout restaurants.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 284/396
(I) Theaters, assembly halls, concert halls or similar places of assembly when conducted completely
within enclosed buildings.
(J) Post office buildings.
(K) New and used car salesrooms, showrooms, or offices which do not provide outdoor sales space
and/or service and repair activities.
(L) Health and athletic clubs.
(M) Discount, department, or variety stores.
(N) Any service establishment of an office, showroom or workshop nature of an electrician, decorator,
dressmaker, tailor, baker, painter, upholsterer or an establishment doing radio or home appliance
repair, photographic reproduction, and similar service establishments that require a retail adjunct.
(O) Governmental administration buildings, museums, and libraries.
(P) Other uses similar to the above uses.
(Q) Establishments licensed pursuant to subsection 3-3-7(A) of this Code to sell alcoholic liquor at
retail. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001; amd. Ord. 1438, 2-6-2017)
12-4G-3: SPECIAL USES:
The following special uses shall be permitted subject to the conditions hereinafter required for each
use, subject to any and all reasonable conditions which may be imposed in accordance with 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes, 1998 Illinois State Bar edition, as may be amended, and further subject to the
review and approval by the Planning Commission and City Council as specified in sections 12-6-2,
"Review And Approval Of Special Uses", and 12-6-1, "Review And Approval Of Site Plans", of this
title:
(A) Residential units when the following conditions are met:
1. The dwelling unit(s) shall be provided on any floor other than a floor where grade level access is
provided.
2. The minimum floor area per unit shall equal five hundred (500) square feet for a one bedroom
unit, seven hundred (700) square feet for a two (2) bedroom unit, nine hundred (900) square feet
for a three (3) bedroom unit, and one thousand one hundred (1,100) square feet for units
containing four (4) bedrooms.
3. Off street parking shall be provided in the ratio of two (2) parking spaces for each residential unit
provided.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 285/396
(B) Any other use, which is determined by the Planning Commission to be of the same general
character as, and compatible with, the above permitted uses.
(C) Establishments licensed pursuant to subsection 3-3-7(A) of this Code to sell alcoholic liquor at
retail. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001; amd. Ord. 1438, 2-6-2017)
12-4G-4: REQUIRED CONDITIONS:
Outdoor storage of commodities shall be expressly prohibited. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-4G-5: AREA AND SIZE REQUIREMENTS:
See chapter 9, "Schedule Of Regulations", of this title, limiting the height and size of buildings, the
minimum size of lot by permitted land use, and providing minimum yard setback requirements. (Ord.
867, 11-5-2001)
ARTICLE H. C-2 SERVICE/BUSINESS DISTRICT
12-4H-1: INTENT:
The C-2 service/business district is designed to provide sites for more diversified business types
which would often be incompatible with the pedestrian movement in the central business district and
which are oriented to serving the needs of "passerby" traffic and locations for planned shopping
centers. Many of the business types permitted also generate greater volumes of traffic and activities,
which must be specially considered to minimize adverse effects on adjacent properties. (Ord. 867, 11-
5-2001)
12-4H-2: PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED:
In a service/business district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except
for one or more of the following uses unless otherwise provided in this title:
(A) Any retail business whose principal activity is the sale of merchandise in an enclosed building,
such as, but not limited to: groceries, meats, dairy products, baked goods or other foods, drugs,
dry goods, clothing and notions or hardware.
(B) Dry cleaning establishments, or pick up stations, dealing directly with the consumer. Central dry
cleaning plants serving more than one retail outlet shall be prohibited.
(C) Standard or carryout restaurants.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 286/396
(D) Private clubs, fraternal organizations, and lodge halls.
(E) Overnight lodging facility, subject to the following:
1. Access shall be provided so as not to conflict with the adjacent business uses or adversely
affect traffic flow on a major thoroughfare.
2. Each unit shall contain not less than two hundred fifty (250) square feet of floor area.
3. No guest shall establish permanent residence at a motel for more than thirty (30) consecutive
days within any calendar year.
(F) Bowling alley, billiard hall, indoor archery range, indoor tennis courts, indoor skating rink, or similar
forms of indoor commercial recreation when located at least one hundred feet (100') from any
front, rear or side yard of any residential lot in an adjacent residential district.
Arcades as defined and permitted by all municipal regulations shall only be permitted in this district
as accessory use to any of the above permitted in this section. Any such use shall only be
accessible and directly supervised from within the building and shall not in any manner constitute a
principal use of the premises.
(G) Plant material nursery and other open air business uses.
(H) Automotive service facilities providing: tire (but not recapping), battery, muffler,
rustproofing/undercoating, auto glass, reupholstering, wheel balancing, shock absorbers, wheel
alignments, and minor motor tuneups only, when developed in accordance with the following:
1. There shall be no outside display of any parts and/or products.
2. Any repair and/or replacement activity shall be conducted within a totally enclosed building.
3. All new, used, and/or discarded parts shall be stored within a completely enclosed building
approved by the building department.
4. Any such activity shall be located not less than twenty five feet (25') from a property line.
5. There shall be no outside parking and/or storage or any partially dismantled or inoperative
vehicles.
6. In operations such as automobile reconditioning, but not necessarily limited to such activities,
there shall be no releasing of toxic gases, liquids, or materials in any form into the atmosphere,
the water or sewer systems of the city of Clinton or on, or into the earth; and further, no adverse
effects shall be created by any activity on adjacent property or development.
(I) Bank, credit unions, savings and loan associations, and similar uses including those offering drivethrough
facilities.
(J) Veterinary hospitals and clinics having boarding facilities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 287/396
(K) Funeral homes.
(L) Office establishments (attorney, dentist, accountant, etc.). (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
(M) Any use permitted under section 12-4G-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 1130, 9-15-2008)
12-4H-3: SPECIAL USES:
The following special uses shall be permitted subject to the conditions hereinafter required for each
use, subject to any and all reasonable conditions which may be imposed in accordance with 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-13-1.1, Illinois state bar edition 1998, as may be amended, and further subject
to the review and approval by the planning commission and city council as specified in sections 12-6-
2, "Review And Approval Of Special Uses", and 12-6-1, "Review And Approval Of Site Plans", of this
title:
(A) Vehicle dealers with outdoor sales space and/or repair facilities for the sale of new or secondhand
automobiles, house trailers, recreational vehicles, or rental trailers and/or automobiles, all subject
to the following:
1. The lot or area shall be provided with a permanent, durable and dustless surface, and shall be
graded and drained as to dispose of all surface water accumulated within the area.
2. Access to the outdoor sales area shall be at least sixty feet (60') from the intersection of any two
(2) streets.
3. Any servicing of vehicles including major motor repair and refinishing shall be subject to the
following requirements:
(a) Any such activities shall be clearly incidental to the sale of said vehicles and shall occur
within a completely enclosed building.
(b) Partially dismantled and/or damaged vehicles shall be stored within an enclosed building.
(c) New, used and/or discarded parts and supplies shall be stored within a completely enclosed
building.
(d) Any such activity shall be located not less than fifty feet (50') from any property line.
(e) There shall be no external evidence, beyond the building, by way of dust, odor, or noise of
such activities.
4. All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts.
(B) Business in the character of an open front store or, a fast food or drive-in restaurant subject to
following conditions:
1. A setback of at least sixty feet (60') from the right of way line of any existing or proposed street
must be maintained.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 288/396
2. Access points shall be located at least sixty feet (60') from the intersection of any two (2) streets.
3. All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts.
4. A six foot (6') high completely obscuring wall shall be provided when abutting or adjacent
districts are zoned for an R-1 one-family residential district, R-2 one-family residential district, R-
3 one-family residential district, R-4 multiple-family residential district, and a C-1 central business
district. The height of the wall shall be measured from the surface of the ground. Said wall shall
further meet the requirements of section 12-5-22, "Screening Walls", of this title.
(C) Gasoline service station for the sale of gasoline, oil and minor accessories only, and repair work,
but not including vehicle body repair, painting, tire recapping, engine rebuilding, auto dismantling,
and such other activities whose external effects could adversely extend beyond the property line,
subject to the following conditions:
1. The curb cuts for access to a service station shall not be permitted at such locations that will
tend to create traffic hazards in the streets immediately adjacent thereto. Entrances shall be no
less than twenty five feet (25') from a street intersection (measured from the road right of way) or
from adjacent residential districts.
2. The minimum lot area shall be fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet, and so arranged that
ample space is available for motor vehicles, which are required to wait. Gasoline service
stations, which are intended solely for the sale of gasoline, oil and minor accessories and have
no facilities for repair or servicing of automobiles (including lubricating facilities), may be
permitted on lots of ten thousand (10,000) square feet, subject to all other provisions herein
required.
3. The view of all restroom doors shall be shielded from adjacent streets and residential districts.
4. Tow trucks (wreckers) and vehicles under repair shall not be permitted in the front yard.
5. The parking of vehicles on site shall be limited to those which may be serviced within a twenty
four (24) hour period.
6. A ten foot (10') landscaped greenbelt shall be provided along all street frontages.
(D) Any other use which is determined by the planning commission to be of the same general
character as, and compatible with, the above permitted uses. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
(E) All uses allowed under section 12-4G-3 of this chapter. (Ord. 1130, 9-15-2008)
12-4H-4: AREA AND SIZE REQUIREMENTS:
See chapter 9, "Schedule Of Regulations", of this title, limiting the height and size of buildings, the
minimum size of the lot by permitted land use, and providing minimum yard setback requirements.
(Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
ARTICLE I. C-3 HIGHWAY BUSINESS DISTRICT
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 289/396
12-4I-1: INTENT:
The highway business district is established to provide an aesthetically attractive working environment
exclusively for, and conducive to, the development and protection of large commercial, offices, and
specialized retail uses.
The provisions of this article have been developed to coordinate these developments with the intent
to:
(A) Establish and maintain high aesthetic standards;
(B) Preserve the district's visual character by assuring improvements are properly related to their sites
and to surrounding developments;
(C) Encourage originality, flexibility, and innovation in site planning and development, including
architecture, landscaping, and graphic design; and
(D) Encourage development that is compatible with and complementary to nearby residential and
commercial areas. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-4I-2: PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED:
In the highway business district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be hereafter
erected, reconstructed, altered, or enlarged, except for one or more of the following uses:
(A) Corporate headquarters, regional headquarters, and general administrative offices used primarily
for conducting the affairs of a business, profession, service, industry, or government.
(B) General hospitals, medical clinics, and/or optical facilities that provide testing services or provide
medical or dental devices such as artificial limbs, teeth, eyeglasses, etc.
(C) Theaters, auditoriums, concert halls, and similar places of assembly when conducted within a
completely enclosed building.
(D) Business and technical schools.
(E) Public utility buildings, telephone exchange buildings, electric transformer stations and
substations, and gas regulator stations (but not including, service or storage yards) when operating
requirements necessitate the location of such facilities within the district.
(F) Health and athletic clubs.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 290/396
(G) Common open space, including pedestrian plazas and courts.
(H) Standard or carryout/drive-through restaurants.
(I) Hotel/motel.
(J) All new, used, and/or discarded parts shall be stored within a completely enclosed building
approved by the building department. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
(K) Vehicle dealers with outdoor sales space and/or repair facilities for the sale of new or secondhand
automobiles, house trailers, recreational vehicles, or rental trailers and/or automobiles, all subject
to the following:
1. The lot or area shall be provided with a permanent, durable and dustless surface, and shall be
graded and drained as to dispose of all surface water accumulated within the area.
2. Access to the outdoor sales area shall be at least sixty feet (60') from the intersection of any two
(2) streets.
3. Any servicing of vehicles including major motor repair and refinishing shall be subject to the
following requirements:
(a) Any such activities shall be clearly incidental to the sale of said vehicles and shall occur
within a completely enclosed building.
(b) Partially dismantled and/or damaged vehicles shall be stored within an enclosed building.
(c) New, used and/or discarded parts and supplies shall be stored within a completely enclosed
building.
(d) Any such activity shall be located not less than fifty feet (50') from any property line.
(e) There shall be no external evidence, beyond the building, by way of dust, odor, or noise of
such activities.
4. All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts.
(L) All uses permitted under section 12-4H-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 1130, 9-15-2008)
12-4I-3: SPECIAL USES:
The following special uses shall be permitted subject to the conditions hereinafter required for each
use, subject to any and all reasonable conditions which may be imposed in accordance with 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-13-1.1, Illinois state bar edition 1998, as may be amended, and further subject
to the review and approval by the planning commission and city council as specified in sections 12-6-
2, "Review And Approval Of Special Uses", and 12-6-1, "Review And Approval Of Site Plans", of this
title:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 291/396
(A) Gasoline service station for the sale of gasoline, oil and minor accessories only, and where repair
work is done, but not including vehicle body repair, painting, tire recapping, engine rebuilding, auto
dismantling, and such other activities whose external effects could adversely extend beyond the
property line, subject to the following conditions:
1. The curb cuts for access to a service station shall not be permitted at such locations that will
tend to create traffic hazards in the streets immediately adjacent thereto. Entrances shall be no
less than twenty five feet (25') from a street intersection (measured from the road right of way) or
from adjacent residential districts.
2. The minimum lot area shall be fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet, and so arranged that
ample space is available for motor vehicles, which are required to wait. Gasoline service
stations, which are intended solely for the sale of gasoline, oil and minor accessories and have
no facilities for repair or servicing of automobiles (including lubricating facilities), may be
permitted on lots of ten thousand (10,000) square feet, subject to all other provisions herein
required.
3. The view of all restroom doors shall be shielded from adjacent streets and residential districts.
4. Tow trucks (wreckers) and vehicles under repair shall not be permitted in the front yard.
5. The parking of vehicles on site shall be limited to those which may be serviced within a twenty
four (24) hour period.
6. A ten foot (10') landscaped greenbelt shall be provided along all street frontages.
(B) Car wash.
(C) Oil change facility.
(D) Any other use, which is determined, by the planning commission to be of the same general
character as, and compatible with, the above permitted uses. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
(E) All uses allowed under section 12-4H-3 of this chapter, excepting subsection 12-4H-3(A) of this
chapter. (Ord. 1130, 9-15-2008)
12-4I-4: ACCESSORY USES:
The following shall be allowed as accessory uses in the highway business district:
(A) Uses and structures customarily accessory and incidental to a permitted use.
(B) Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work which buildings shall be removed
upon completion or abandonment of the construction work.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 292/396
(C) Indoor and outdoor recreational facilities, such as swimming pools, saunas, game and craft rooms,
tennis courts, and exercise studios, which are provided in association with a permitted use.
(D) Parking and loading structures and areas provided in conjunction with a permitted use. (Ord. 867,
11-5-2001)
12-4I-5: AREA AND SIZE REQUIREMENTS:
See chapter 9, "Schedule Of Regulations", of this title, limiting the height and size of buildings, the
minimum size of the lot by permitted land use, and providing minimum yard setback requirements.
(Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
ARTICLE J. I-1 RESEARCH/INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
12-4J-1: INTENT:
The I-1 research/industrial district is designed so as to accommodate activities industrial and research
uses whose external and physical effects are not as intensive as those of some of the uses allowed in
the I-2 industrial manufacturing district. I-1 may be used as a buffer district between I-2 industrial
manufacturing and less intensive uses. I-1 research/industrial uses are restricted to the area of the
district and in no manner affect in a detrimental way any of the surrounding districts.
The general goals of this use district include, among others, the following specific purposes:
(A) To provide sufficient space, in appropriate locations, to meet the needs of the municipality's
expected future economy for additional research/industrial and related uses.
(B) To protect abutting residential districts by separating them from research/industrial activities, and
by prohibiting the use of such research/industrial areas for new residential development.
(C) To promote development which is free from danger of fire, explosions, toxic and noxious matter,
radiation, and other hazards, and from offensive noise, vibration, smoke, odor and other
objectionable influences.
(D) To protect the most desirable use of land in accordance with a well considered plan. To protect the
character and established pattern of adjacent development, and in each area to conserve the
value of land and buildings and other structures, and to protect the municipality's tax revenue.
(Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-4J-2: PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED:
In a research/industrial district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected
except for one or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this title:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 293/396
(A) Any use charged with the principal function of basic research, design and pilot or experimental
product development when conducted within a completely enclosed building.
(B) Retail uses which have an industrial character in terms of either their outdoor storage
requirements or activities (such as, but not limited to, lumberyard, building materials outlet,
upholsterer, cabinetmaker).
(C) Laboratories - experimental, film, or testing. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-4J-3: SPECIAL USES:
The following special uses shall be permitted subject to the conditions hereinafter required for each
use, subject to any and all reasonable conditions which may be imposed in accordance with 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-13-1.1, Illinois state bar edition 1998, as may be amended, and further subject
to the review and approval by the planning commission and city council as specified in sections 12-6-
2, "Review And Approval Of Special Uses", and 12-6-1, "Review And Approval Of Site Plans", of this
title:
(A) Miniwarehouses (self-storage facilities) subject to the following conditions:
1. The minimum size of the site devoted to such use shall not be less than three (3) acres.
2. Building setbacks shall be as follows: front yard not less than twenty feet (20'); side and rear
yard not less than ten feet (10').
3. Building separation between self-storage buildings on the same site shall be fifteen feet (15'), as
measured from side to side or front to rear, or equal to the building height, whichever is greater.
4. The total lot coverage of all structures shall be limited to fifty percent (50%) of the total lot area.
5. A sightproof barrier shall be provided around the perimeter of the development. Said barrier
shall be located at the setback line and may consist of either the solid facades of the storage
structures or a fence. If a fence is provided, it shall be a minimum of six feet (6') in height and
shall be constructed of brick, stone, masonry units, or wood products, which are determined by
the building official to be durable and weather resistant.
6. A ten foot (10') landscaped greenbelt shall be provided between the property line and required
barrier along all street frontages. A five foot (5') landscaped greenbelt shall be provided between
the property line and barrier where the site abuts any residential district. All materials shall be
planted in conformance with section 12-5-20 of this title.
7. Parking shall be provided in the ratio of one space for each two thousand (2,000) square feet of
gross building area. At a minimum, two (2) parking spaces must be assigned to, and located
conveniently to, each individual storage building. In addition, two (2) spaces for the resident
manager, and one additional space for each additional employee shall be provided adjacent to
the rental office.
8. Internal driveway aisles shall be a minimum of twenty four feet (24') in width.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 294/396
9. All off street parking areas and driveways shall be hard surfaced and drained in accordance with
section 12-5-8 of this title.
10. All ingress and egress from this site shall be directly onto a collector or major thoroughfare as
identified on the city's master plan.
11. Building height shall not exceed one story or fifteen feet (15') except that a caretaker or
resident manager's unit may be allowed a building height of two (2) stories or twenty five feet
(25').
12. No single storage building shall exceed five thousand (5,000) square feet.
13. All storage on the property shall be kept within an enclosed building.
14. The use of the premises shall be limited to storage only, and shall not be used for any auction,
or sales, or storage and transfer business; for the servicing, repair, or fabrication of any vehicle,
boat, trailer, appliance, or similar item; or for the operation of power tools, compressors, kilns, or
similar equipment; except, that limited sales to tenants of products and supplies incidental to the
principal use, such as packing materials, identification labels, rope, locks, tape, etc., shall be
permitted on the site devoted to this use. The storage of combustible or flammable liquids,
combustible fibers or explosive materials, as defined in the fire protection code, or toxic
materials are expressly prohibited. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
(B) The manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging or treatment of cosmetics. (Ord. 1019, 8-
15-2005)
(C) Any other use, which is determined by the planning commission to be of the same general
character as, and compatible with, the above permitted uses. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001; amd. Ord.
1019, 8-15-2005)
12-4J-4: REQUIRED CONDITIONS:
(A) Open storage facilities shall be totally obscured by a wall on those sides abutting R-1 one-family
residential district, R-2 one-family residential district, R-3 one-family residential district, R-4
multiple-family residential district, a C-1 central business district, and on any front yard abutting a
public thoroughfare except as otherwise provided in section 12-5-7 of this title. In I-1 districts, the
extent of such a wall may be determined by the planning commission on the basis of usage. Such
a wall shall not be less than four feet six inches (4'6") in height and may, depending upon land
usage, be required to be eight feet (8') in height, and shall be subject further to the requirements of
section 12-5-22, "Screening Walls", of this title. The height shall be determined in the same
manner as the wall height is above set forth.
(B) All activities and uses within the district shall conform to the following performance standards:
1. Smoke: A person or industry shall not discharge into the atmosphere from any single source of
emission whatsoever any air contaminant that exceeds existing federal and/or state standards
and statutes regulating such emissions.
2. Open Fires: A person or industry shall not burn any combustible refuse in any open outdoor fire
within the district.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 295/396
3. Noxious Gases: No noxious or malodorous gases shall be allowed to escape into the
atmosphere in concentrations which are offensive, which produce a public nuisance or hazard
on any adjoining lot or property, or which could be detrimental to human, plant, or animal life.
4. Air Contaminants: A person or industry shall not discharge from any source whatsoever such
quantities of air contaminants or other material that exceed existing federal and/or state
standards and statutes regulating such air discharges.
5. Glare And Heat: Any operation or activity producing glare shall be so conducted that direct and
indirect illumination from the source of light shall not cause illumination in excess of one-half
(0.5) of one foot-candle when measured at any adjoining residence or business district boundary
line. Flickering or intense source of light shall be so controlled as not to cause a nuisance across
any lot lines.
If heat is a result of an industrial operation, it shall be so insulated as to not raise the
temperature at any property line at any time.
6. Noise: No activity shall emit noise in excess of the standards specified in section 12-5-26 of
this title.
7. Vibration: Vibrations from industrial operations and vehicular traffic in this district must be
controlled to the extent that they cannot be felt past any property line.
8. Radio Transmission: For electronic equipment required in an industrial operation, the equipment
shall be so shielded that its operation will not interfere with radio, television, or other electronic
equipment.
9. Storage Of Flammable Materials: Any activity involving the use or storage of flammable or
explosive materials shall be protected by adequate firefighting and fire suppression equipment
and such safety devices as are normally used in the handling of any such material. Such
hazards shall be kept removed from adjacent activities to a distance, which is compatible with
the potential danger involved.
10. Radioactive Materials: No activity shall emit dangerous radioactivity at any point, or
unreasonable electrical disturbance adversely affecting the operation at any point of any
equipment other than that of the creator of such disturbance.
11. Water Pollution: Pollution of water shall be subject to such requirements and regulations as are
established by the city of Clinton, the Illinois state department of health, the Illinois department of
natural resources, the Illinois environmental protection agency, and the U.S. environmental
protection agency. All discharges into public sewers shall be in accordance all applicable local,
state, and federal regulations. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-4J-5: AREA AND SIZE REQUIREMENTS:
See chapter 9, "Schedule Of Regulations", of this title, limiting the height and size of buildings, the
minimum size of lot by permitted land use and providing minimum yard setback requirements. (Ord.
867, 11-5-2001)
ARTICLE K. I-2 INDUSTRIAL MANUFACTURING
DISTRICT
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 296/396
12-4K-1: INTENT:
The I-2 industrial manufacturing district is designed so as to primarily accommodate wholesale
activities, warehouses, and industrial operations whose external, physical effects are restricted to the
area of the district and in no manner affect in a detrimental way any of the surrounding districts.
The general goals of this use district include, among others, the following specific purposes:
(A) To provide sufficient space, in appropriate locations, to meet the needs of the municipality's
expected future economy for additional manufacturing and related uses.
(B) To protect abutting residential districts by separating them from manufacturing activities, and by
prohibiting the use of such industrial areas for new residential development.
(C) To promote manufacturing development which is free from danger of fire, explosions, toxic and
noxious matter, radiation, and other hazards, and from offensive noise, vibration, smoke, odor and
other objectionable influences.
(D) To protect the most desirable use of land in accordance with a well considered plan. To protect the
character and established pattern of adjacent development, and in each area to conserve the
value of land and buildings and other structures, and to protect the municipality's tax revenue.
(Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-4K-2: PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED:
In an industrial manufacturing district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be
erected except for one or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this title:
(A) Any use charged with the principal function of basic research, design and pilot or experimental
product development when conducted within a completely enclosed building.
(B) Any of the following uses when the manufacturing, compounding, or processing is conducted
wholly within a completely enclosed building:
1. Warehousing and wholesale establishments and trucking facilities.
2. The manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging or treatment of such products as, but
not limited to, bakery goods, candy, cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, toiletries, food products,
hardware and cutlery, tool, die, gauge and machine shops.
3. The manufacture, compounding, assembling or treatment of articles of merchandise from
previously prepared materials: bone, canvas, cellophane, cloth, cork, elastomers, feathers, felt,
fiber, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather, paper, plastics, rubber, precious or semiprecious metals or
stones, sheet metal, shell, textiles, tobacco, wax, wire, wood, and yarns.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 297/396
4. The manufacture of pottery and figurines or other similar ceramic products using only previously
pulverized clay, and kilns fired only by electricity or gas.
5. Manufacture of musical instruments, toys, novelties and metal or rubber stamps, or other
molded rubber products.
6. Manufacture or assembly of electrical appliances, electronic instruments and devices, radio and
phonographs.
7. Laboratories - experimental, film, or testing.
8. Manufacturing and repair of electric or neon signs, light sheet metal products, including heating
and ventilating equipment, cornices, eaves, and the like.
9. Central dry cleaning plants or laundries; provided, that such plants should not deal directly with
consumer at retail.
10. All public utilities, including buildings, necessary structures, storage yards, and other related
uses.
(C) Warehouse, storage, and transfer and electric and gas service buildings and yards. Public utility
buildings, telephone exchange buildings, electrical transformer stations and substations, and gas
regulator stations.
(D) Storage facilities for building materials, sand, gravel, stone, lumber, storage of contractor's
equipment and supplies.
(E) Municipal uses such as water treatment plants, and reservoirs, sewage treatment plants, and all
other similar municipal buildings and uses, including outdoor storage.
(F) Kennels.
(G) Trade or industrial schools.
(H) Retail uses which have an industrial character in terms of either their outdoor storage
requirements or activities (such as, but not limited to, lumberyard, building materials outlet,
upholsterer, cabinetmaker).
(I) Recycling centers.
(J) Auto engine and body repair, and undercoating shops when located in a completely enclosed
building. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-4K-3: SPECIAL USES:
The following special uses shall be permitted subject to the conditions hereinafter required for each
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 298/396
use, subject to any and all reasonable conditions which may be imposed in accordance with 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-13-1.1, Illinois state bar edition 1998, as may be amended, and further subject
to the review and approval by the planning commission and city council as specified in sections 12-6-
2, "Review And Approval Of Special Uses", and 12-6-1, "Review And Approval Of Site Plans", of this
title:
(A) Miniwarehouses (self-storage facilities) subject to the following conditions:
1. The minimum size of the site devoted to such use shall not be less than three (3) acres.
2. Building setbacks shall be as follows: front yard not less than twenty feet (20'); side and rear
yard not less than ten feet (10').
3. Building separation between self-storage buildings on the same site shall be fifteen feet (15'), as
measured from side to side or front to rear, or equal to the building height, whichever is greater.
4. The total lot coverage of all structures shall be limited to fifty percent (50%) of the total lot area.
5. A sightproof barrier shall be provided around the perimeter of the development. Said barrier
shall be located at the setback line and may consist of either the solid facades of the storage
structures or a fence. If a fence is provided, it shall be a minimum of six feet (6') in height and
shall be constructed of brick, stone, masonry units, or wood products, which are determined by
the building official to be durable and weather resistant.
6. A ten foot (10') landscaped greenbelt shall be provided between the property line and required
barrier along all street frontages. A five foot (5') landscaped greenbelt shall be provided between
the property line and barrier where the site abuts any residential district. All materials shall be
planted in conformance with section 12-5-21 of this title.
7. Parking shall be provided in the ratio of one space for each two thousand (2,000) square feet of
gross building area. At a minimum, two (2) parking spaces must be assigned to, and located
conveniently to, each individual storage building. In addition, two (2) spaces for the resident
manager, and one additional space for each additional employee shall be provided adjacent to
the rental office.
8. Internal driveway aisles shall be a minimum of twenty four feet (24') in width.
9. All off street parking areas and driveways shall be hard surfaced and drained in accordance with
section 12-5-8 of this title.
10. All ingress and egress from this site shall be directly onto a collector or major thoroughfare as
identified on the city's master plan.
11. Building height shall not exceed one story or fifteen feet (15') except that a caretaker or
resident manager's unit may be allowed a building height of two (2) stories or twenty five feet
(25').
12. No single storage building shall exceed five thousand (5,000) square feet.
13. All storage on the property shall be kept within an enclosed building.
14. The use of the premises shall be limited to storage only, and shall not be used for any auction,
or sales, or storage and transfer business; for the servicing, repair, or fabrication of any vehicle,
boat, trailer, appliance, or similar item; or for the operation of power tools, compressors, kilns, or
similar equipment; except, that limited sales to tenants of products and supplies incidental to the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 299/396
principal use, such as packing materials, identification labels, rope, locks, tape, etc., shall be
permitted on the site devoted to this use. The storage of combustible or flammable liquids,
combustible fibers or explosive materials, as defined in the fire protection code, or toxic
materials are expressly prohibited.
(B) Commercial television and radio towers, public utility microwaves, public utility television
transmitting towers, subject to the following conditions:
1. They shall be located centrally on a continuous parcel of not less than 1.0 times the height of the
tower measured from the base of said tower to all points on each property line.
2. A barrier, not exceeding eight feet (8') in height shall be installed along the perimeter of the
development. Said barriers shall be located at the setback line and consist of either an
ornamental masonry wall or fence constructed of materials which are determined by the building
inspector to be durable and weather resistant.
3. A ten foot (10') landscaped greenbelt shall be provided between the property line and required
barrier along all street frontages. A five foot (5') landscaped greenbelt shall be provided between
the property line and barrier where the site abuts any residential district. All materials shall be
planted in conformance with section 12-5-21 of this title.
4. A minimum of two (2) parking spaces must be provided on site and interior to the perimeter
barrier. The parking area shall be provided with a permanent durable and dustless surface and
shall be so graded and drained so as to dispose of all surface water accumulated within said
parking area.
5. All towers shall be developed on a site consisting of at least two (2) acres in area.
6. The tower shall be located no closer than one hundred feet (100') to any abutting residential
district or public street, as measured from the base of the tower.
7. All towers constructed shall not be altered in terms of physical improvements or method of
operation; except, however, that modification may occur upon submittal and approval of an
amended application for special use approval.
(C) Adult entertainment use subject to the following conditions:
1. No adult entertainment use shall be located within one thousand feet (1,000') of any other adult
entertainment use nor within five hundred feet (500') of any of the following uses:
(a) All establishments licensed by the Illinois liquor control commission.
(b) Pool or billiard halls.
(c) Coin operated amusement centers.
(d) Teenage discos or dance halls.
(e) Ice or roller skating rinks.
(f) Pawnshops.
(g) Indoor or drive-in movie theaters.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 300/396
(h) Any public park.
(i) Any church.
(j) Any public or private school having a curriculum including kindergarten or any one or more of
the grades, one through twelve (12).
Such distance shall be measured along the centerline of the street or streets or address between
two (2) fixed points on the centerlines determined by projecting straight lines at right angles from
the part of the above listed uses nearest to the contemplated location of the structure containing
the adult entertainment use, and from the contemplated location of the structure containing the
adult entertainment use nearest to a use listed above.
2. No adult entertainment use shall be located within five hundred feet (500') of any area zoned
residential. Such required distances shall be measured by a straight line between a point on the
boundary line of a zoned residential area nearest to the contemplated structure or contemplated
location of the structure containing the adult entertainment use to a point on the contemplated
structure or contemplated location of the structure containing the adult entertainment use
nearest to the boundary lines of a zoned residential area.
3. All adult entertainment uses shall be contained in a freestanding building. Enclosed malls,
commercial strip stores, common wall structures, and multi-uses within the same structure do
not constitute a freestanding building.
4. No adult use shall be conducted in any manner that permits the observation of any material
depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"
from any public way or from any property not regulated as an adult entertainment use. This
provision shall apply to any display, decoration, and sign, show window or other opening.
(D) Any other use, which is determined by the planning commission to be of the same general
character as, and compatible with, the above permitted uses. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-4K-4: REQUIRED CONDITIONS:
(A) Open storage facilities for materials or equipment used in manufacturing, compounding or
processing shall be totally obscured by a wall on those sides abutting R/C-1
recreation/conservation district, R-1 one-family residential district, R-2 one-family residential
district, R-3 one-family residential district, R-4 multiple-family residential district, and a C-1 central
business district, C-2 service/business district, I-1 research/industrial district, and on any front yard
abutting a public thoroughfare except as otherwise provided in section 12-5-7 of this title. In I-2
districts, the extent of such a wall may be determined by the planning commission on the basis of
usage. Such a wall shall not be less than four feet six inches (4'6") in height and may, depending
upon land usage, be required to be eight feet (8') in height, and shall be subject further to the
requirements of section 12-5-22, general provisions of this title. The height shall be determined in
the same manner as the wall height is above set forth.
(B) All activities and uses within the district shall conform to the following performance standards:
1. Smoke: A person or industry shall not discharge into the atmosphere from any single source of
emission whatsoever any air contaminant that exceeds existing federal and/or state standards
and statutes regulating such emissions.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 301/396
2. Open Fires: A person or industry shall not burn any combustible refuse in any open outdoor fire
within the district.
3. Noxious Gases: No noxious or malodorous gases shall be allowed to escape into the
atmosphere in concentrations which are offensive, which produce a public nuisance or hazard
on any adjoining lot or property, or which could be detrimental to human, plant, or animal life.
4. Air Contaminants: A person or industry shall not discharge from any source whatsoever such
quantities of air contaminants or other material that exceed existing federal and/or state
standards and statutes regulating such air discharges.
5. Glare And Heat: Any operation or activity producing glare shall be so conducted that direct and
indirect illumination from the source of light shall not cause illumination in excess of one-half
(0.5) of one foot-candle when measured at any adjoining residence or business district boundary
line. Flickering or intense source of light shall be so controlled as not to cause a nuisance across
any lot lines.
If heat is a result of an industrial operation, it shall be so insulated as to not raise the
temperature at any property line at any time.
6. Noise: No activity shall emit noise in excess of the standards specified in section 12-5-26 of this
title.
7. Vibration: Vibrations from industrial operations and vehicular traffic in this district must be
controlled to the extent that they cannot be felt past any property line.
8. Radio Transmission: For electronic equipment required in an industrial operation, the equipment
shall be so shielded that its operation will not interfere with radio, television, or other electronic
equipment.
9. Storage Of Flammable Materials: Any activity involving the use or storage of flammable or
explosive materials shall be protected by adequate firefighting and fire suppression equipment
and such safety devices as are normally used in the handling of any such material. Such
hazards shall be kept removed from adjacent activities to a distance, which is compatible with
the potential danger involved.
10. Radioactive Materials: No activity shall emit dangerous radioactivity at any point, or
unreasonable electrical disturbance adversely affecting the operation at any point of any
equipment other than that of the creator of such disturbance.
11. Water Pollution: Pollution of water shall be subject to such requirements and regulations as are
established by the city of Clinton, the Illinois state department of health, the Illinois department of
natural resources, and the U.S. environmental protection agency. All discharges into public
sewers shall be in accordance all applicable local, state, and federal regulations. (Ord. 867, 11-
5-2001)
12-4K-5: AREA AND SIZE REQUIREMENTS:
See chapter 9, "Schedule Of Regulations", of this title, limiting the height and size of buildings, the
minimum size of lot by permitted land use and providing minimum yard setback requirements. (Ord.
867, 11-5-2001)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 302/396
ARTICLE L. O-FP FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT1
12-4L-1: INTENT:
(A) The O-FP floodplain overlay district delineates areas in the vicinity of the Ten Mile Creek, Goose
Creek and Coon Creek watercourses, and their tributaries. In the absence of flood protection
measures, these areas are subject to periodic flooding which may result in injury to or loss of life
and property, disruption of private and governmental services, impairment of the municipal tax
base, and the need for extraordinary relief measures. The regulations of this section are intended
to restrict permitted development in floodplains to:
1. Uses which inherently have low flood damage potential; and
2. Other uses allowed in the primary zoning districts, provided appropriate protective measures
have been taken.
(B) The floodplain overlay district shall be the official flood hazard boundary as approved by the city
council. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-4L-2: PERMITTED USES, SPECIAL USES:
This overlay district has no effect on the classification, whether permitted, special or prohibited, of
uses in the primary zoning districts. Rather, this overlay district imposes additional restrictions on both
permitted and special uses. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-4L-3: ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS:
(A) All uses, whether permitted or special, that are located in the area covered by the O-FP overlay
district shall not only meet all the applicable requirements of the primary district, but shall also be
adequately protected against flood damage. To assure such protection, the administrator, following
consultation with technically qualified persons, may require as necessary:
1. Anchorage or addition of weight to structures to resist flotation;
2. Installation of watertight doors and bulkheads;
3. Use of special paints, membranes or mortars so as to reduce seepage through walls;
4. Installation of pumps to lower water levels in structures or to relieve external foundation wall
flood pressure;
5. Reinforcement of walls to resist rupture or collapse caused by water pressure or floating debris;
6. Installation of valves or controls on sanitary and storm drains so that the drains can be closed to
prevent backup of sewage or storm runoff into structures;
7. Location of electrical equipment and appliances above the level of the regulatory flood elevation;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 303/396
8. Location of storage facilities for chemicals, explosives, flammable liquids, toxic substances, etc.,
above the regulatory flood elevation;
9. Filling and earth moving to raise the level of the proposed building site above the regulatory
flood elevation; and/or
10. Any other reasonable flood protection measures.
(B) In no case shall the administrator approve any proposed flood protection measure which would
result in an increase in the volume or velocity of floodwater leaving the lot in question. (Ord. 867,
11-5-2001)
Chapter 5
GENERAL PROVISIONS
12-5-1: CONFLICTING REGULATIONS:
Whenever any provision of this title imposes more stringent requirements, regulations, restrictions or
limitations than are imposed or required by the provisions of any other law or ordinance, then the
provisions of this title shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other law or ordinance impose
more stringent requirements than are imposed or required by this title, then the provisions of such law
or ordinance shall govern. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-5-2: BUILDING REGULATIONS:
(A) Scope: No building or structure, or part thereof, shall hereafter be erected, constructed, used,
reconstructed, altered or maintained, and no lot or land, or part thereof, shall hereafter be used or
maintained and no new use made of any building, structure or land, or part thereof, except in
conformity with the provisions of this title.
(B) Unlawful Building: In case any building, or part thereof, is used, erected, occupied or altered
contrary to law or the provisions of this title, such building shall be deemed an unlawful structure
and a nuisance and may be required to be vacated, torn down or abated by any legal means, and
shall not be used or occupied until it has been made to conform to the provisions of this title. Public
expenditures toward abating such nuisance shall become a lien upon the land.
(C) Temporary Building: No temporary building shall be erected unless a valid building permit exists
for a permanent building or a new use of land on the same site. Any temporary building shall be
removed from the site within thirty (30) days of issuance of a certificate of occupancy. The approval
of a temporary building may not exceed one year; however, the zoning board of appeals, may
grant multiple extensions up to three (3) months each for good cause shown, when the approval is
due to expire.
(D) Building Occupancy: No basement shall be used or occupied as a dwelling unit at any time, nor
shall a dwelling be erected in a nonresidential district, except for the living quarters of a watchman,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 304/396
caretaker, or resident manager.
(E) Frontage On A Public Street: No building shall be erected on a lot unless said lot fronts upon a
street or road that has been dedicated to the public. Multi-family developments, or commercial,
office, or industrial centers need not front each such structure within the development upon publicly
dedicated streets or roads, provided that adequate interior vehicular circulation and access can be
assured in a site plan submitted for approval to the city.
(F) One Lot, One Building: In all districts, only one principal building shall be placed on a single lot of
record, except as provided by section 12-5-3 of this chapter. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-5-3: BUILDING APPEARANCE, STRUCTURE COMPLETION, AND PERSONAL
CONSTRUCTION AUTHORITY:
(A) Residential Zones: In residential zones, after twenty five percent (25%) of the lots and frontage on
the side of the street on any block where the proposed improvement is contemplated have been
improved by the erection of the residences thereon, if one-half (1/2) or more of the residences built
in any such block are of a certain type and style, the remainder of the residences built in any such
block and to be constructed, altered, relocated, or repaired in such block shall be of a substantially
similar type and style so that new or altered buildings will be in harmony with the character of the
neighborhood. Nothing herein shall prevent the upgrading of any residential block by installing an
exterior finish having fire or weather resistance, which is greater than the minimum herein required,
or by constructing in such block a residence having floor area greater than the average area of
residences in such block provided, however, such type and style shall be such as not to impair or
destroy property values in the block.
(B) Nonresidential Zones: In any case where a building or accessory building in a nonresidential
district is erected or placed within two hundred feet (200') of the front lot line of any parcel of land
fronting upon any public street, the front walls of said building or accessory building within said
distance of two hundred feet (200') shall be constructed of stone, face brick or other ornamental
materials approved by the planning commission consistent with neighboring property, and no
building so situated shall be constructed of tarred paper, tin, corrugated iron, or any form of
pressed board or felt or similar material within the limits herein specified, nor shall any occupant of
such premises be permitted to place open stock, scrap, or junk piles within said two hundred feet
(200') unless the same shall be obscured from view from the street by the existence of a building,
solid wall, earth berm, or evergreen screen sufficient to properly obscure the same from view from
the street.
(C) Building Completion Period: All structures shall be completed within one year of the issue date of
the building permit for such structure, unless the building official grants an extension for not more
than one additional year for good cause. When a part of the building is ready for occupancy, a
temporary occupancy permit may be issued, provided that the premises complies with health and
fire standards required under this title, or any other ordinance, regulation, or statute.
(D) Personal Construction Authority: Nothing in this title shall be construed as prohibiting an owner,
tenant, occupant, or land contract vendee from doing his or her own building, altering, plumbing,
electrical installations, etc., provided building permits are obtained and complied with and provided
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 305/396
the minimum requirements of the electrical and plumbing codes of the state of Illinois, and the
applicable county health department regulations are complied with or applicable building codes.
(Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-5-4: NONCONFORMING LOTS, USES, AND STRUCTURES:
(A) Intent: It is the intent of this title to permit existing, legal nonconforming lots, structures, or uses to
continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival.
It is recognized that there exists within the districts established by this title and subsequent
amendments, lots, structures, and use of land and structures which were lawful before this title
was passed or amended which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this
title or future amendments.
Such uses are declared by this title to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts involved.
It is further the intent of this title that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or
extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the
same district.
A nonconforming use of a structure, a nonconforming use of land, or a nonconforming use of a
structure and land shall not be extended or enlarged after passage of this title by attachment on a
building or premises of additional signs intended to be seen from off the premises, or by the
addition of other uses of a nature which would be prohibited generally in the district involved.
To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this title shall be deemed to require a change in the plans,
construction or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun
prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment hereof and upon which actual building
construction has been diligently carried on. "Actual construction" is hereby defined to include the
placing of construction materials in a permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner;
except that where demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially begun
preparatory to rebuilding, such demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction,
provided that work shall be diligently carried on until completion of the building involved.
(B) Nonconforming Lots: In any one-family residential district, notwithstanding limitations imposed by
other provisions of this title, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be
erected on any single lot of record which is under separate and distinct ownership from adjacent
lots at the effective date of adoption or amendment hereof. This provision shall apply even though
such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in
the district; provided that yard dimensions and other requirements not involving area or width, or
both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located. Yard
requirement variances may be sought through approval of the zoning board of appeals.
(C) Nonconforming Uses Of Land: Where, at the effective date of adoption or amendment hereof,
lawful use of land exists that is made no longer permissible under the terms of this title as enacted
or amended, such use may be continued, so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the
following provisions:
1. No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended to occupy a greater
area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment hereof.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 306/396
2. No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot or
parcel occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment hereof.
3. If such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than six (6)
months, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this title
for the district in which such land is located.
(D) Nonconforming Structures: Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or
amendment hereof that could not be built under the terms of this title by reason of restrictions on
area, lot coverage, height, yards, or other characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot,
such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following
provisions:
1. No such structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity. For
example, existing residences on lots of a width less than required herein may add a rear porch
provided that other requirements relative to yard space and land coverage are met.
2. Should such structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than fifty percent (50%)
of its replacement cost, exclusive of the foundation, at the time of destruction, it shall not be
reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this title, however, this provision shall
not apply to single-family and two-family residential structures.
3. Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it shall thereafter
conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located after it is removed.
(E) Nonconforming Uses Of Structures And Land: If a lawful use of a structure, or of structure and
land in combination, exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment hereof, that would not
be allowed in the district under the terms of this title, the lawful use may be continued so long as it
remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
1. No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this title in the district in which it is
located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered
except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located.
2. Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building, which were
manifestly arranged or designed for such use, and which existed at the time of adoption or
amendment hereof, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building.
3. If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and land
in combination, may be changed to another nonconforming use of the same or more restricted
classification; provided, that the zoning board of appeals, either by general rule or by making
findings in the specific case, shall find that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more
appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming use. In permitting such change, the
zoning board of appeals may require conditions and safeguards in accord with the purpose and
intent of this title. Where a nonconforming use of a structure, land, or structure and land in
combination, is hereafter changed to a more conforming use, it shall not thereafter be changed
to a less conforming use.
4. Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is
superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in
which such structure is located, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 307/396
5. When a nonconforming use of structure, or structure and premises in combination, is
discontinued or ceases to exist for six (6) consecutive months or eighteen (18) months during
any three (3) year period, the structure, or structure and premises in combination, shall not
thereafter be used except in conformance with the regulations of the district in which it is located.
Structures occupied by seasonal uses (1 season out of each year) shall be excepted from this
provision.
6. Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in combination, removal or
destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land.
(F) Repairs And Maintenance: On any building devoted in whole or in part to any nonconforming use,
work may be done in any period of twelve (12) consecutive months on ordinary repairs, or on
repair or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing to an extent not exceeding
fifty percent (50%) of the assessed value of the building; provided, that the cubic content of the
building as it existed at the time of passage or amendment hereof shall not be increased.
Nothing in this title shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of
any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public
safety, upon order of such official.
(G) Special Use Interpretation: Any special use as provided for in this title shall not be deemed a
nonconforming use, but shall, without further action, is deemed a conforming use in such district.
(H) Change Of Tenancy Or Ownership: There may be a change of tenancy, ownership, or
management of any existing nonconforming uses of land, structures and premises, provided there
is no change in the nature or character of such nonconforming uses.
(I) Acquisition: The city council may acquire, by purchase, condemnation, or otherwise, private
property or an interest in private property for the removal of nonconforming uses. The cost and
expense, or a portion thereof, of acquiring the private property may be paid from general funds or
assessed to a special district in accordance with the applicable statutory provisions relating to the
creation and operation of special assessment districts for public improvements in cities. The
elimination of the nonconforming uses and structures in a zoning district is declared to be for a
public purpose and for a public use. The city council may institute and prosecute proceedings for
condemnation of nonconforming uses and structures under the power of eminent domain in
accordance with applicable state statutes. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-5-5: ADAPTIVE REUSE PROJECTS:
(A) Intent: Typically, various land use activities are provided for in one or more zoning districts. The
criteria for such allocations are based upon similarities in the nature of uses and their relationship
to other such uses and adjoining development. Zoning districts are also established to coordinate
with and provide for the effectuation of the city's master plan.
The city does, however, possess various existing specialized structures, which have become
functionally obsolete for their original purpose and whose redevelopment or conversion in
conformance with the city's master plan would be unnecessarily burdensome. It is therefore, the
intent of this section to set forth the basic qualifying criteria, project classification, development
standards, and submittal requirements necessary to provide for the adaptive reuse of eligible
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 308/396
properties within the city to support the local economic and employment base without adversely
affecting the public health, safety, and welfare of the city as a whole.
(B) Qualifying Criteria:
1. The city council shall approve the adaptive reuse of nonresidential buildings and uses. In
qualifying a site for adaptive reuse, the city council shall find the following conditions to exist:
(a) The subject site is zoned in compliance with the city's master plan;
(b) The use can no longer be reasonably continued for its existing purpose by reason of market
conditions or operational constraints (i.e., limited site size, floor area deficiencies, parking or
loading area, etc.);
(c) Site redevelopment in accordance with local development codes would be unnecessarily
burdensome by reason of ordinance compliance (restrictions on area, lot coverage, height,
yards, or other characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot) or cost; and
(d) The subject site has frontage on, or direct access to, an improved major or secondary
thoroughfare.
2. The city council may not grant adaptive reuse status to any property whose principal structures
are found to be destroyed by any means to the extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of its
replacement cost. Any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations of the
zoning district in which it is located.
(C) Data Required:
1. Application for adaptive reuse project as provided under the provisions of this title shall be made
to the city clerk by filing an application form; submitting required data, exhibits, and information;
and depositing the required fee as established by resolution of the city council, and as may be
amended from time to time. No portion of such fee shall be reimbursable to the applicant.
2. An application shall contain the following:
(a) Applicant's name, address, and telephone number.
(b) Address and tax description number of the subject parcel.
(c) A signed statement that the applicant is the owner of the subject parcel, or is acting as the
owner's representative.
(d) A certified survey drawing of the subject parcel.
(e) Supporting statements, evidence, data, information and exhibits which address those
qualifying criteria for assessing special use permit applications outlined in subsection (B) of
this section.
(D) Public Hearing Requirements:
1. Upon receipt of an application for an adaptive reuse project, the planning commission shall hold
a public hearing, one notice of which shall be published not less than fifteen (15) nor more than
thirty (30) days prior to the public hearing date in a newspaper of general circulation in the city
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 309/396
and sent by first class mail to the owners of the property for which an adaptive reuse project is
being considered, to the owners of record of all real property and to the occupants of all
structures located within three hundred feet (300') of the boundaries of the property in question.
The notice shall:
(a) Describe the nature of the adaptive reuse request.
(b) Adequately describe the property in question.
(c) State the date, time, and place of the public hearing.
(d) Indicate when and where written comments concerning the request will be received.
(E) Project Classification:
1. Upon holding a public hearing, the planning commission shall determine whether the qualifying
criteria have been met as set forth in subsection (B) of this section.
The planning commission shall within thirty (30) days of making such determination forward to
the city council its finding and recommendation.
2. The city council, upon receipt of the finding, may table action for purposes of further study or
gaining additional information; deny the application for adaptive reuse upon finding that the
criteria have not been met, or approve the application for adaptive reuse upon finding that the
qualifying criteria have been met.
3. If the application for adaptive reuse is approved, the city council shall designate the applicant's
property as either a class I or class II site.
(a) Class I sites permit the conversion of institutional or business uses in residential zones.
Properties may be redeveloped/converted to offices, multi-family developments, care facilities
and similar uses deemed no more objectionable than the aforementioned uses.
(b) Class II sites permit the conversion of industrial uses in residential or commercial zones.
Properties may be redeveloped/ converted to any class I purpose, business uses, as well as
less intensive industrial development in areas zoned for business.
(F) Development Standards:
1. In areas meeting the above criteria, development standards may be modified by the planning
commission upon finding adequate evidence that the proposed use:
(a) Will be compatibly designed, constructed, and maintained with the existing and intended
character of the vicinity;
(b) Will not be hazardous or disturbing to existing or future neighboring uses;
(c) Will be served adequately by essential public services and facilities or the agencies
responsible for the establishment of the proposed use shall be able to adequately provide for
such services; and
(d) Will not involve uses, activities, processes, materials, equipment, and conditions of operation
that will be detrimental to any persons, property, or the general welfare by reason of excessive
smoke, fumes, glare, noise, vibration, or odor.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 310/396
2. The planning commission may require such additional safeguards as deemed necessary for the
protection of the general welfare and for ensuring individual property rights and for ensuring that
the intent and objectives of this title will be observed.
(G) Site Plan Requirements:
1. Site plan approval shall be required in accordance with section 12-6-1 of this title and all
applicable ordinances.
(a) The planning commission may, at its discretion, concurrently review the site plan at the time
of its review of qualifying criteria. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-5-6: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES:
Accessory buildings or structures, except as otherwise permitted in this title, shall be subject to the
following regulations:
(A) Where the accessory building is structurally attached to a main building it shall be subject to, and
must conform to, all regulations of this title applicable to the main building.
(B) Accessory buildings and structures shall not be erected in any side yard nor in any front yard.
(C) An accessory building shall not occupy more than twenty five percent (25%) of a required rear
yard.
(D) No detached accessory building shall be located closer than ten feet (10') to any main building nor
shall any accessory building or structure be located closer than three feet (3') to any side or rear lot
line.
(E) Height of accessory buildings:
1. Detached accessory buildings and structures in residential districts:
(a) A detached accessory building or structure shall not exceed one story or fifteen feet (15') in
height.
(b) The vertical exterior surface of a building, not forming part of the roof, shall not exceed a
height of nine feet (9'), measured from grade to the top plate of the wall.
2. Detached accessory buildings and structures in nonresidential districts:
Detached accessory buildings or structures in all nonresidential districts may be constructed to
equal the permitted maximum building height in said districts, subject to board of zoning appeals
review and approval, if the building or structure exceeds one story or fifteen feet (15') in height.
(F) When an accessory building is located on a corner lot, the lot line of which is substantially a
continuation of the front lot line of the lot to its rear, said building should not project beyond the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 311/396
front yard setback required on the lot to the rear of such corner lot.
(G) When an accessory building in excess of two hundred (200) square feet in any residence,
business, or commercial district is intended for other than the storage of private motor vehicles, the
accessory use shall be subject to the approval of the zoning board of appeals.
(H) Household animal enclosures, dog runs, that could or are likely to produce noise, odors, and other
nuisances, shall not be located in any side yard and shall be located in the rear yard only. (Ord.
867, 11-5-2001)
12-5-7: OFF STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
There shall be provided in all districts at the time of erection or enlargement of any main building or
structure, automobile off street parking space with adequate access to all spaces. The number of off
street parking spaces, in conjunction with all land or building uses, shall be provided prior to the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy, as hereinafter prescribed.
(A) Off street parking spaces may be located within a rear yard or within a nonrequired side yard
unless otherwise provided in this title. Off street parking, except in one-family residential districts,
shall not be permitted within a front yard nor within a required side yard setback unless otherwise
provided in this title. In one-family residential districts, parking is allowed in the front yard but only
on a designated and clearly delineated driveway, and shall not be on lawn or landscaped area.
(B) Off street parking shall be on the same lot of the building it is intended to serve, except as may be
otherwise provided for by this title.
(C) Required residential off street parking spaces shall consist of a parking strip, parking bay,
driveways, garage, or combination thereof and shall be located on the premises they are intended
to serve, and also subject to the provisions of section 12-5-6, "Accessory Buildings And
Structures", of this chapter, for garages.
(D) Minimum required off street parking spaces shall not be replaced by any other use unless and until
equal parking facilities are provided elsewhere.
(E) Off street parking existing at the effective date hereof, in connection with the operation of an
existing building or use, shall not be reduced to an amount less than hereinafter required for a
similar new building or new use.
(F) Two (2) or more buildings or uses may collectively provide the required off street parking in which
case the required number of parking spaces shall not be less than the sum of the requirements for
the several individual uses computed separately.
(G) In the instance of dual function of off street parking spaces where operating hours of buildings do
not overlap, the board of zoning appeals may grant an exception.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 312/396
(H) The storage of merchandise, motor vehicles for sale, trucks, or the repair of vehicles is prohibited.
(I) For those uses not specifically mentioned, the requirements for off street parking facilities shall be
in accordance with a use, which the planning commission considers is similar in type.
(J) When units or measurements determining the number of required parking spaces result in the
requirement of a fractional space, any fraction up to and including one-half (1/2) shall be
disregarded and fractions over one-half (1/2) shall require one parking space.
(K) For the purpose of computing the number of parking spaces required, the definition of "usable floor
area" shall govern, and be defined as that area used for or intended to be used for the sale of
merchandise or services, or for use to serve patrons, clients, or customers. Such floor area, which
is used or intended to be used principally for the storage or processing of merchandise, hallways,
or for utilities or sanitary facilities, shall be excluded from this computation. Measurement of usable
floor area shall be the sum of the horizontal areas of the several floors of the building, measured
from the interior faces of the exterior walls.
(L) The minimum number of off street parking spaces by type of use shall be determined in
accordance with the following schedule:
1. Residential:
(a)
Single- or twofamily
unit
2 per dwelling unit
(b)
Multiple-family
dwelling
2 per dwelling unit plus 0.25 parking spaces per unit for visitor
parking
(c)
Housing for the
elderly
1 space per efficiency dwelling unit (no separate bedroom), 1.25
spaces per each one-bedroom unit, and 1.5 spaces per 2 or
more bedroom units
(d)
Mobile home
park
2 for each mobile home site and 1 for each employee of the
mobile home park
2. Institutional:
(a)
Churches or
temples
1 for each 3 seats or 6 feet of pews in the main unit of worship
(b)
Hospitals 1 for each 1 bed
(c)
Convalescent
or nursing
homes
1 for each 4 beds
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 313/396
(d)
Elementary
and junior high
schools
1 for each teacher, employee, or administrator, in addition to the
requirements of the auditorium
(e)
Senior high
schools
1 for each 1 teacher, employee, or administrator and 1 for each
10 students, in addition to the requirements of the auditorium
(f) Private clubs
or lodge halls
1 for each 3 persons allowed within the maximum occupancy
load as established by local, county, or state fire, building, or
health code
(g)
Private golf
clubs
1 for each 2 member swimming pool clubs, families or
individuals and 1 tennis club, or for each employee in addition to
the other similar use requirements for each accessory use such
as a restaurant or bar
(h)
Golf courses
open to
general
public, except
miniature or
"par 3" courses
6 for each 1 golf hole and 1 for each employee, in addition to
the requirements for each accessory use, such as a restaurant
or bar
(i) Fraternity or
sorority
1 for each 5 permitted active members or 1 for each 2 beds,
whichever is greater
(j) Stadium,
sports arena,
or similar
place of
outdoor
assembly
1 for each 3 seats or 6 feet of benches
(k)
Theaters and
auditoriums
1 for each 3 seats, plus 1 for each 2 employees
(l) Nursery
school, day
nurseries
or childcare
centers
1 for each employee and 1 for each 4 students in attendance at
any particular time
(m)
Library 1 for each 2.5 persons allowed within the maximum occupancy
load as established by local, county, or state fire, building or
health codes, and 1 for each employee in the largest working
shift
3. Business And Commercial:
(a)
Planned
commercial or
shopping
center
4 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area for planned
commercial or shopping centers having between 10,000 and
50,000 square feet of gross floor area; planned commercial or
shopping centers containing more than 50,000 square feet of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 314/396
gross floor area shall provide 5 per 1,000 square feet of gross
floor area; when a restaurant, lounge, or other establishment
whose primary business offers prepared food for sale or
consumption on the premises, or carryout, and is part of a
planned commercial or shopping center, the parking for such
use shall be computed separately, based on the need for a
freestanding use of this nature, and the resulting increase shall
be added to the other uses in the center
(b)
Auto wash
(automatic)
1 for each 1 employee. In addition, reserve parking spaces
equal in number to 5 times the maximum capacity of the auto
wash; "maximum capacity of the auto wash" shall mean the
greatest number of automobiles possible undergoing some
phase of washing at the same time, which shall be determined
by dividing the length in feet of each wash line by 20
(c)
Auto wash
(self-service or
coin operated)
5 reserve parking spaces for each washing stall
(d)
Beauty parlor
or barbershop
3 spaces for each of the first 2 beauty or barber chairs, and 11/2
spaces for each additional chair
(e)
Bowling alleys
5 for each 1 bowling lane in addition to the requirements for
each accessory use, such as a restaurant or bar
(f) Dance halls,
roller skating
rinks,
exhibition
halls, and
assembly
halls
1 for each 2 persons allowed within the maximum occupancy
load without fixed seats as established by local, county, or state
fire, building, or health code
(g)
Standard
restaurant
1 for each 3 persons allowed within the maximum occupancy
load as established by local, county, or state fire, building or
health codes, plus 1 for each 2 employees
(h)
Furniture and
appliance,
household
equipment,
repair
shops,
showroom of a
plumber,
decorator,
electrician, or
similar
trade, shoe
repair, and
other
similar use
1 for each 800 square feet of usable floor area (for that floor
area used in processing, 1 additional space shall be provided
for each 2 persons employed therein)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 315/396
(i) Gasoline
service
stations
2 for each lubrication stall, rack, or pit; 1 for each
gasoline pump; and 1 for each 150 square feet of usable floor
space devoted to retail sales
(j) Laundromats
and coin
operated
dry cleaners
1 for each 2 washing and dry cleaning machines
(k)
Miniature or
"par 3" golf
courses
3 for each 1 hole, plus 1 for each employee
(l) Mortuary
establishments
1 for each 50 square feet of usable floor space
(m)
Motel, hotel, or
other
commercial
lodging establishments
1 for each 1 occupancy unit, plus 1 for each employee
(n)
Motor vehicle
sales and
service
establishments
1 for each 200 square feet of usable floor space of sales room
and 1 for each 1 auto service stall in the service room
(o)
Retail stores
except as
otherwise
specified
1 for each 150 square feet of usable floor
(p)
Establishments
offering
carryout
service, being
establishments
primarily
serving
customers
over a counter
or
through a
window, i.e.,
food
carryout, dry
cleaner pick
up,
meat markets,
bakeries, shoe
repair, etc.
1 parking space for each employee in the largest working shift
and 1 parking space for each 30 square feet of usable floor area
devoted to customer assembly and/or waiting area; parking
needs for areas devoted to the consumption of food on the
premises shall be computed separately for such seating areas
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 316/396
(q)
Pool or billiard
parlors,
card rooms,
arcades or
other
similar
establishments
1 for each 3 persons allowed within the maximum occupancy
load as established by local, county or state fire, building or
health code
(r)
Drivein/
through
restaurant
1 parking space for each employee in the largest working shift;
1 for each 2 seats provided; and 1 for each 30 square feet of
usable floor area devoted to customer waiting area
(s)
Miniwarehouse
facility
1 parking space for each 2,000 square feet of gross building
area; at a minimum, 2 parking spaces must be assigned to, and
located conveniently to, each individual storage building; in
addition, 2 spaces for the resident manager, and 1 additional
space for each additional employee shall be provided adjacent
to the rental once
4. Offices:
(a)
Banks 1 for each 100 square feet of usable floor space
(c)
Professional
offices of
doctors,
dentists or
similar
professionals
1 for each 50 square feet of usable floor area in waiting rooms,
and 1 for each examining room, dental chair or similar use area
5. Industrial:
(a)
Industrial or
research
establishments,
and
related
accessory
offices
3, plus 1 for every 1 employee in the largest working shift or 3,
plus 1 for every 550 square feet of usable floor area, whichever
is greater
(b)
Warehouses
and wholesale
establishments
and related
accessory
offices
3, plus 1 for every 1 employee in the largest working shift, or 3,
plus 1 for every 1,700 square feet of usable floor space,
whichever is greater; space on site shall also be provided for all
construction workers during periods of plant construction
(M) Each parking lot that services a building entrance, except single- and two-family residential or
temporary structures, shall have a number of level parking spaces for the physically handicapped as
set forth in the following table, and identified by above grade signs as reserved for physically
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 317/396
handicapped persons:
Total Spaces
In Parking Lot
Required Number Of
Accessible Spaces
Up to 25 1
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 9
501 to 1,000 2 percent of total
Over 1,000 20, plus 1 for each
Parking spaces for the physically handicapped shall be a minimum of twelve feet (12') wide and must
meet all other applicable requirements as to size as set forth in the building code. (Ord. 867, 11-5-
2001)
12-5-8: OFF STREET PARKING SPACE LAYOUT, STANDARDS, CONSTRUCTION,
AND MAINTENANCE:
Whenever the off street parking requirements in section 12-5-7 of this chapter, require the building of
an off street parking facility, such off street parking lots shall be laid out, constructed and maintained in
accordance with the following standards and regulations:
(A) No parking lot shall be constructed unless and until the building official therefor issues a permit.
Applications for a permit shall be submitted to the building department in such form as may be
determined by the building official and shall be accompanied with two (2) sets of site plans for the
development and construction of the parking lot showing that the provisions of this section will be
fully complied with.
In all districts, the entire parking area, including parking spaces, maneuvering lanes required under
this section, and driveways, shall be provided with bituminous concrete, concrete or oil and chip
surfacing in accordance with specifications approved by the superintendent of city services. Off
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 318/396
street paving areas shall be drained so as to dispose of all surface water accumulated in the
paving area in such a way as to preclude drainage of water onto adjacent property or toward
buildings.
(B) Plans for the layout of off street parking facilities shall be in accordance with the following
minimum requirements:
OFF STREET PARKING LAYOUT REQUIREMENTS
Parking
Pattern
Maneuvering
Lane Width
Parking
Stall
Width
Parking
Stall
Depth
(90
Measure)
Total Depth Of
1 Tier Of
Spaces Plus
Maneuvering
Lane
Total Depth Of
2 Tiers Of
Spaces Plus
Maneuvering
Lane
(2-Way
Movement)
(1-Way
Movement)
0
(parallel)
parking
24' 12' 10' 20' 20' 40'
45 23' 12' 10' 20' 25' 49'
60 24' 16' 10' 20' 32' 56'
90 25' n/a 10' 20' 43' 61'
(C) All maneuvering lane widths shall permit one-way traffic movement, except that the ninety degree
(90) pattern shall permit two-way movement.
(D) All spaces shall be provided adequate access by means of maneuvering lanes. Backing directly
onto a street shall be prohibited.
(E) Adequate ingress and egress to the parking lot by means of clearly limited and defined drives shall
be provided for all vehicles. Ingress and egress to a parking lot lying in an area zoned for other
than one-family residential use shall not be across land zoned for one-family residential use.
(F) Each entrance and exit to and from any off street parking lot located in an area zoned for other
than one-family residential use shall be at least twenty five feet (25') distant from adjacent property
located in any one-family residential district.
(G) A wall shall be provided on all sides of the off street parking area abutting or adjacent to a
residential district. The obscuring wall shall not be less than four feet six inches (4'6") in height
measured from the surface of the parking area.
All land between the required obscuring wall and the front property line or street right of way line
shall be kept free from refuse and debris and shall be landscaped with deciduous shrubs,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 319/396
evergreen material and ornamental trees. The ground area shall be planted and kept in lawn. All
such landscaping and planting shall be maintained in a healthy, growing condition, neat and
orderly in appearance.
The planning commission, upon application by the property owner of the off street parking area,
may waive or modify the wall requirement by approving either an earth berm or evergreen screen
in its place. The planning commission may also waive the wall requirement if in specific cases
where cause can be shown that no good purpose would be served by compliance with the
requirements of this subsection.
(H) All lighting used to illuminate any off street parking area shall be so installed as to be confined
within and directed onto the parking area only.
(I) In all cases where a wall extends to an alley which is a means of ingress and egress to an off street
parking area, it shall be permissible to end the wall not more than ten feet (10') from such alley line
in order to permit a wider means of access to the parking area.
(J) Parking aisles shall not exceed three hundred feet (300') without a break in circulation.
(K) Except for those serving single- and two-family dwellings, all parking lots shall be provided with
wheel stops or bumper guards so located that no part of parked vehicles will extend beyond the
property line or into required landscaped areas or pedestrianways.
(L) No parking lot shall have more than one attendant shelter building. All shelter buildings shall
conform to setback requirements for structures in the district in which located. (Ord. 867, 11-5-
2001)
12-5-9: PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING:
Off street parking areas shall be landscaped as follows:
(A) In off street parking areas containing twenty (20) or more parking spaces, an area equal to at least
five percent (5%) of the total parking area shall be used for interior landscaping. Whenever
possible, parking lot landscaping shall be arranged to improve the safety of pedestrian and
vehicular traffic, guide traffic movement, and improve the appearance of the parking area, through
the even distribution of the landscape effort across the total off street parking area, rather than to
concentrate all effort in one location.
(B) Parking lot landscaping shall be not less than five feet (5') in any single dimension and not less
than one hundred fifty (150) square feet in any single island area. Not more than two (2)
landscaped units of one hundred fifty (150) square feet may be combined in plans designed to
meet the minimum requirements.
(C) The landscape plan shall designate the sizes, quantities, and types of plant material to be used in
parking lot landscaping.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 320/396
(D) Required landscaping elsewhere on the parcel shall not be counted in meeting the parking lot
landscaping requirements.
(E) A minimum of one deciduous tree shall be planted in each landscaped area. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-5-10: OFF SITE PARKING FACILITIES:
Required parking for a development may be located off site under certain circumstances. Requests for
off site parking must meet the following requirements:
(A) Residential Uses: Parking facilities accessory to dwelling units shall be located on the same
zoning lot as the use served. Spaces accessory to uses other than dwellings (such as churches)
may be located on a lot adjacent to or directly across a street or alley from the lot occupied by the
use served; but in no case at a distance in excess of three hundred feet (300') from such zoning
lot.
(B) Nonresidential Uses: Parking facilities accessory to nonresidential uses may be located on other
than the same zoning lot as the use served (off site). All required parking spaces should be within
five hundred feet (500') of such zoning lot. No parking spaces accessory to a use in a business or
industrial district shall be located in a residential district, unless authorized by the planning
commission.
(C) Agreement Required: A written agreement shall be drawn to the satisfaction of the city attorney
and executed by all parties concerned assuring the continued availability of the off site parking
facilities for the use they are intended to serve. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-5-11: SPECIAL PARKING DISTRICTS, PAYMENT IN LIEU OF PROVIDING
REQUIRED PARKING:
The provisions and requirements as set forth in sections 12-5-7 and 12-5-10 of this chapter shall apply
to all areas within the city, except as modified by this section. The city recognizes that special
provisions should be considered for the downtown area including the reduction of required parking
spaces due to the availability of public parking. To this end:
(A) Portions of the city of Clinton shall be contained within areas described as special parking districts
as established by the city council with recommendation from the planning commission.
(B) The boundaries of areas classified as special parking districts are hereby established as shown on
the zoning map. Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the special parking
districts as shown on the zoning districts map, the rules as set forth in this section, shall apply.
(C) The number of off street parking spaces and the size of loading and unloading areas required for
any new use, expanded or intensified use of property located within, or partially within a special
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 321/396
parking district, shall be determined as set forth in sections 12-5-7 and 12-5-12 of this chapter,
except as herein provided for:
1. Off Street Parking: The determination of parking needs within a special parking district shall be
based upon the standards specified below. For those uses not specified an adjustment may be
made by the city council, following planning commission recommendation, when it is found that a
reduction from the standards set forth in section 12-5-7 of this chapter would not adversely affect
the retail, office and ancillary service facilities forming the commercial nucleus of these older
core business areas. In this latter regard, primary consideration shall be given to uses which are
generally the object of special purpose trips and thereby have little or no interrelation with those
business activities in the core business areas. The following standards reflect the gross floor
area(s) actively used in day to day operations and shall exclude only vacant space and storage
areas:
(a) Retail stores except as
otherwise specified
1 for each 350 square feet of gross floor area
(b) Furniture and appliance stores 1 for each 1,800 square feet of gross floor area
(c) Business and professional
offices except as otherwise
specified
1 for each 500 square feet of gross floor area
(d) Medical and dental offices 1 for each 175 square feet of gross floor area
(e) Banks (excluding drive-in
stations)
1 for each 250 square feet of gross floor area
(f) Establishments offering food,
beverages, or refreshments
for sale and consumption on
the premises
1 for each 100 square feet of gross floor area
(g) Apartments 1 for each dwelling unit, plus 1/4 for each bedroom
2. Off Street Loading: The planning commission shall have the right to modify or waive the
requirement for off street loading areas as specified in section 12-5-12 of this chapter. Any such
modification or waiver shall be based upon a review of a site plan and/or the surrounding area
and a determination that there is satisfactory loading space serving the building or that the
provision of such loading space is physically and/or functionally impractical to provide.
(D) The owner or owners of the said new or expanded use may make application to the city clerk for
the option of paying a dollar amount established by resolution of the city council per required
parking space and loading and unloading space in lieu of providing said required spaces as per
the provisions and requirements set forth in sections 12-5-7 and 12-5-12 of this chapter. These
monies would be paid into the special parking district fund established by the city council
specifically for the purpose of constructing and improving off street parking areas to serve uses
located within the special parking districts. The timing of parking spaces provided and their location
shall be at the sole discretion of the city council.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 322/396
(E) The amount paid into the parking fund described above shall not apply against any present or
future special assessments levied by the city for parking improvements.
(F) This exception may only be granted by the city council. Granting of the exception shall be based
upon evidence presented by the property owner or owners showing that the reasonable ability to
provide any or all of the required parking spaces and/or loading and unloading areas as required in
sections 12-5-7 and 12-5-12 of this chapter, does not exist.
(G) A property owner or owners granted the exception of contributing to the parking fund will not
receive an occupancy permit until said monies have been paid into said fund, in full.
(H) The provisions of this section also apply to any change in use of property located within a special
parking district that would require parking spaces in excess of those required for the previous use.
(Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-5-12: OFF STREET LOADING AND UNLOADING:
On the same premises with every building, structure, or part thereof, involving the receipt or
distribution of vehicles or materials or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained on the lot,
adequate space for standing, loading, and unloading in order to avoid undue interference with public
use of dedicated rights of way. Such space shall be provided as follows:
Total Floor
Area
Of The
Building
Off Street Loading
Space Requirements
Office Use:
0 _ 20,000
square feet
1 usable loading space 10' x 50' in area
20,001 _ 50,000
square feet
2 usable loading spaces, 10' x 50' in area
Over 50,000
square feet
3 usable loading spaces, each 10' x 50' in area
Commercial And Industrial Uses:
0 _ 1,400
square feet
1 usable loading space 10' x 50' in area
1,401 _ 20,000
square feet
2 usable loading spaces,
each 10' x 50' in area
20,001 _ 50,000
square feet
3 usable loading spaces, each 10' x 50' in area
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 323/396
Over 50,000
square feet
4 usable loading spaces, plus 1 space for each 50,000 square feet in
excess of 50,000 square feet, each 10' x 50' in area
(A) All loading spaces shall be in addition to the off street parking area access drive, and maneuvering
lane requirements.
(B) Off street loading space shall have a clearance of fourteen feet (14') in height.
(C) Off street loading space may be completely enclosed within a building, or may occupy a portion of
the site outside of the building, provided that where any portion of a loading space is open to public
view, said space shall be screened in accordance with section 12-5-22, "Screening Walls", of this
chapter.
(D) All loading and unloading in the industrial district shall be provided off street in the rear yard or
interior side yard, and shall in no instance be permitted in a front yard. In those instances where
exterior side yards have a common relationship with an industrial district across a public
thoroughfare, loading and unloading may take place in said exterior side yard when the setback is
equal to at least fifty feet (50'). (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-5-13: OPEN PARKING AND STORAGE IN ALL DISTRICTS EXCEPT WHERE
PERMITTED:
(A) Intent: The regulations set forth in this section are intended to prevent the storage or accumulation
of unusable, inoperable, or unsightly motor vehicles, machinery, or building materials that could be
hazardous to the safety of children, encourage the propagation of rats or rodents, or detract from
the orderly appearance of the city.
(B) General Requirements:
1. Motor Vehicle Parking And Storage: No motor vehicle shall be kept, parked or stored in any
district zoned for residential use, unless the vehicle is in operating condition and properly
licensed or is kept inside a building.
2. Machinery And Building Materials Storage: Unusable or inoperable machinery, equipment, or
machines and/or equipment parts of machines or equipment not intended for use upon the
premises, or old and/or used building materials, shall not be kept or stored outside of a building.
However, the temporary storage of building materials intended to be used to improve the
premises may be stored outside, if piled off the ground so as not to become a suitable
environment for rats or rodents. The temporary storage of building materials to be used for the
purpose of new construction shall be permitted. In no case shall usable or unusable machinery,
building materials, or other items be stored on a permanent basis in a truck trailer or other type
of trailer, with or without its wheels. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-5-14: VEHICLE STORAGE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 324/396
(A) In residential districts, there shall be allowed the parking or storage of no more than one of the
following:
1. Boats,
2. Travel trailers,
3. Recreational vehicles, or similar type vehicle,
within the front yard areas, without having first received a parking permit from the zoning
administrator.
Vehicles so parked shall only be parked on a designated driveway or landscape blocks. A
designated driveway may be constructed of concrete, asphalt, gravel, or white rock. Landscape
blocks may be of the decorative or plain masonry type block and placed under the wheels and/or
tongue of said vehicle. The zoning administrator shall approve the designated driveway or
landscape block surface prior to issuing a permit pursuant to this section.
(B) A combination of not more than any three (3) of the following items may be kept or stored for an
indefinite period of time in the rear or side yard of a single- or two-family lot:
Recreational vehicles,
Travel trailers/campers,
Boats,
Snowmobiles,
Motor vehicles (autos, pickup trucks, etc.),
Motorcycles; provided:
1. Such vehicles are in operable condition, and
2. Such vehicles shall be subject to all applicable setback provisions concerning accessory
buildings as set forth in section 12-5-6 of this chapter, and
3. Such motor vehicles shall be properly licensed. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
(C) A travel trailer, motor home, or camper parked or stored in any zoning district shall not be
connected to Municipal utilities and shall not be occupied for any period in excess of two (2) weeks
in any calendar year. (Ord. 1472, 2-5-2018)
(D) For purposes of this section, the front yard of a corner lot shall be that portion of the yard adjacent
to the entrance to the improvements on the property. For purposes of this section, a "stored"
vehicle shall not be interpreted to include any operable passenger vehicle being continually used
by the occupant of the property. Any such vehicle being used three (3) or more times per week
shall be considered an operable passenger vehicle. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 325/396
12-5-15: HOME OCCUPATIONS, GARAGE SALES, AND YARD SALES:
Home occupations, garage sales and yard sales are permitted, subject to the following requirements:
(A) A home occupation shall be conducted entirely within a residential building or detached garage.
(B) Only persons residing on the premises shall be engaged in the home occupation, except where a
home occupation involving other persons is authorized by the planning commission as a special
use.
(C) The use of a dwelling for a home occupation shall be secondary and incidental to its use for
residential purposes.
(D) Not more than twenty five percent (25%) of the dwelling unit total for all occupations, exclusive of
unfinished attics, attached garages, breezeways, and enclosed or unenclosed porches, shall be
used for purposes of the home occupation.
(E) There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the structure or premises, or other visible
evidence of the conduct of such home occupation other than approved signage.
(F) The outdoor storage of goods and materials shall be prohibited. No interior display shall be visible
from the exterior of a dwelling unit used for purposes of a home occupation.
(G) No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater volumes than would normally be
expected in a residential neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of
such home occupation shall be provided by an off street area, located other than in a required front
yard.
(H) All electrical motors and equipment used in the conduct of the home occupation shall be shielded
so as not to cause radio or television interference for adjoining properties. Any mechanical
equipment shall be not substantially different from that normally used for household purposes and
hobbies.
(I) Garage and yard sales shall only offer privately owned articles and shall not include merchandise
purchased for or a commission paid for resale. (Such sales are commercial "flea markets".)
(J) A single dwelling unit shall not have more than two (2) sales per year and each sale shall not be
more than three (3) days in length.
(K) A dwelling unit shall have not more than a total of one sign advertising the home occupation or
garage or yard sale. A sign advertising a home occupation shall not exceed two (2) square feet
and shall be attached to the building. A garage sale or yard sale may be advertised by means of a
temporary sign not exceeding four (4) square feet; said sign shall not be erected more than twenty
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 326/396
four (24) hours in advance of the sale and must be removed at the conclusion of the sale. (Ord.
867, 11-5-2001)
12-5-16: BED AND BREAKFAST OPERATIONS:
Any dwelling unit used for bed and breakfast operation shall comply with the following requirements:
(A) Not more than twenty five percent (25%) of the total floor area shall be used for bed and breakfast
sleeping rooms.
(B) There shall be no separate cooking facilities used for the bed and breakfast stay.
(C) Occupancy by guests shall be restricted from one to seven (7) days.
(D) One additional parking space shall be provided for each guestroom, on site; further, said parking
shall not be permitted within a required front yard. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-5-17: ACCESS TO A MAJOR THOROUGHFARE OR COLLECTOR STREET:
For uses making reference to this section, vehicular access shall be provided only to an existing or
planned major thoroughfare, freeway service drive, or collector street. Provided, however, that access
driveways may be permitted to other than a major thoroughfare, freeway service drive, or collector
street where such access is provided to a street where the property directly across the street between
the driveway and the major thoroughfare, freeway service drive, or collector street is zoned for
multiple-family use or any nonresidential use, is developed with permanent uses other than singlefamily
residences or is an area which, in the opinion of the planning commission, will be used for other
than single-family purposes in the future. This exception shall apply only if the planning commission
finds that there are special circumstances, which indicate that there will be a substantial improvement
in traffic safety by reducing the number of driveways to a thoroughfare. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-5-18: RESIDENTIAL ENTRANCEWAY:
In all residential districts, so called entranceway structures including, but not limited to, walls, columns,
and gates marking entrances to single-family subdivisions or multiple-housing projects may be
permitted and may be located in a required yard, except as provided in sections 12-5-22, 12-5-23, and
12-5-19 of this chapter, provided that such entranceway structures shall comply to all codes of the
municipality, and shall be approved by the building official and a permit issued. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-5-19: CORNER CLEARANCE:
Except as may otherwise be provided in this title, no fence, wall, shrubbery, sign, or other obstruction
to vision above a height of two feet (2') from the established street grades shall be permitted within the
triangular area formed at the intersection of any street right of way lines by a straight line drawn
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 327/396
between said right of way lines at a distance along each line of twenty five feet (25') from their point of
intersection. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-5-20: LANDSCAPING:
(A) Intent: Landscaping, greenbelts, and screening are necessary for the protection and enhancement
of the environment and for the continued vitality of all land uses in the city. Landscaping and
greenbelts are capable of enhancing the visual environment, preserving natural features,
improving property values, and alleviating the impact of noise, traffic, and visual disruption related
to intensive uses. The purpose of this section is to set minimum standards for the protection and
enhancement of the environment through requirements for the design and use of landscaping,
greenbelts, and screening.
(B) Scope Of Application: The requirements set forth in this section shall apply to all uses, lots, sites,
and parcels, which are developed or expanded following the effective date hereof. No site plan
shall be approved unless said site plan shows landscaping consistent with the provisions of this
section. Furthermore, where landscaping is required, a building permit shall not be issued until the
required landscape plan is submitted and approved, and a certificate of occupancy shall not be
issued unless provisions set forth in this section have been met or a performance bond has been
posted in accordance with the provisions set forth in subsection 12-5-5(G) of this chapter.
In cases where the use of an existing building changes or an existing building is changed or
otherwise altered or reoccupied, all of the standards set forth herein shall be met.
The requirements of this section are minimum requirements, and nothing herein shall preclude a
developer and the city from agreeing to more extensive landscaping.
(C) Landscaping Design Standards: Except as otherwise specified in the general requirements for
each zoning ordinance, all landscaping shall conform to the following standards:
1. General Landscaping: All portions of the lot or parcel area not covered by buildings, paving, or
other impervious surfaces, shall be landscaped with vegetative ground cover and other
ornamental materials as required below, except where specific landscape elements, such as a
greenbelt, berm, or screening are required:
(a) All portions of the landscaped area shall be planted with grass, ground cover, shrubbery, or
other suitable plant material, except that paved patios, terraces, sidewalks and similar site
features may be incorporated with planning commission approval.
(b) A mixture of evergreen and deciduous trees shall be planted at the rate of one tree for each
one thousand (1,000) square feet or portion thereof of landscaped open space area.
(c) Required trees and shrubs may be planted at uniform intervals, at random, or in groupings.
(d) On sites which are two (2) acres or larger in size, the landscaped area shall include a
greenbelt of a minimum ten foot (10') width, located and continually maintained along a public
right of way.
(e) In consideration of the overall design and impact of the landscape plan, the planning
commission may reduce or waive the requirements outlined herein for general landscaping, or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 328/396
for landscaping in greenbelt areas, on berms, or as part of a screen, provided that any such
adjustment is in keeping with the intent of this title.
(f) The total landscaped area shall be the basis for determining the required number of trees or
shrubs, irrespective of the portion which is devoted to patios, terraces, sidewalks, or other site
features.
2. Greenbelt Buffer: Where required, greenbelts and greenbelt buffers shall conform to the
following standards:
(a) A required greenbelt or greenbelt buffer may be interrupted only to provide for roads or
driveways for vehicular access.
(b) Grass, ground cover, or other suitable live plant material shall be planted over the entire
greenbelt area, except that paving may be used in areas of intensive pedestrian circulation.
(c) A minimum of one deciduous tree or evergreen tree shall be planted for each thirty (30) linear
feet or portion thereof of required greenbelt length. Required trees shall be at least five feet
(5') tall and may be planted at uniform intervals, at random, or in groupings.
(d) For each fifty (50) linear feet or portion thereof of required greenbelt length, at least one
ornamental spring flowering tree at least five feet (5') in height shall be installed and
maintained.
(e) Two (2) 18-inch high or wide shrubs shall be required for each fifteen (15) linear feet of
greenbelt area. Required shrubs may be planted at uniform intervals, at random, or in
groupings.
(f) For the purpose of determining required plant material, required greenbelt area length shall
be measured along the exterior periphery of the greenbelt area inclusive of all driveways.
3. Berms: Where required, earth berms or landscaped berms shall conform to the following
standards:
(a) The berm shall be at least three feet (3') above the grade elevation, and shall be constructed
with slopes no steeper than one foot (1') vertical for each three feet (3') horizontal. For the
purposes of this provision, "grade elevation" shall be the ground elevation at the property line
adjacent to the proposed berm.
(b) The berm area shall be planted with grass or other suitable ground cover to ensure that it
withstands wind and weather and retains its height and shape.
(c) A minimum of one deciduous or evergreen tree shall be planted for each thirty (30) linear feet
or portion of required berm.
(d) Eight (8) shrubs per tree may be planted as substitute for trees (see subsection (C)3(c) of
this section).
(e) Required trees and shrubs may be planted at uniform intervals, at random, or in groupings.
(f) For the purpose of determining required plant material, required berm length shall be
measured along the exterior periphery of the berm.
4. Evergreen Screening: Where required, evergreen screening shall consist of closely spaced
plantings, which form a visual barrier that is at least eight feet (8') above ground level within five
(5) years of planting.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 329/396
5. Landscaping Of Rights Of Way And Other Adjacent Public Open Space Areas: Public rights of
way and other public open space areas adjacent to required landscaped areas and greenbelts
shall be planted with grass or other suitable ground cover and maintained by the owner of the
adjacent property as if they were part of required landscaped areas and greenbelts.
6. Regulations Pertaining To Landscaping Areas Used For Sight Distance: When a driveway
intersects a public right of way or when the subject property abuts the intersection of public
rights of way, all landscaping within the corner triangular areas described below shall permit
unobstructed cross visibility. Shrubs located in the triangular area shall not be permitted to grow
to a height of more than two feet (2') above the pavement grade at the edge of the pavement.
Portions of required berms located within sight distance triangular areas shall also not exceed a
height of two feet (2') above the pavement grade at the edge of the pavement. Trees may be
maintained in this area provided that all branches are trimmed to maintain a clear vision for a
vertical height of eight feet (8') above the roadway surface. Landscaping, except grass or ground
cover, shall not be located closer than three feet (3') from the edge of a driveway.
The triangular areas referred to above are:
(a) The area formed at the corner intersection of a public right of way and a driveway, two (2)
sides of the triangle area being ten feet (10') in length measured along the right of way line
and driveway line and the third side being a line connecting these two (2) sides.
(b) The area formed at a corner intersection of two (2) public right of way lines, the two (2) sides
of the triangular area being twenty five feet (25') in length measured along the abutting public
right of way lines and the third side being a line connecting these two (2) sides.
7. Maintenance Of Landscaping: All required landscape areas shall be planted and maintained
with living plant materials. All landscaping which is located more than fifty feet (50') from a
building site shall have an irrigation (water sprinkler) system installed or access to water within
fifty feet (50') to assist in maintaining plant materials in a healthy condition. Failure to maintain
required landscaped areas, including the removal and replacement of dead or diseased plant
materials, shall constitute a violation of this title. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-5-21: PLANT MATERIALS:
Whenever in this title planting is required, it shall be planted within six (6) months from the date of
completion of the building or improvement, and shall thereafter be reasonably maintained with
permanent plant materials. Plastic and other nonorganic, nonliving plant materials shall be prohibited
from use and shall not be in compliance with the spirit and intent of this title.
Whenever possible, preference will be given to native trees and shrubs. "*Native" is defined as
indigenous to this region, growing naturally in this region. Native trees and shrubs are well adapted to
the climate and conditions of this region, requiring less watering and less maintenance, and are less
likely to cause or succumb to disease.
Wildlife being recognized as important to the quality of life of our citizens, where appropriate,
preference will be given to species that provide quality food for native birds and other wildlife.
Exotic trees and shrubs known to be invasive including, but not limited to, the list in subsection (G) of
this section will be excluded/removed from city property.
(A) Plant Material Spacing:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 330/396
1. Plant materials shall not be placed closer than four feet (4') from the fence line or property line
except that shrubs may be planted no closer than two feet (2') from the fence or property line.
2. Where plant materials are planted in two (2) or more rows, plantings shall be staggered in rows.
3. Evergreen trees shall be planted not more than thirty feet (30') on centers.
4. Narrow evergreens shall be planted not more than ten feet (10') on centers.
5. Deciduous trees shall be planted not more than thirty feet (30') on centers.
6. Tree like shrubs shall be planted not more than ten feet (10') on centers.
7. Large deciduous shrubs shall be planted not more than four feet (4') on centers.
(B) Evergreen Trees (*Native):
1. Cedar (*red, white).
2. Fir (balsam, concolor, Douglas).
3. Pine (red, white).
4. Spruce (Colorado blue, Norway, white).
(C) Narrow Or Shrub Like Evergreens (*Native):
1. Arborvitae.
2. Cypress (*bald).
3. Hemlock.
4. Juniper.
5. Yew.
(D) Deciduous Trees (*Native):
1. Ash (European, *green, *white).
2. *Beech.
3. *Birch (river or bore resistant variety).
4. *Dogwood (white or pink flowering).
5. *Hackberry.
6. Hard maple (Norway, *sugar).
7. *Hickory.
8. Honey locust (seedless and thornless).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 331/396
9. *Linden.
10. Pear (Bradford, callary).
11. *Oaks.
12. *Tulip tree.
13. *Walnut.
14. Red maple.
(E) Tree Like Shrubs (*Native):
1. *Dogwood (white or pink flowering).
2. Flowering crabapple (scab resistant).
3. Mountain ash.
4. *Redbud.
5. *Serviceberry.
6. *Witch hazel.
(F) Large Deciduous Shrubs (*Native):
1. Cotoneaster.
2. Euonymus.
3. Forsythia.
4. *Hazelnut.
5. Lilac.
6. Mock orange.
7. Plum (purple).
8. Privet.
9. Rose of Sharon.
10. Viburnum.
(G) Trees Not Permitted:
1. Black locust.
2. Box elder.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 332/396
3. Buckthorn.
4. Catalpa.
5. Ginkgo (female).
6. Horse chestnut (nut bearing).
7. Magnolia.
8. Poplar.
9. Scotch pine.
10. Maple (soft, silver).
11. Sweet gum.
12. Sycamore.
13. Tree of heaven.
14. Willow.
(H) Existing Plant Materials: In instances where healthy plant material exists on a site prior to its
development, the building official may adjust the application of the above standards to allow credit
for such plant material if such an adjustment is in keeping with, and will preserve, the intent of this
section.
All existing plant materials must first be inspected by the building official to determine the health
and desirability of such materials. In the event plant materials are to be saved, prior approval must
be obtained from the building official before any delimbing, root pruning, or other work is done.
If such existing plant material is labeled "To Be Saved" on site plans, protective techniques, such
as, not limited to, fencing placed at the drip line around the perimeter of the plant material, shall be
installed. No vehicle or other construction equipment shall be parked or stored within the drip line
of any plant material intended to be saved.
In the event that healthy trees labeled "To Be Saved" on the approved site plan are destroyed or
damaged, as determined by the building official, the owner, developer or contractor shall replace
said trees with trees of comparable type. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-5-22: SCREENING WALLS:
(A)For the districts and uses listed below, there shall be provided and maintained on those sides
abutting or adjacent to a one-family residential district, an obscuring wall. The height of the wall shall
be measured from the surface of the parking area or land on the nonresidential side of the wall.
Use Minimum Height Requirements
1. Off street parking
area
4'6" high wall (see also section 12-5-9 of this chapter)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 333/396
2. R-4 (with 17 or more
units),
C-1, C-2, and C-3
4'6" high wall
3. I-1 and I-2 districts 4'6" high wall
4. Open storage areas
and
loading and unloading
zones
4'6" to 8'0" high wall or fence (see also sections 12-5-12 and 12-5-
13 of this chapter)
5. Trash receptacles 6'0" high wall (see also section 12-5-24 of this chapter)
6. Utility buildings,
stations,
and substations
6'0" high wall or fence
(B) In the case of the variable wall height requirement in subsection (A)4 of this section, the extent of
obscuring wall shall be determined by the planning commission on the basis of land usage,
provided further that no wall or fence shall be less than the above required minimum, nor greater
than the above required maximum height.
(C) Required walls shall be located on the lot line except where underground utilities interfere and
except in instances where this title requires conformance with yard setback lines. Upon review of
the site plan, the planning commission may approve an alternate location for the wall, or may
modify the wall requirement by approving either an earth berm or evergreen screen in its place.
The planning commission may also waive the wall requirement if in specific cases where cause
can be shown that no good purpose would be served by the screening requirement.
(D) Required walls shall have no openings for vehicular traffic or other purposes, except as otherwise
provided in this title and except such openings as may be approved by the planning commission.
All walls herein required shall be constructed of materials approved by the building official to be
durable, weather resistant, and easily maintained.
(E) The requirement for an obscuring wall between off street parking areas, outdoor storage areas,
and any abutting residential district shall not be required when such areas are located more than
two hundred feet (200') distant from abutting residential district(s). (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-5-23: FENCES:
(A) Scope: The installation, erection, and/or maintenance of a fence is hereby prohibited except in
strict compliance with this title. A permit to be issued by the building official shall be obtained prior
to installation or erection of any fence within the corporate limits of the city of Clinton. Application
shall be made upon a form provided by the zoning office and shall require such information as may
be required by the building official. All applications for a fence permit shall be accompanied by a
filing fee as may be established by city council resolution.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 334/396
(B) Calculation Of Fence Height: The height of the fence shall be computed as the distance from the
base of the fence at normal grade to the top of the highest component of the fence. (Ord. 867, 11-
5-2001)
(C) Design Requirements:
1. Residential Fences: All fences in residential zones or used for residential purposes shall be of
an ornamental type. Fences in front yards of residential areas shall be constructed of decorative
materials and not be constructed of wire, chainlink, chicken wire, or other type wire. Height of
fences shall not exceed forty eight inches (48") in front yards, six feet (6') in side yards, and eight
feet (8') in rear yards. (Ord. 945, 10-6-2003)
2. Business, Office, Or Commercial Fences: All fences in areas zoned or used for business, office,
or commercial purposes shall be of an ornamental type, and shall not be more than six feet (6')
in height above grade level.
3. Industrial Fences: All fences in areas zoned or used for industrial purposes shall not exceed
twelve feet (12') in height above grade level.
4. Fences Separating Single- Or Two-Family Residential Property From Multiple-Family
Residential Property: Areas zoned or used for multiple-family residential purposes, with five (5)
to sixteen (16) total number of units, which abut single- or two-family property, shall have erected
upon said adjoining property line, a fence of approved type, to be six feet (6') in height above
grade level.
5. Fences For Parks, Schools, Public Buildings, Etc.: The height and type of fences enclosing
municipal parks, public and parochial school grounds, public building and church grounds or
land used for playgrounds, parks, picnic groves, golf courses, golf driving ranges or similar
facilities for outdoor exercise and recreation shall require the approval of the city council after
receiving the recommendation of the zoning office. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
6. Fences Required For Swimming Pools: For the protection of the general public, any swimming
pool shall be enclosed by a fence not less than four feet (4') in height above grade level. The
gate(s) shall be of a self-closing and latching type, with the latch on the inside of the gate not
readily accessible for children to open. It shall be capable of being securely locked when the
pool is not in use for extended periods; provided, however, that if the entire premises is enclosed
with a fence of not less than four feet (4') in height above grade level, the zoning office may
waive this provision. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001; amd. correspondence dated 6-4-2007)
(D) Material Specifications: Fences shall be constructed of wood, metal or masonry, and other
acceptable materials of required stability. Only new material shall be used, which has been
manufactured and/or treated in a manner to prevent rust and corrosion, and/or rot and decay. All
posts shall be sunk in the soil to a depth of at least three feet (3').
1. No person shall erect or cause to be erected a fence which is:
(a) Made with or upon which is fixed barbed wire; or
(b) Has any protective spike, nail, or sharp pointed object; or
(c) Charged with electric current;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 335/396
provided, however, that a fence in an industrial area may be erected with barbed wire on arms
or brackets extending inward over such property upon application and approval by city council.
(E) Location:
1. All fences must be located entirely on the private property of the person constructing the fence,
provided that if the adjoining property owner(s) consents in writing to the construction of a fence
on this property line, it may be so constructed. Such written consent shall be filed with the
application for a permit. In the case of disagreement of property owner(s), the applicant must
establish the legal property line before a permit can be issued.
2. In no case shall a fence in a side or front yard be a visual obstruction to vehicular traffic, and
shall be in accordance with section 12-5-19, "Corner Clearance", of this chapter.
(F) Maintenance Of Nuisance: Fences must be maintained in a neat and safe condition, so as not to
endanger life or property. Any fence which, through lack of repair, type of construction or
otherwise, endangers life or property, is hereby deemed a nuisance. The zoning office shall notify
the owner, agent, or person in control of the property on which such fence is located of the
existence of such nuisance and specify the required repairs or modifications to be made to render
the fence safe, or require that the unsafe fence or any portion thereof to be removed and shall
provide a time limiting such repairs, modification, or removal.
(G) Existing Fences:
1. Fences presently in existence shall not be enlarged, rebuilt, or reconstructed without first having
obtained a permit therefor from the building department. Such fences, when repaired or
replaced, shall conform to all provisions of this title.
2. Any newly rezoned property shall comply with all fence requirements for the newly zoned
district. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-5-24: SCREENING OF TRASH STORAGE AREAS:
(A) In all areas except one-family residential districts, for each lot or use there shall be provided an
outdoor trash storage area. Any such area shall be limited to normal refuse, which is collected on a
regular basis, and shall be maintained in a neat, orderly and sanitary condition. The requirement
for such a trash storage area may be waived by the planning commission upon a finding that it is
unnecessary due to the nature of the use, or owing to provisions for indoor trash storage.
(B) In no instance shall any such refuse be visible above the required screening.
(C) A screening wall, fence, or hedge in accordance with section 12-5-22 of this chapter, of six feet (6')
in height, shall enclose three (3) sides of the storage area. Bollards and/or other protective devices
shall be installed at the opening and to the rear of any storage area to prevent damage to the
screening walls. The surface under any such storage area shall be constructed of concrete, which
complies with local building requirements.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 336/396
(D) Any such storage area shall be located in a rear yard and/or be so located and arranged as to
minimize its visibility from adjacent streets and uses. The planning commission may require an
obscuring gate when the visibility of such a storage area, from a public street or adjacent use, is
deemed to render an adverse influence. In no instance shall any such area be located in a front
yard.
(E) All trash storage areas and/or enclosures shall be located a minimum of ten feet (10') from any
building or structure. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-5-25: EXTERIOR LIGHTING:
(A) All outdoor lighting in all use districts other than residential shall be shielded so the surface of the
source of the light shall not be visible from all adjacent residential districts, adjacent residences,
and public rights of way. Shielding shall prevent light from projecting skyward.
(B) Illumination guidelines shall be in accordance with the following standards:
1. Street Illumination: Standards for the illumination for streets and other public rights of way within
the city shall be in conformance with standards as specified by the administrative assistant in
charge of public works. Illumination levels shall be so established as to provide proper protection
for the health and safety of pedestrians and vehicular traffic.
2. Parking Illumination:
Level Of Activity
Vehicular Use Area Only General Parking And Pedestrian Safety
LUX Foot-Candles LUX Foot-Candles
Low activity 5 0.5 2 0.2
Medium activity 11 1.0 6 0.6
High activity 22 2.0 10 0.9
Low Activity: Examples include neighborhood shopping, industrial employee parking, educational
facility parking, and church parking.
Medium Activity: Examples include community shopping centers, office parks, hospital parking areas,
transportation parking (airports, etc.), cultural, civic or recreational events, and residential complex
parking.
High Activity: Examples include major league athletic events, major cultural or civic events, regional
shopping centers, and fast food facilities.
(C) All illumination shall not be of a flashing, moving, or intermittent type other than used in connection
with a sign for the conveyance of noncommercial information which requires periodic change, such
as time, temperature, or stock average.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 337/396
(D) All illumination shall be constant in intensity and color at all times when in use. (Ord. 867, 11-5-
2001)
12-5-26: NOISE:
See section 5-2-16 of this code. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-5-27: PRIVATE SWIMMING POOLS:
(A) For permanent above or below ground swimming pools with a diameter exceeding twelve feet (12')
or an area exceeding one hundred (100) square feet, a building permit must be obtained for its
alteration, erection, and construction. Before a permit is issued, an application shall be approved
by the enforcing official (building official or authorized representative). An application is not
required for a wading pool. An application for a permit should provide the following information:
name of the owner, plot plan specifying dimensions, site location of the pool, as well as nearby
fences, buildings, gates, septic tanks, tile fields, public utilities, and easements. The application for
a belowground pool must include plans and specifications to scale of the pool walls, slope, bottom,
walkway, diving boards, type and rating of auxiliary equipment, piping, and valve layout. (Ord. 867,
11-5-2001; amd. per correspondence dated 6-4-2007)
(B) A private swimming pool shall be located only in the rear yard. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
(C) (Rep. by Ord. 1130, 9-15-2008)
(D) With regard to overhead electrical, cable television, or telephone wires, a distance of not less than
ten feet (10') horizontally from the water's edge shall be enforced. Under no circumstances shall
wire of any kind cross over the water surface.
(E) No swimming pool or wading pool shall be constructed or maintained unless access to such
swimming pool is limited. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
Chapter 6
REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES
12-6-1: REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF SITE PLANS:
(A) Application: Prior to the establishment of a new use, change of use, addition to an existing use, or
the erection of any building in a zoning district, subject to the conditions listed below, a site and/or
architectural building plan shall be submitted and approved, approved with conditions, or
disapproved by the planning commission in accordance with the ordinance requirements of this
chapter:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 338/396
1. Site plan reviews are required for all permitted principal uses and structures in all zoning districts
(except for the single-family detached dwellings and their accessory uses only when said uses
are not within the 100-year floodplain) and all conditional approval uses in all zoning districts.
2. When the proposed new construction or remodeling constitutes an addition to an existing
building, or use, site plan review procedures may be modified, at the discretion of the building
official, to provide for an administrative review by the building official in lieu of a more formal
review by the planning commission. The building official may conduct an administrative review
provided both of the following are true:
(a) No variances to this title are required.
(b) The proposed new construction would not increase the total square footage of the building
greater than twenty five percent (25%) or one thousand (1,000) square feet, whichever is less.
3. For those cases requiring site plan review solely as a result of building reoccupancy, site plan
review procedures may be modified, at the discretion of the building official, to provide for an
administrative review by the building official in lieu of a more formal review by the planning
commission. The building official may conduct an administrative review provided all of the
following are true:
(a) Such use is conducted within a completely enclosed building.
(b) Reoccupancy does not create additional parking demands, beyond twenty five percent (25%)
of that which exists.
(c) Reoccupancy does not substantially alter the character of the site.
4. Every site plan submitted for review shall be in accordance with the requirements of this title.
Administrative review procedures are not intended to modify any ordinance, regulation or
development standard.
(B) Copies Required: Every site and/or architectural building plan submitted to the planning
commission shall be in accordance with the requirements of this title. Eight (8) complete copies of
all site plans shall be filed with the building official who shall place the request on the next planning
commission agenda.
(C) Information Required: The following information shall be included on the site plan:
1. A scale of not less than one inch equals fifty feet (1" = 50') if the subject property is less than
three (3) acres and one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') if three (3) acres or more.
2. Date, north point and scale.
3. The dimensions of all lot and property lines, showing the relationship of the subject property to
abutting properties and buildings within one hundred feet (100').
4. Legal description of parcel.
5. Existing and proposed topography with contours at two foot (2') intervals (based on USGS
datum), extending a minimum of one hundred feet (100') beyond site boundaries.
6. An inventory of existing vegetation on the site and an indication of any alterations.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 339/396
7. The location and nature of any streams, drains, swamps, marshes, and/or unstable soils.
8. An indication of basic drainage patterns, existing and proposed, and including any structures,
retention basins and fencing which are proposed. The applicant shall contact the municipality
and municipal engineer to determine the adequacy of utility and storm water proposals, slope
and sod erosion requirements to determine if any such requirements will adversely affect the site
and/or architectural building plan.
9. A schedule of parking needs. Separate drawings may be submitted to indicate usable floor
areas, etc., for computation of parking needs.
10. A detailed planting plan and schedule of plant materials and sizes.
11. Cross section drawings of any walls, berms, etc.
12. The location and width of all existing and proposed sidewalks on or bordering the subject site.
Where the subject site borders a public right of way, a concrete sidewalk five feet (5') in width
shall be provided within the public right of way one foot (1') from the subject's site's property line.
If a sidewalk in good condition exists within the public right of way, the building official may waive
the above requirement.
13. The location of all existing and proposed structures of the subject property and all existing
structures within one hundred feet (100') of the subject property. The setbacks to all existing and
proposed structures to be retained or constructed on the site shall be indicated; this includes
buildings, signs, trash storage areas, walls, fences, berms, parking areas, etc. The height of all
proposed structures shall also be indicated.
14. The location of all existing and proposed drives and parking areas.
15. The location and right of way widths of all abutting streets and alleys.
16. The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the architect, planner, designer, engineer or
person responsible for the preparation of the site plan.
17. The names, addresses and telephone numbers, of the developers.
18. In addition to the above information, the applicant shall submit a supplementary explanation as
to the specific type(s) of activities proposed. Such information shall include, but not be limited to:
(a) Estimated number of employees, resident shoppers, etc.
(b) Hours of operation.
(c) Any changes anticipated in terms of dust, odor, smoke, fumes, noise, lights, etc.
(d) Modifications to vegetative cover, drainage patterns, earth work, problem areas.
(e) Any ancillary improvements that the applicant proposes to remedy or prevent problems
created by the development.
(f) Estimated costs of proposed landscaping berms, walls, acceleration-deceleration lanes, or
bypass lanes or any other required site improvement not covered in the building permit cost
estimates, shall be provided.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 340/396
(D) Content Of Site Plan File: The site plan(s), all supplementary data, together with minutes of any
meeting and/or hearings related to the proposed site and/or architectural building plan shall
become part of the official site plan file.
(E) Standards For Approval: In the process of reviewing the site plan, the planning commission shall
consider:
1. Specific development requirements set forth in the zoning ordinance.
2. The location and design of driveways providing vehicular ingress to and egress from the site, in
relation to streets giving access to the site, and in relation to pedestrian traffic.
3. The traffic circulation features within the site and location of automobile parking areas; and may
make such requirements with respect to any matters as will assure:
(a) Safety and convenience of both vehicular and pedestrian traffic, both within the site and in
relation to access streets.
(b) Satisfactory and harmonious relationships between the development on the site and the
existing and prospective development of contiguous land and adjacent neighborhoods.
(c) Accessibility afforded to emergency vehicles.
4. The arrangement of use areas on the site in relation to functional, efficient and compatible
arrangements within the site and also to adjacent uses.
5. The planning commission may further require landscaping, fences, and walls in pursuance of
these objectives, and same shall be provided and maintained as a condition of the establishment
and the continued maintenance of any use to which they are appurtenant.
6. In those instances wherein the planning commission finds that an excessive number of ingress
and/or egress points may occur with relation to major or secondary thoroughfares, thereby
diminishing the carrying capacity of the thoroughfare, the planning commission may require
marginal access drives. For a narrow frontage, which will require a single outlet, the planning
commission may require that money be placed in escrow with the city of Clinton so as to provide
for a marginal service drive equal in length to the frontage of the property involved. Occupancy
permits shall not be issued until the improvement is physically provided, or monies have been
deposited with the clerk.
7. The cost estimates, as required in this section, shall be reviewed by the appropriate municipal
official (i.e., building official, engineer or planner) for their compliance with current cost
estimates. These reviews and recommendations may be forwarded to the planning commission
for inclusion in any approved site plan.
8. The planning commission may waive site plan information for topography, vegetation, problem
soils, landscaping, employment data, environmental considerations, etc., when such concerns
are obviously not pertinent to the proposed development.
9. The planning commission, or building official as part of administrative review procedures, shall
seek the input from local public safety officials as part of the site plan review process, prior to
approving, disapproving, or approving with conditions, the site plan.
(F) Planning Commission Actions: The planning commission, upon reviewing a site plan, shall take
one of the following actions:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 341/396
1. Approval: If the site plan meets all the zoning ordinance and related development requirements
and standards, the planning commission shall record such approval, and the chairman shall sign
three (3) copies of the site plan filing one in the official site plan file, forwarding one to the
building official, and returning one to the applicant.
2. Disapproval: If the site plan does not meet zoning ordinance and related development
requirements and standards, the planning commission shall record the reasons for denial. The
applicant may subsequently refile a corrected site plan under the same procedures followed for
the initial submission.
3. Conditional Approval: If minor corrections to the site plan are necessary, which can be clearly
noted, then the planning commission shall so note such conditions, and the chairman shall sign
three (3) site plans as conditionally approved and stating the necessary conditions. One copy
shall be retained in the official site plan file, one forwarded to the building official, and one
returned to the applicant.
4. Table: If the site plan is found to be in violation of the requirements or incomplete with respect to
necessary information, the planning commission may table action on the site plan until ordinance
compliance is shown or required additional information is provided.
(G) Performance Guarantees: To ensure compliance with the zoning ordinance and any condition
imposed thereunder, the planning commission may require (excluding single-family) that a cash
certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit, or surety bond acceptable to the city covering the
estimated cost of improvements associated with a project for which site plan approval is sought, be
deposited with the city to ensure faithful completion of the improvements and also be subject to the
following:
1. The performance guarantee shall be deposited prior to the issuance of a temporary certificate of
occupancy. The city shall establish procedures whereby a rebate of any cash deposits in
reasonable proportion to the ratio of work completed on the required improvements will be made
as work progresses. Any partial release of funds shall be less than ten percent (10%), which
shall be retained by the municipality until all work has been completed and subsequently
inspected and approved by the building official. This does not relieve the applicant from
satisfying all applicable maintenance warranties and/or guarantees necessary to ensure the
proper functioning of said public improvements.
2. As used in this section, "improvements" mean those features and actions associated with a
project which are considered necessary by the body or official granting zoning approval, to
protect natural resources, or the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the city and future
users or inhabitants of the proposed project or project area, including roadways, lighting, utilities,
sidewalks, screening, landscaping, and surface drainage. "Improvements" do not include the
entire project, which is the subject of zoning approval.
(H) Period Of Completion: An approved site plan shall remain valid for a period of one year from the
date of approval. In the event all improvements are not installed, then any such remaining
improvements shall be completed no later than July 1 of the following construction season, except
that the planning commission may, at its discretion, upon application by the owner and for cause
shown, provide for up to two (2) successive twelve (12) month extensions. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-6-2: REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF SPECIAL USES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 342/396
(A) Application:
1. The uses identified as special uses are recognized as possessing characteristics of such unique
and special nature (relative to location, design, size, public utilities needs, and other similar
characteristics) as necessitating individual standards and conditions in order to safeguard the
general health, safety and welfare of the community.
2. The city council, as provided herein, shall have the authority to approve special use permits,
subject to such conditions of design, operation, and appropriate and reasonable safeguards as
the city may require for any special use included in the various provisions of this title.
(B) Data Required:
1. Application for any special use permit as provided under the provisions of this title shall be made
to the building official by filing an official special use permit application form; submitting required
data, exhibits, and information; and depositing the required fee as established by resolution of
the city council, and as may be amended from time to time. No portion of such fee shall be
reimbursable to the applicant.
2. An application for a special use permit shall contain the following:
(a) Applicant's name, address and telephone number.
(b) Address and tax description number of the subject parcel.
(c) A signed statement that the applicant is the owner of the subject parcel, or is acting as the
owner's representative.
(d) A certified survey drawing of the subject parcel.
(e) A complete site plan containing all of the applicable data outlined in section 12-6-1, "Review
And Approval Of Site Plans", of this chapter.
(f) Supporting statements, evidence, data, information and exhibits which address those
standards and requirements for assessing special use permit applications outlined in
subsection (D) of this section.
(C) Public Hearing Requirements: Upon receipt of an application for a use requiring conditional
approval, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing, one notice of which shall be
published not less than fifteen (15) nor more than thirty (30) days prior to the public hearing date in
a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The applicant must fulfill all conditions of 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-13-1.1 (1998 state bar edition), as may be amended, and all conditions by
its reference to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-13-6 and 5/11-13-7 (1998 state bar edition), as
may be amended.
(D) Standards For Approval:
1. The planning commission shall review the particular circumstances and facts applicable to each
proposed special use in terms of the following standards and requirements and shall make a
determination as to whether the use proposed to be developed on the subject parcel meets the
following standards and requirements:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 343/396
(a) Will be harmonious with and in accordance with the general objective of the city's master
plan.
(b) Will be designed, constructed, operated, maintained, in harmony with existing and intended
character of the general vicinity and so that such use will not change the essential character of
that area.
(c) Will not be hazardous or detrimental to existing or future neighboring uses.
(d) Will represent a substantial improvement to property in the immediate vicinity and general
benefit to the community as a whole.
(e) Will be served adequately by essential public services and facilities, such as highways,
streets, drainage structures, police and fire protection and refuse disposal; or persons or
agencies responsible for the establishment of the proposed use shall be able to provide
adequately for such services.
(f) Will not create excessive additional requirements at public cost for public facilities and
services, and will not be detrimental to the economic welfare of the community.
(g) Will not involve uses, activities, processes, materials, equipment and conditions of operation
that will be detrimental to any persons, property, or the general welfare by reason of excessive
smoke, fumes, glare, noise, vibration or odors.
(h) Will be consistent with the intent and purposes of this title.
2. If the facts regarding the special use being reviewed do not establish by a preponderance of the
evidence that the standards and requirements set forth in this title will be met by the proposed
use, the planning commission shall not recommend special condition approval to the city council.
In recommending approval of a special use permit to the city council, the planning commission
shall recommend imposition of such reasonable conditions of use as it deems necessary to
protect the best interests of the city and the general vicinity, to achieve the objectives of this title
and to assure that the general public health, safety, and welfare will not be infringed upon.
The planning commission may recommend denial, approval or approval with conditions, on a
request for special use approval. The recommendation on a special use shall be incorporated in
a statement containing the conclusions relative to the special use under consideration, which
specifies the basis for the decision and any conditions recommended.
3. Upon holding a public hearing and review of the special use request, the planning commission
shall within thirty (30) days forward to the city council its finding and recommendation. The
finding shall include a record of those conditions which are recommended to be imposed. The
city council, upon receipt of the finding and recommendation, may deny, approve, or approve
with conditions, any request for a special use approval. Any decision on such a request shall
state the findings of fact and specify the conclusions drawn therefrom and any conditions
imposed thereon. Any conditions imposed shall remain unchanged except upon the mutual
consent of a majority of the city council and the landowner, and the city council shall maintain a
record of all conditions that are changed. All records of proceedings hereunder shall be kept and
made available to the public.
4. The special use review and site plan review may occur concurrently at the discretion of the
planning commission. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 344/396
Chapter 7
GENERAL EXCEPTIONS
12-7-1: AREA, HEIGHT, AND USE EXCEPTIONS:
The regulations in this title shall be subject to the following interpretations and exceptions. (Ord. 867,
11-5-2001)
12-7-2: ESSENTIAL SERVICES:
Essential services serving the city of Clinton shall be permitted as authorized and regulated by law
and other ordinances of the municipality. Overhead or underground lines and necessary poles and
towers to be erected to service primarily those areas beyond the municipality shall receive the review
and approval, after a public hearing, of the city council and after being recommended by the zoning
board of appeals. Such review shall consider abutting property and uses as they relate to easements,
rights of way, overhead lines, poles and towers and further, shall consider injurious effects on property
abutting or adjacent thereto and on the orderly appearance of the city of Clinton. (Ord. 867, 11-5-
2001)
12-7-3: VOTING PLACE:
The provisions of this title shall not be so construed as to interfere with the temporary use of any
property as a voting place in connection with a municipal or other public election. (Ord. 867, 11-5-
2001)
12-7-4: HEIGHT LIMIT:
The height limitations of this title shall not apply to farm buildings, chimneys, church spires, flagpoles,
public monuments or television antennas for personal use; provided, however, that the city council
may specify a height limit for any such structure when such structure requires authorization as a
special use. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-7-5: LOT AREA:
If two (2) or more lots with continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at the time of
passage or amendment of this title, and if the lots do not meet the requirements established for lot
width and area, the lands involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purposes of
this title, and no portion of said lands shall be used or sold in a manner which diminishes compliance
with lot width and area requirements established by these regulations, nor shall any division of any
parcel be made which creates a lot width or area below the requirements stated in these regulations.
(Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-7-6: YARD REGULATIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 345/396
When yard regulations cannot reasonably be complied with, or where their application cannot be
determined on lots of peculiar shape, topography or due to architectural or site arrangement, such
regulations may be modified as determined by the zoning board of appeals, acting as appeal board.
(Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-7-7: PORCHES:
An open, unenclosed, and uncovered porch or paved terrace may project into a front yard for a
distance not exceeding ten feet (10'), but this shall not be interpreted to include or permit fixed
canopies. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-7-8: PROJECTIONS INTO YARDS:
Architectural features, not including vertical projections, may extend or project into a required side
yard not more than three inches (3") for each one foot (1') of width of such side yard; and may extend
or project into a required front yard or rear yard not more than three feet (3'). (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-7-9: ACCESS THROUGH YARDS:
For the purpose of this title, access drives may be placed in the required front or side yards so as to
provide access to rear yards or accessory or attached structures. These drives shall not be
considered as structural violations in front and side yards. Further, any walk, terrace or other
pavement servicing a like function, and not in excess of nine inches (9") above the grade upon which
placed, shall for the purpose of this title not be considered to be a structure, and shall be permitted in
any required yard. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-7-10: CANOPIES AND AWNINGS:
Canopies and awnings offering partial protection from the weather, but not fully enclosed, and which
extend into a public right of way or required yard, may be considered for approval subject to the
following conditions:
(A) Canopies and awnings extending into a public right of way are subject to the following
requirements:
1. Such approval shall only be granted by the city council following planning commission
recommendation.
2. Any such structure shall not extend closer than twenty four inches (24") to any vehicular parking
space or moving vehicle lane.
3. Any such structure shall not conflict with necessary sight distances for proper vehicular and
pedestrian movements.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 346/396
4. Any such structure shall not conflict with any existing or proposed: landscape features, traffic
control device, adjacent properties and signs and pedestrian movements.
5. The height, location, materials, construction and signage involved in any such structure shall
specifically be subject to review and approval by the city council.
6. The structure shall be maintained in such a manner as to continue its original appearance and
provide proper safety to the persons and property it may affect.
7. The city of Clinton, its officials, employees and any of its representatives shall be guaranteed full
protection against any liability or damages resulting from the construction and existence of any
such structure. The property owner shall name the city of Clinton, its officials, employees and
any of its representatives as an additional insured on the owner's liability insurance policy and
shall provide the city of Clinton with a policy endorsement showing such coverage. The
insurance policy shall contain a clause indicating that it cannot be terminated without thirty (30)
days' prior written notice to the city of Clinton, and shall be in an amount as determined by the
city of Clinton.
(B) Canopies and awnings extending into a required yard are subject to the following requirements:
1. Such approval shall only be granted by the planning commission.
2. Any such structure shall not extend closer than the height of the structure to any property line
adjacent to a residential district.
3. Any such structure shall not conflict with necessary sight distances for proper vehicular and
pedestrian movements.
4. Any such structure shall not conflict with any existing or potential development on adjacent
property.
5. The height, location, materials, construction and signage involved in any such structure shall
specifically be subject to review and approval.
6. The structure shall be maintained in such a manner as to continue its original appearance and
provide proper safety to the persons and property it may affect. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-7-11: DECKS:
A deck which is associated with a residential structure shall not occupy any required rear yard, side
yard or front yard area, and shall be subject to the following restrictions:
(A) The portion of a deck, which occupies the required rear yard, shall not be above the elevation of
the first floor of the residence;
(B) The portion of a deck, which occupies the required rear yard, shall not be converted into any
enclosed habitable space.
(C) A deck shall be subject to lot coverage limitations. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 347/396
Chapter 8
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS (PUD)
12-8-1: INTENT:
The planned unit development (PUD) regulations offer an alternative method for developing land. This
alternative allows flexibility in applying certain zoning standards. Such flexibility requires a review
process to safeguard health, safety and welfare. PUDs, in exchange for flexibility, may be required to
provide amenities in addition to those required under traditional zoning. Required amenities are
designed to reduce the impacts, which may result from the application of flexible development
standards.
The purpose for PUD regulation includes:
(A) Promoting of more efficient land use.
(B) Accommodating mixed land use developments, which have been designed to overcome traditional
land use conflicts.
(C) Encouraging environmentally sensitive design.
(D) Allowing for more innovative design than might be allowed through traditional zoning.
(E) Promoting the efficient arrangement of buildings, circulation systems, and public services and
utilities. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT: A form of planned unit development that allows for flexibility in building
setbacks.
COMMON LOT LINE DEVELOPMENT: A form of planned unit development that permits adjoining
structures along the lot line in such a manner that each structure is located on its own lot.
ZERO LOT LINE DEVELOPMENT: A form of planned unit development that permits the location of
each building on a lot to be situated in such a manner that one or more buildings is located without
any setback from the lot line on a single side yard. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-8-3: ELIGIBILITY:
No project may be developed under the PUD regulation unless it meets the following requirements:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 348/396
(A) The minimum project size shall be twenty (20) acres. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-8-4: PERMITTED LAND USES:
(A) Permitted: Permitted uses in a PUD shall be as follows:
Underlying Zoning Classification Permitted PUD Use
R/C-1 R-1
R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 R-4, C-1
C-1, C-2, C-3, I-1 R-4, C-1, C-2, C-3, I-1
I-1 C-1, C-2, C-3, I-1
All uses shall be subject to the same zoning conditions and restrictions of the most restricted district
which permits the use being developed, unless otherwise specified in this title.
Duplexes and multiple-family dwellings shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the total dwellings in a
residential project.
Commercial uses proposed, as part of residential projects shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of total
land area.
(B) Area Regulations: The fee simple transfer of ownership of a lot in an approved PUD with a zero lot
line, cluster development or common lot line is permitted, provided the development meets the
PUD and subdivision regulations.
1. Cluster developments shall comply with:
(a) Periphery Of Cluster Developments: Yards along the periphery of a cluster development shall
be provided as required by the regulation of the district in which said development is located.
(b) Front Yard: There shall be a front yard of not less than thirty feet (30') from the road right of
way.
(c) Side Yard: The total side yard fifty feet (50'); provided, that no side yard is less than twenty
feet (20').
(d) Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard of not less than twenty feet (20').
(e) Reduction Of Yard Requirements: The planning commission may reduce any of the above
yard requirements by not more than fifty percent (50%) on not more than fifty percent (50%) of
the total dwelling units.
(f) Total Lots: Total lots in the PUD cannot exceed the PUD area divided by the minimum lot size
of the underlying zoning district. In no case shall a lot be less than six thousand five hundred
(6,500) square feet.
2. Zero lot line developments shall comply with:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 349/396
(a) Yards along the periphery of a PUD shall be provided as required by the regulation of the
district in which said development is located.
(b) The minimum residential lot area in zero lot line developments shall be not less than six
thousand five hundred (6,500) square feet.
(c) The minimum lot width shall be sixty feet (60').
(d) There shall be no minimum side yard on one side (zero side yard setback) and a minimum
ten foot (10') side yard on the opposite side for zero lot line. The minimum front yard setback
shall be not less than thirty feet (30') and the minimum rear yard shall be no less than twenty
feet (20') for residential use. The minimum front yard setback shall be not less than thirty feet
(30') and the minimum rear yard shall be no less than thirty feet (30') for all other uses.
(e) A four foot (4') easement for building wall maintenance/drainage shall be provided on the lot
adjacent to the zero lot line property line, dedicated the entire length of the lot. With the
exception of fences and utility appurtenances such easement shall remain clear of structures.
This easement shall be incorporated into the deed transferring title to the property either as a
covenant in the owner's certificate or in each deed transferring property in the PUD.
(f) Total lots in the PUD cannot exceed the PUD area divided by the minimum lot size of the
underlying zoning district. In no case shall a lot be less than six thousand five hundred (6,500)
square feet.
3. Common lot line:
(a) Total Lots In PUD: Total lots in the PUD cannot exceed the PUD area divided by the
minimum lot size of the underlying zoning district. In no case shall a lot be less than six
thousand five hundred (6,500) square feet.
(1) Residential: Where a common lot line structure is constructed for sale, with each unit on an
individual lot, for individual ownership, the dwelling is subject to a minimum lot area of six
thousand five hundred (6,500) square feet, minimum lot width of fifty feet (50') and the
setback requirements of the underlying zoning district except that no side yard setback is
required for the interior portion of the lot.
(2) Other Districts: Where a common lot line structure is constructed for sale, with each unit on
an individual lot, for individual ownership the structure is subject to the setback
requirements of the underlying zoning district except that no side yard setback is required
for the interior portion of the lot. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-8-5: REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES:
Prior to the establishment of a PUD, a preliminary site plan shall be submitted and approved,
approved with conditions or disapproved by the planning commission in accordance with the
ordinance requirements of this chapter.
(A) Preliminary Site Plan Approval: An applicant wishing to develop property under the city's PUD
provisions shall first submit for approval to the city a preliminary site plan. This plan shall contain at
a minimum the following information:
1. Date, north arrow and scale of not less than one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100').
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 350/396
2. Legal description and common of the subject property.
3. The dimensions of all lot and property lines, showing the relationship of the subject property to
abutting properties and buildings within one hundred feet (100').
4. The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the architect, planner, designer, engineer or
person responsible for the preparation of the site plan and the names, addresses and telephone
numbers of the developers.
5. A general description of the project and how the proposal relates to the purpose statements at
the beginning of this chapter.
6. The proposed uses of the property including proposed lot sizes and uses, total projected
commercial uses sufficient to develop preliminary parking requirements, total numbers of singlefamily,
duplex and multi-family units, and overall site layout in sufficient detail to allow for a
review of the overall development concept as well as an estimate of the total development cost.
7. Present and future zoning (if applicable).
8. Building envelopes for all parcels.
9. Whether or not the project will be phased and a description of the phases. All phases of the
development must be capable of meeting all the requirements of this title on their own in the
event that future phases are not completed.
10. The location of all existing and proposed streets, drives and parking areas, along with a
designation of whether those areas are to be public or private.
11. The location and nature of any streams, drains, swamps, marshes, and/or unstable soils.
12. An indication of basic drainage patterns, existing and proposed.
(B) Hearings, Publication And Notice: Prior to approval of the preliminary site plan, the planning
commission shall hold a public hearing, one notice of such shall be published not less than fifteen
(15) nor more than thirty (30) days prior to the public hearing date in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city.
The applicant not less than fifteen (15) nor more than thirty (30) days prior to the public hearing
shall send notice by first class mail to the holders of the property for which the project is proposed,
to the owners of record of all real property and to the occupants of all structures located within two
hundred fifty feet (250'), excluding public rights of way, of the boundaries of the property in
question. The notice shall include:
1. Describe the nature of the PUD request and intent to file request.
2. Adequately describe the property in question.
3. Indicate the legal owner of the property.
4. State the date, time and place for the public hearing.
5. Indicate when and where written comments concerning the proposed project will be received.
6. Indicate if property is also under consideration for rezoning.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 351/396
Following the public hearing, the planning commission shall review the particular circumstances
and facts applicable to the proposed project in terms of the following standards and
requirements and shall make a determination as to whether the proposed project meets the
following standards:
(a) The proposed development is in keeping with the overall goals of the city's master land use
plan.
(b) The proposed development is designed to be in harmony with the existing and intended
character of the general vicinity.
(c) The proposed development will not be detrimental to the existing or future neighboring uses.
(d) The proposed development meets the intent of the PUD ordinance.
(e) The proposed development will not be detrimental to the economic welfare of the community.
If after the public hearing and subsequent review of the project, the planning commission finds that
the proposed development meets the above set forth standards, the planning commission shall
grant the applicant preliminary site plan approval. Such approval is limited only to an approval of
the overall concept, general layout and phasing scheme, and does not grant or guarantee final
site plan approval. The planning commission may grant only conditional approval for the
preliminary site plan for items that it feels need to be more fully addressed and decided upon
during the final site plan approval process. In those cases, the planning commission must fully
itemize those items for which it is granting only conditional approval in its motion.
Concurrent with granting preliminary site plan approval, the planning commission will
recommend approval of rezoning the subject parcel to PUD district. This rezoning will follow
standard city procedures.
(C) Final Site Plan Approval: Following approval of the preliminary site plan, the applicant shall
complete and submit a final site plan to the planning commission for final site plan approval. This
plan shall contain at a minimum the following information:
1. All information required under preliminary site plan approval.
2. Complete engineering drawings and calculations for all roads, bridges, signs, sanitary sewer,
water and storm water infrastructure.
3. All roads, whether public or private, shall be constructed according to applicable city standards
for public roads as found in the city's subdivision ordinance.
4. Storm water and drainage shall be designed to city standards as found in the city's subdivision
ordinance.
5. Floor plans and elevation drawings for all nonresidential buildings.
6. Landscape plan.
7. Golf course management and/or landscape management plans.
8. The location and type of any hazardous materials or landscape maintenance chemicals to be
stored on the site.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 352/396
9. Master deeds, master condominium documents and special subdivision regulations or
covenants.
10. Detailed plans addressing any special concerns or requests of the city raised during the
preliminary site plan approval phase.
The planning commission shall review the application for final site plan approval, together with
any reports from city consultants, and approve or deny the application based upon its meeting
the initial preliminary site plan concept, and its meeting all the requirements of final site plan
approval.
(D) Performance Guarantees: To ensure compliance with the zoning ordinance and any conditions
imposed thereunder, the planning commission may require that a cash, certified check, irrevocable
letter of credit, or surety bond acceptable to the city covering the estimated cost of improvements
associated with a project, be deposited with the city to ensure faithful completion of the
improvements and also to be subject to the following:
1. The performance guarantee shall be deposited prior to the issuance of a temporary certificate of
occupancy. The city shall establish procedures whereby a rebate of any cash deposits in
reasonable proportion to the ratio of work completed on the required improvements will be made
as work progresses. Any partial release of funds shall be less ten percent (10%) of the amount
due the applicant which shall be maintained by the city until all work has been completed and
subsequently inspected and approved by the building official or other designated city
representative.
2. This section shall not be applicable to improvements for which a cash deposit, certified check,
irrevocable letter of credit, or surety bond has been deposited.
3. As used in this section, "improvements" mean those features and actions associated with
projects which are considered necessary by the body or official granting zoning approval, to
protect natural resources, or the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the city and future
users or inhabitants of the proposed project or project area, including roadways, lighting, utilities,
sidewalks, screening, landscaping and surface drainage. Improvements do not include the entire
project, which is the subject of zoning approval. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
Chapter 9
SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS
12-9-1: SCHEDULE LIMITING HEIGHT, SIZE, DENSITY, AND AREA BY ZONING
DISTRICT:
The following regulations regarding lot sizes, yards, setbacks, building heights, and densities apply
within the zoning districts as indicated, including the regulations contained in section 12-9-2, "Notes To
Schedule Of Regulations", of this chapter. No building shall be erected, nor shall an existing building
be altered, enlarged or rebuilt, nor shall any open spaces surrounding any building be encroached
upon or reduced in any manner, except in conformity with the regulations hereby established for the
district in which such building is located. No portion of lot used in complying with the provisions of this
title for yards, courts, lot area occupancy, in connection with an existing or projected building or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 353/396
structure, shall again be used to qualify or justify any other building or structure existing or intended to
exist at the same time.
Zoning District
Minimum
Size Per
Zoning Lot
(A)
Maximum
Building
Height
Maximum
Building
Lot
Coverage
(%)
Minimum Yard
Setback
Requirements Per
Zoning Lot In Feet
(B)(C)(D)(E)(K)
Minimum
Livable
Floor Area
In Square
Feet
(E)(F)
Area In
Square
Feet
Width
In
Feet
In
Stories
In
Feet
Front
(G)
(H)
Each
Side
Rear
A-1 agricultural district
1.5 ac
150 2.5 35 20 50 25 30 2,000
R/C-1
recreation/conservation
district (T)
1 ac 150 1 35 10 50 25 50 2,000
R-1 one-family
residential district
24,000
100 2.5 35 30 30 10 20 2,000
R-2 one-family
residential district
12,000
75 2.5 35 30 30 10 20 1,500
R-3 one-family
residential district (I)
6,000 60 2.5 35 40 25 5 10 1,200
R-4 multiple-family
residential district (M)
(N)
7,000
(J)
70 3 40 50 30 15(L)
20
C-1 central business
district
- - 6 75 (O) - (R) 30(Q)
-
C-2 service/business
district
- - 1.5 20 (O) 25(P)
15(R)
30(Q)
-
C-3 highway business
district
- - 2.5 30 (O) 25(P)
15(R)
30(Q)
-
I-1 research/industrial
district
0.25
ac
100 3 40 (O) 25(P)
15(R)
30(Q)
(S)
-
I-2 industrial
manufacturing district
1 ac 150 n/a 75 (O) 25(P)
25(R)
50(Q)
(S)
-
(Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-9-2: NOTES TO SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS:
(A) See section 12-9-3, "Lot Size Averaging", of this chapter, for flexibility allowances.
(B) Minimum front yard setback is measured from the edge of the abutting right of way, based upon
information and standards set forth by the city of Clinton.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 354/396
(C) For all nonresidential uses allowed in residential districts, the setbacks shall equal the height of the
main building, or the setbacks required in this chapter, "Schedule Of Regulations", whichever is
greater.
(D) All side yards abutting upon a public street shall be considered as a front yard for setback
purposes, except as may otherwise be required by this title.
(E) The minimum floor area per dwelling unit shall not include area of basements, breezeways, and
porches or attached garages.
(F) The minimum livable floor area per multiple-family unit shall be in accordance with the following
schedule:
Unit Type
Minimum Floor Area
Required (Square Feet)
Efficiency 350
1 bedroom 600
2 bedroom 800
3 or more bedrooms 1,000
(G) In all residential districts, the required front yard setback shall not be used for off street parking,
loading, or unloading, and shall remain as open space unoccupied and unobstructed from the
ground upward, except for landscaping, plant materials, vehicle access drives, or as otherwise
specified by this title.
(H) Where the average setback of the buildings existing at the time of adoption of this title within one
hundred fifty feet (150') on either side of the lot on which a building is proposed is less than thirty
feet (30'), that average distance may be used as a minimum setback.
(I) For two-family dwellings in the R-3 one-family residential district, the following standards shall
apply:
Minimum Size Per Zoning Lot: Area: 10,000 square feet
Width: 100 feet
Maximum Building Height: Stories: 2.5
Feet: 25
Maximum Lot Coverage: 30 percent
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 355/396
Minimum Yard Setbacks: Side: 15 feet
Rear: 40 feet
Front: 30 feet
(J) On a corner lot, the minimum lot area in the multiple-family residential district shall be eight
thousand (8,000) square feet.
(K) The distance between any two (2) structures within a multiple-family residential development shall
not be less than thirty feet (30').
(L) In the multiple-family district, the minimum side yards for multiple-family developments shall be
equal to fifteen feet (15') or one-half (1/2) the height of the structure, whichever is greater.
(M) Within any yard setback or area between buildings, an area equivalent to seventy percent (70%)
of any required yard or any required minimum area between buildings must be landscaped and
developed as usable open space or recreation area available to the residents of the development,
and further, said areas shall be kept free of all vehicular uses.
(N) In the district, front, side, or rear yards need not refer to spacing between buildings for the planned
development of two (2) or more buildings on the same parcel. In such cases, the minimum
distance between any two (2) buildings shall be regulated according to the length and height of
such buildings and in no instance is less than thirty feet (30').
The formula for regulating the required minimum distance between two (2) buildings is as follows:
S =
LA + LB + [2 (HA + HB)]
6
where:
S Equals required minimum horizontal distance between any wall of building A and any wall of
building B or the vertical prolongation of either.
LA
Equals total length of building A. The total length of building A is the length of that portion or
portions of a wall or walls of building A from which, when viewed directly from above, lines
drawn perpendicular to building A will intersect any wall of building B.
LB
Equals total length of building B. The total length of building B is the length of that portion or
portions of a wall or walls of building B from which, when viewed directly from above, the
lines drawn perpendicular to building B will intersect any wall of building A.
HA
Equals height of building A. The height of building A at any given level is the height above
natural grade level of any portion or portions of a wall or walls along the length of building A.
Natural grade level shall be the mean level of the ground immediately adjoining the portion
or portions of the wall or walls along the total length of the building.
HB
Equals height of building B. The height of building B at any given level is the height above
natural grade level of any portion or portions of a wall or walls along the length of building B.
Natural grade level shall be the mean level of the ground immediately, adjoining the portion
or portions of the wall or walls along the total length of the building.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 356/396
(O) The maximum percentage of coverage shall be determined by the use and provisions of required
off street parking, loading and unloading, and required yards.
(P) Off street parking shall be permitted to occupy a portion of the required front yard; provided, that
there shall be maintained a minimum unobstructed landscaped setback of ten feet (10') between
the nearest point of the off street parking area, exclusive of access driveways, and the front lot line.
(Q) Loading space shall be provided in the rear yard in accordance with section 12-5-12 of this title.
(R) Off street parking shall be permitted in a required side yard setback when said side yard abuts a
nonresidential district.
(S) All storage shall be in the rear yard and shall be completely screened with an obscuring wall or
fence, not less than six feet (6') high, or with a chainlink type fence and a greenbelt planting so as
to obscure all view from any adjacent residential or business district or from a public street.
(T) In the recreation/conservation district, the requirements for minimum lot size, maximum building
height, and maximum lot coverage shall not apply to educational and municipal buildings. (Ord.
867, 11-5-2001)
12-9-3: LOT SIZE AVERAGING:
Lot size averaging may be permitted by the planning commission, upon application from the
proprietor, if it determines that it will provide a better relationship of lots to the topography, vegetation
or other natural or manmade features. Lot size averaging is the allowance for a change in lot area and
width in a development, but with the average lot area meeting the minimum area as required in this
section for that particular one-family residential district.
In the case where lot size averaging is permitted, the following conditions shall be met:
(A) The number of lots shall not exceed the number allowed for the zoning district in which the
development is located.
(B) Reduction of lot area or width below the minimum required for the zoning district shall not be
permitted for more than one-third (1/3) of the total number of lots in the development.
(C) No lot shall have an area or width more than ten percent (10%) below that area or width required
in the schedule of regulations.
(D) All computations showing lot area and the average resulting through this technique shall be
indicated on the print of the preliminary plat.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 357/396
(E) The submittal shall be reviewed and approved in accordance with terms of the city's subdivision
regulation ordinance. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
Chapter 10
APPEAL PROCEDURES
12-10-1: INTENT:
An appeals procedure is herein established in order that the objectives of this title may be fully and
equitably achieved, that a means shall be provided for competent interpretation of this title, that
adequate but controlled flexibility be provided in the application of this title, that the health, safety, and
welfare of the public is secured, and that justice be done. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-10-2: ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS:
There is hereby established a board of zoning appeals, which shall perform its duties and exercise its
powers as provided in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-13 et seq. (1998 state bar edition 1998), and
as may be amended, and in such a way that the objectives of this chapter shall be observed, public
safety secured, and substantial justice done. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-10-3: MEETINGS:
(A) All meetings of the board of appeals shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such times as
such board may determine.
(B) All hearings conducted shall be open to the public. The board of appeals shall keep minutes of its
proceedings showing the vote of each member in question, or if absent, or failing to vote, indicating
such fact; and shall also keep records of its hearings and other official actions in the office of the
city clerk, and shall be a public record.
(C) The board of appeals shall not conduct business unless a majority of the members are present.
The concurring vote of a majority of the full membership of board of appeals shall be necessary to
reverse an order, requirement, decision, or determination of an administrative official or body, or to
decide in favor of the applicant a matter upon which they are required to pass under an ordinance,
or to effect a variation in an ordinance.
(D) The board of appeals shall have the power to subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses,
administer oaths, compel testimony, and the production of books, papers, files, and other evidence
pertinent to the matters before it. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-10-4: APPEAL AND NOTICE REQUIREMENTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 358/396
(A) An appeal may be taken to the zoning board of appeals by any person, firm or corporation, or by
any officer, department, board, or bureau affected by a decision of the building official. Such appeal
shall be taken within such time as shall be prescribed by the zoning board of appeals by general
rule, by filing with the building official, a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof. The
building official shall forthwith transmit to the zoning board of appeals all of the papers constituting
the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the building official certifies to the zoning board of
appeals, after notice of appeal has been filed with him, that, by reason of facts stated in the
certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case, the
proceedings shall not be stayed, otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by a
court of record.
(B) The zoning board of appeals shall select a reasonable time and place for the hearing of the appeal
and give due notice of the appeal to the parties. The zoning board of appeals shall decide the
appeal within a reasonable time as required by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-13-12 (1998
state bar edition) and as may be amended.
(C) No application shall be taken to the zoning board of appeals in connection with an approved site
plan unless the planning commission has first reviewed such application and the planning
commission provides a recommendation on the variance. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-10-5: JURISDICTION:
The zoning board of appeals may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order,
requirement, decision or determination as in its opinion ought to be made in the premises, and to that
end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal was taken and may issue or direct
the issuance of a permit. Where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship in the way of
carrying out the strict letter of this title, the zoning board of appeals shall have the power in passing
upon appeals to vary or modify any of its rules, regulations or provisions so that the spirit of this title
shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done in accord with 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-13-5 (1998 state bar edition). Nothing herein contained shall be construed to
give or grant to the zoning board of appeals the authority to make changes in the zoning ordinance or
the zoning map acting under the authority of appeal board. The power and authority to rezone is
reserved to the city council in the manner provided by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-13-14 (1998
state bar edition) and as may be amended. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-10-6: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The zoning board of appeals shall have the following specified powers and duties:
(A) Administrative Review: To hear appeals and make recommendations to city council where it is
alleged by the appellant that there is an error in any order, requirement, permit, decision, or refusal
made by the building official or any other administrative official in carrying out, or enforcing, any
provisions of this title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 359/396
(B) Interpretation: To hear and make recommendations to city council in accordance with the
provisions of this title.
1. Appeals for the interpretation of the provisions of the ordinance.
2. Requests to determine the precise location of the boundary lines between the zoning districts as
they are displayed on the zoning map, when there is dissatisfaction with the decision on such
subject.
(C) Variances: The zoning board of appeals shall have the power to make recommendations to city
council, upon appeal, specific variances from such dimensional requirements as lot area and width
regulations, building height and square foot regulations, yard width and depth regulations, such
requirements as off street parking and loading space, and sign regulations, and other similar
requirements as specified in the ordinance. To obtain a variance, the applicant must show that a
"practical difficulty" exists. In determining if a practical difficulty exists, the zoning board of appeals
shall consider whether the following conditions exist:
1. That strict compliance with area, setbacks, frontage, height, bulk, or density would unreasonably
prevent the owner from using the property for a permitted purpose, or would render the
conformity unnecessarily burdensome;
2. That a variance would do substantial justice to the applicant, as well as to other property
owners in the district;
3. That the plight of the owner is due to the unique circumstances of the property;
4. That the problem is in no way self-created.
(D) Approval Of Temporary Uses: The zoning board of appeals shall have the power to grant permits
authorizing temporary land uses for:
1. Seasonal sales of produce, firewood or Christmas trees, and similar uses; under the following
conditions:
(a) Zoning Districts Where Permitted:
(1) Temporary uses shall be restricted to nonresidential zoning district.
(2) The superintendent of city services or his designee may administratively approve
temporary uses on for profit enterprises on private property that meet all setbacks and that
do not reduce available parking by more than ten percent (10%).
(3) The superintendent of city services or his designee may administratively approve
temporary uses for all nonprofit and 501(c)3 enterprises, schools and churches.
(b) Application And Submittal Requirement: The application for a temporary use permit shall be
accompanied by plans and specifications including a plot plan, in triplicate, drawn to scale,
showing the following:
(1) The shape, location, and dimensions of the lot, including the shape, size, and location of all
buildings or other structures already on the lot, off street parking layout, and the location of
any designated fire lanes.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 360/396
(2) The materials to be utilized in and the shape, size, and location of all buildings and
structures to be erected or moved onto the lot, including all tents, tables, stands, or display
racks.
(3) The anticipated automobile traffic flow to and from the lot and any adjacent thoroughfares,
loss of off street parking spaces, if any, as well as the anticipated flow of pedestrian traffic
upon lot sidewalks.
(c) Time Limitations:
(1) A temporary use permit for the sale of Christmas trees, seasonal items such as flowers
and similar uses shall by its terms be effective for no longer than thirty (30) days. No more
than one temporary use permit for the sale of Christmas trees shall be issued for any given
location within a single calendar year.
(2) A temporary use permit for a vegetable, fruit or produce stand or for the sale of firewood or
similar use shall, by its terms, be effective for no longer than three (3) months. No more
than one temporary use permit for such uses shall be issued for any given location within a
single calendar year.
2. Permit uses, which do not require the erection of any capital improvement of a structural nature,
not otherwise permitted in any district (such as art fairs, carnivals, and civic festival events), not
to exceed twelve (12) months.
In classifying uses as not requiring capital improvement, the zoning board of appeals shall
determine that they are either demountable structures related to the permitted use of land;
recreation developments, such as, but not limited to: golf driving range and outdoor archery
courts; or structures which do not require foundations, heating systems, or sanitary connections.
3. The granting of the temporary use shall be approved in writing, stipulating all conditions as to
time, nature of development permitted and arrangements for removing the use at the termination
of said temporary permit.
4. No temporary use permit shall be granted without first giving notice to owners of adjacent
property of the time and place of a public hearing to be held as further provided for in this title.
Further, the zoning board of appeals shall seek the review and recommendation of the planning
commission prior to the taking of any action.
(E) Essential Services: The zoning board of appeals shall review and approve, after a public hearing,
the location of overhead or underground wires and necessary poles and towers to be erected to
service primarily those areas beyond the municipality.
(F) Standards For Approval For Temporary Uses And Essential Services: A temporary use permit shall
only be granted if the zoning board of appeals determines that the proposed use, including the
erection of any temporary building or structure, will:
1. Provide adequate light and ventilation between buildings and structures.
2. Provide adequate automobile and pedestrian traffic flow and provide adequate off street parking.
3. Provide adequate lot access for fire protection purposes.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 361/396
4. Not adversely affect the stability and integrity of the zoning plan prescribed by this title or
otherwise interferes with the protection of public health, safety, and general welfare.
5. Not be incompatible with or otherwise adversely affect the physical character of the community
and, in particular, the surrounding area within a distance of one thousand feet (1,000').
6. When the proposed temporary use is to be conducted on an otherwise vacant or unused lot, the
use shall comply with all applicable zoning regulations for the district in which the temporary
special use is to be located, including all requirements pertaining to lot size, height, setback,
open space ratio, maximum percentage of covered lot area, and off street parking. (Ord. 867,
11-5-2001)
12-10-7: PROHIBITED VARIANCES:
A use variance shall not be permitted, except as described under subsection 12-10-6(D), "Approval Of
Temporary Uses", of this chapter. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-10-8: ATTACHMENT OF CONDITIONS:
The zoning board of appeals may impose conditions upon an affirmative decision. The conditions may
include, conditions necessary to ensure that public services and facilities affected by a proposed land
use or activity will be capable of accommodating increased service and facility loads caused by the
land use or activity, to protect the natural environment and conserve natural resources and energy, to
ensure compatibility with adjacent uses of land, and to promote the use of land in a socially and
economically desirable manner. Conditions imposed shall do all the following:
(A) Be designed to protect natural resources, the health, safety, and welfare, as well as the social and
economic well being of those who will use the land use or activity under consideration, residents,
and landowners immediately adjacent to the proposed land use or activity, and the community as a
whole.
(B) Be related to the valid exercise of the police power and purposes which are affected by the
proposed use or activity.
(C) Be necessary to meet the intent and purpose of the zoning regulations; be related to the standards
established in the ordinance for the land use or activity under consideration and be necessary to
ensure compliance with those standards.
(D) The conditions imposed shall be recorded in the record of the approval action and shall remain
unchanged except upon the mutual consent of the approving authority and the landowner. The
approving authority shall maintain a record of changes granted in conditions. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-10-9: FEES:
The city council may from time to time prescribe and amend by resolution a reasonable schedule of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 362/396
fees to be charged to applicants for appeal proceedings. At the time an application is filed, said fee
shall be paid to the city clerk. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-10-10: REHEARING:
(A) The decision of the city council shall be final. However, a person having an interest affected by the
city council may appeal to circuit court.
(B) The city council is without general authority to reconsider a matter it has decided and from
reversing its previous decision, unless the facts and circumstances which actuated the decision
have so changed as to vitiate or materially affect the reason which produced and supported it, and
no vested rights have intervened. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
Chapter 11
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
12-11-1: ENFORCEMENT:
The provisions of this title shall be administered and enforced by the building official or by such
deputies of his department as the building official may delegate to enforce the provisions of this title.
(Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-11-2: DUTIES OF BUILDING OFFICIAL:
The building official shall have the power to grant zoning compliance and occupancy permits, to make
inspections of buildings or premises necessary to carry out his duties in the enforcement of this title. It
shall be unlawful for the building official to approve any plans or issue any permits or certificates of
occupancy for any excavation or construction until he has inspected such plans in detail and found
them to conform to this title.
Under no circumstances is the building official permitted neither to make changes to this title nor to
vary the terms of this title in carrying out his duties as building official.
The building official shall not refuse to issue a permit when conditions imposed by this title are
complied with by the applicant despite violations of contracts, such as covenants or private
agreements, which may occur upon the granting of said permit. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-11-3: PLOT PLAN:
The building official shall require that all applications for building permits shall be accompanied by
plans and specifications including a plot plan, in triplicate, drawn to scale, showing the following:
(A) The actual shape, location, and dimensions of the lot.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 363/396
(B) The shape, size, and location of all buildings or other structures to be erected, altered, or moved
and of any building or other structures already on the lot.
(C) The existing and intended use of the lot and of all such structures upon it, including, in residential
areas, the number of dwelling units the building is intended to accommodate.
(D) Such other information concerning the lot or adjoining lots as may be essential for determining
whether the provisions of this title are being observed. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-11-4: PERMITS:
The following shall apply in the issuance of any permit:
(A) Permits Not To Be Issued: No building permit shall be issued for the erection, alteration or use of
any building or structure or part thereof, or for the use of any land, which is not in accordance with
all provisions of this title.
(B) Permits For New Use Of Land: No land heretofore vacant shall hereafter be used or an existing
use of land be hereafter changed to a use of a different class or type unless a certificate of
occupancy is first obtained for the new or different use.
(C) Permits For New Use Of Buildings: No building or structure, or part thereof, shall be changed to or
occupied by a use of a different class or type unless a certificate of occupancy is first obtained for
the new or different use.
(D) Permits Required: No building or structure, or part thereof, shall be hereafter erected, altered,
moved, or repaired unless a building permit shall have been first issued for such work. The terms
"altered" and "repaired" shall include any changes in structural parts, stairways, type of
construction, type, class or kind of occupancy, light or ventilation, means of egress and ingress, or
other changes affecting or regulated by the city of Clinton zoning code, except for minor repairs or
changes not involving any of the aforesaid features. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-11-5: CERTIFICATES:
No land, building, or part thereof, shall be occupied by or for any use unless and until a certificate of
occupancy shall have been issued for such use. The following shall apply in the issuance of any
certificate:
(A) Certificate Not To Be Issued: No certificates of occupancy shall be issued for any buildings,
structure or part thereof, or for the use of any land, which is not in accordance with all the
provisions of this title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 364/396
(B) Certificates Required: No building or structure, or parts thereof, which is hereafter erected, or
altered, shall be occupied or used or the same caused to be done, unless and until a certificate of
occupancy shall have been issued for such building or structure.
(C) Certificates Including Zoning: Certificates of occupancy as required by the city building code for
new buildings or structures, or parts thereof, or for alterations to or changes of use of existing
buildings or structures, shall also constitute certificates of occupancy as required by this title.
(D) Record Of Certificates: A record of all certificates issued shall be kept on file in the office of the
building official, and copies shall be furnished upon request to any person having a proprietary or
tenancy interest in the property involved.
(E) Certificates For Dwelling Accessory Buildings: Buildings or structures accessory to dwellings shall
not require separate certificates of occupancy, but may be included in the certificate of occupancy
for the dwelling when shown on the plot plan and when completed at the same time as such
dwellings.
(F) Application For Certificates: Application for certificates of occupancy shall be made in writing to the
building official on forms furnished by that department, and such certificates shall be issued within
ten (10) days after receipt of such application if it is found that the building or structure, or part
thereof, or the use of land is in accordance with the provisions of this title. If such certificate is
refused for cause, the applicant therefor shall be notified of such refusal and cause thereof, within
the aforesaid ten (10) day period. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-11-6: FINAL INSPECTION:
The holder of every building permit for the construction, erection, alteration, repair, or moving of any
building or structure or part thereof, shall notify the building official immediately upon the completion of
the work authorized by such permit, for a final inspection. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-11-7: FEES:
Fees for inspection and the issuance of permits or certificates or copies thereof required or issued
under the provisions of this title may be collected by the building inspector in advance of issuance.
The amount of such fees shall be established by resolution of the city council and shall cover the cost
of inspection and supervision resulting from enforcement of this title.
FEE SCHEDULES FOR ISSUANCE OF PERMITS
Estimated Cost Fee
$0.00 - $5,000.00 $20.00, plus $0.50 per hundred or part thereof of the estimated cost over
$1,000.00. Maximum $40.00
$5,001.00 -
$50,000.00
$40.00, plus $0.30 per hundred or part thereof of the estimated cost over
$5,001.00. Maximum $180.00
$50,001.00 -
$250,000.00
$180.00, plus $0.25 per hundred or part thereof of the estimated cost over
$50,000.00. Maximum $680.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 365/396
$250,001.00 -
$500,000.00
$680.00, plus $0.22 per hundred or part thereof of the estimated cost over
$250,000.00. Maximum $1,185.00
$500,001.00 -
$1,000,000.00
$1,185.00, plus $0.20 per hundred or part thereof of the estimated cost
over $500,000.00. Maximum $2,185.00
$1,000,001.00 -
$5,000,000.00
$2,185.00, plus $0.17 per hundred or part thereof of the estimated cost
over $1,000,001.00. Maximum $8,985.00
Over $5,000,001.00
$8,985.00, plus $0.15 per hundred or part thereof of the estimated cost
(Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
Chapter 12
AMENDING THE ORDINANCE
12-12-1: PROPOSALS, RECOMMENDATIONS OR PETITIONS:
(A) The city planning commission must review all amendments to the zoning ordinance. Amendments
may take the form of the city council proposal, staff initiated recommendations or citizen petitions,
for either zoning text or zoning district boundary changes. In any event, the planning commission
shall hold a public hearing as provided in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-13-14 and 5/11-13-3.1
(1998 state bar edition) and as may be amended. After the public hearing has been closed, the
planning commission shall submit a report and recommendations to the city council on the
proposed change.
(B) Citizen petitions for zoning ordinance amendments shall be submitted to the city clerk on standard
forms provided at least fifteen (15) days prior to the next regularly scheduled planning commission
meeting. At the next regularly scheduled meeting; the planning commission shall set a date for a
public hearing to receive public comment. The standard forms shall be completed in the manner
prescribed, and such documents, as required by the ordinance, shall be filed with the clerk. A fee
schedule, as provided by resolution of the city council, shall be levied against each petition to
cover the cost of administering the application process and for advertising public hearings and
other incidental costs relative to said petition. The city clerk shall transmit the application to the
planning commission.
(C) A petition for rezoning, once denied by city council, shall not be resubmitted for recommendation
or action within one year from date of denial.
(D) If the city council does not take any action to resolve a petition for rezoning after public hearing
within six (6) months beginning with the initial day of filing, said petition shall be determined to
have been denied. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 366/396
Chapter 13
MATTERS ENTRUSTED TO THE BOARD OF APPEALS1
12-13-1: BOARD OF APPEALS ESTABLISHED:
The zoning board of appeals of this municipality is established in accordance with Illinois law2. (Ord.
253, 4-18-1983, eff. 5-23-1983; amd. Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-13-2: MEMBERSHIP, APPOINTMENT, COMPENSATION:
The board of appeals shall consist of seven (7) members, all of whom shall reside within this
municipality. Each board member shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the
city council. One of the members so appointed shall be named as chairman at the time of his
appointment. Each board member shall receive for his services such compensation, if any, as is
determined from time to time by the city council. (Ord. 253, 4-18-1983, eff. 5-23-1983; amd. Ord. 867,
11-5-2001)
12-13-3: TERM OF OFFICE, VACANCIES:
Each board member shall hold office for five (5) years from the date of his appointment, and until his
successor has been selected and qualified; provided, however, that the initial appointees to the board
shall serve respectively for the following terms: one for one year; one for two (2) years; one for three
(3) years; one for four (4) years; one for five (5) years; one for six (6) years; and, one for seven (7)
years. With the advice and consent of the city council, the mayor may remove any member of the
board of appeals for cause, after a public hearing. Vacancies on the board shall be filled for the
unexpired term of the member whose place has become vacant in the same manner as provided for
the appointment of new members. (Ord. 253, 4-18-1983, eff. 5-23-1983; amd. Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-13-4: MEETINGS, QUORUM:
All meetings of the board of appeals shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such times as the
board may determine. All board meetings shall be open to the public. The board may adopt their own
rules of meeting procedures consistent with this title and the applicable Illinois statutes. The board
may select such officers as they deem necessary. The chairman or, in his absence, the acting
chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. Four (4) members of the
board shall constitute a quorum, and the affirmative vote of at least four (4) members shall be
necessary to authorize any board action. (Ord. 253, 4-18-1983, eff. 5-23-1983; amd. Ord. 867, 11-5-
2001)
12-13-5: RECORDS:
The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings and examinations. These minutes shall indicate the
absence of any member, the vote or abstention of each member on each question, and any official
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 367/396
action taken. A copy of every rule, variance, order or decision of the board shall be filed immediately in
the board's office and shall be a public record. (Ord. 253, 4-18-1983, eff. 5-23-1983; amd. Ord. 867,
11-5-2001)
12-13-6: APPEALS:
Any person aggrieved by any decision or order of the zoning administrator in any matter related to the
interpretation or enforcement of any provision of this title may appeal to the zoning board of appeals.
Every such appeal shall be made and treated in accordance with Illinois law3 and the provisions of
this section. (Ord. 253, 4-18-1983, eff. 5-23-1983; amd. Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-13-7: FILING, RECORD TRANSMITTAL:
Every appeal shall be made within forty five (45) days of the matter complained of by filing with the
administrator and the board of appeals, a written notice specifying the grounds for appeal4. Not more
than five (5) working days after the notice of appeal has been filed, the administrator shall transmit to
the board of appeals all records pertinent to the case. (Ord. 253, 4-18-1983, eff. 5-23-1983; amd. Ord.
867, 11-5-2001)
12-13-8: STAY OF FURTHER PROCEEDINGS:
An appeal stays all further action on the matter being appealed, unless the administrator certifies to
the board, after the notice of appeal has been filed with him, that, for reasons stated in the certificate,
a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, further action shall not be stayed
unless the board or the circuit court grants a restraining order for due cause, and so notifies the
administrator. (Ord. 253, 4-18-1983, eff. 5-23-1983; amd. Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-13-9: APPEALS; PUBLIC HEARING, NOTICE:
The board of appeals shall hold a public hearing on every appeal within a reasonable time after the
filing of the appeal notice. At the hearing, any interested party may appear and testify, either in person
or by duly authorized agent or attorney. Notice indicating the time, date and place of the hearing, and
briefly describing the issue to be decided shall be given not more than thirty (30) days nor less than
fifteen (15) days before the hearing by first class mail to all parties directly affected by the appeal.
(Ord. 253, 4-18-1983, eff. 5-23-1983; amd. Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-13-10: DECISION BY BOARD OF APPEALS:
The board of appeals shall render a decision on the appeal within a reasonable time after the hearing.
The board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify or amend the decision or order
appealed from, to the extent and in the manner that they deem appropriate. In so doing, the board of
appeals has all the powers of the administrator. (Ord. 253, 4-18-1983, eff. 5-23-1983; amd. Ord. 867,
11-5-2001)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 368/396
12-13-11: SPECIAL USE PERMITS:
This title divides this municipality into various districts, and permits in each district as a matter of right,
only those uses which are clearly compatible with one another. Certain other uses, because of their
special operational or physical characteristics, may or may not have a detrimental impact on nearby
permitted uses, depending upon their precise location, manner of operation and other factors. Such
"special uses" require careful, case by case review, and may be allowed only by permission of the city
council. (Ord. 253, 4-18-1983, eff. 5-23-1983; amd. Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-13-12: SPECIAL USE PERMIT APPLICATION:
Every applicant for a special use permit shall submit to the administrator, in narrative and/or graphic
form, the items of information enumerated below. Every application for a special use permit shall also
be filed with the soil and water conservation district and the local school district. The administrator
shall prepare an advisory report on every request for a special use permit. He shall promptly transmit
the completed application and his advisory report to the zoning board of appeals.
Items of information:
(A) Name and address of the applicant;
(B) Name and address of the owner or operator of the proposed structure or use, if different from
subsection (A) of this section;
(C) Nature of the proposed use, including type of activity, manner of operation, number of occupants
or employees and similar matters;
(D) Location of the proposed use or structure, and its relationship to existing adjacent uses or
structures;
(E) Areas and dimensions of the site for the proposed structure or uses;
(F) Existing topography of the site (USGS 10 foot contour data is acceptable) and proposed finished
grade;
(G) Existing and proposed screening, landscaping and erosion control features on the site, including
the parking area;
(H) Height and setbacks of the proposed structure;
(I) Number and size of proposed dwelling units, if any;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 369/396
(J) Location and number of proposed parking/loading spaces and accessways;
(K) Identification and location of all existing or proposed utilities, whether public or private; and/or
(L) Any other pertinent information that the administrator may require. (Ord. 253, 4-18-1983, eff. 5-23-
1983; amd. Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-13-13: SPECIAL USE PERMIT; PUBLIC HEARING, NOTICE:
The zoning board of appeals shall hold a public hearing on every special use permit application within
a reasonable time after said application is submitted to them. At the hearing, any interested party may
appear and testify, either in person or by duly authorized agent or attorney. Notice indicating the time,
date and place of the hearing, and the nature of the proposed special use shall be given not more
than thirty (30) nor less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing by:
(A) First class mail to the applicant and to all parties whose property would be directly affected by the
proposed special use; and
(B) Publication in a newspaper of general circulation within this municipality. (Ord. 253, 4-18-1983, eff.
5-23-1983; amd. Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-13-14: ADVISORY REPORT, FACTORS CONSIDERED:
Within a reasonable time after the public hearing, the zoning board of appeals shall submit their
advisory report to the city council. In deciding what their advice should be, the zoning board of appeals
shall consider the following factors:
(A) Whether the proposed design, location and manner of operation of the proposed special use will
adequately protect the public health, safety and welfare and the physical environment;
(B) Whether the proposed special use is consistent with this municipality's comprehensive plan;
(C) The effect the proposed special use would have on the value of neighboring property and on this
municipality's overall tax base;
(D) The effect the proposed special use would have on public utilities and on traffic circulation on
nearby streets; and
(E) Whether there are any facilities near the proposed special use (such as schools or hospitals) that
require special protection. (Ord. 253, 4-18-1983, eff. 5-23-1983; amd. Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-13-15: ACTION BY CITY COUNCIL:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 370/396
The city council shall act on every request for a special use permit at their next regularly scheduled
meeting following submission of the zoning board of appeals advisory report. Without further public
hearing, the city council may grant a special use permit by an ordinance passed by simple majority
vote of all members then holding office. In a separate statement accompanying any such ordinance,
the city council shall state their findings of fact, and indicate their reasons for approving (with or
without conditions) or denying the request for a special use permit. (Ord. 253, 4-18-1983, eff. 5-23-
1983; amd. Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-13-16: VARIANCES:
A variance is a relaxation of the requirements of this title that are applicable to a particular lot or
structure. A use variance which would allow a use that is neither permitted nor special in the district in
question is prohibited. (Ord. 253, 4-18-1983, eff. 5-23-1983; amd. Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-13-17: APPLICATION FOR VARIANCE:
Every application for a variance shall be filed with the administrator on a prescribed form. Every
variance application shall also be filed with the soil and water conservation district, as per state law,
and the local school district. The administrator shall promptly transmit said application, together with
any advice he might wish to offer, to the board of appeals. The application shall contain sufficient
information to allow the board to make an informed decision, and shall include, at a minimum, the
following:
(A) Name and address of the applicant;
(B) Location of the structure/use for which the variance is sought;
(C) Relationship of said structure/use to existing structures/uses on adjacent lots;
(D) Specific section(s) of this title containing the regulations which, if strictly applied, would cause a
serious problem; and
(E) Any other pertinent information that the administrator may require. (Ord. 253, 4-18-1983, eff. 5-23-
1983; amd. Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-13-18: VARIANCE; PUBLIC HEARING, NOTICE:
The board of appeals shall hold a public hearing on each variance request within a reasonable time
after the variance application is submitted to them. At the hearing, any interested party may appear
and testify, either in person or by duly authorized agent or attorney. Notice indicating the time, date
and place of the hearing, and the nature of the proposed variance shall be given not more than thirty
(30) nor less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing by:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 371/396
(A) First class mail to the applicant and to all parties whose property would be directly affected by the
proposed variance; and
(B) Publication in a newspaper of general circulation within this municipality. (Ord. 253, 4-18-1983, eff.
5-23-1983; amd. Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-13-19: STANDARDS FOR VARIANCES:
The board of appeals shall not grant any variance unless, based upon the evidence presented to
them, they determine that:
(A) The proposed variance is consistent with the general purposes of this title;
(B) Strict application of the district requirements would result in great practical difficulties or hardship
to the applicant and prevent a reasonable return on the property;
(C) The proposed variance is the minimum deviation from such requirements that will alleviate the
difficulties/hardship and allow a reasonable return on the property;
(D) The plight of the applicant is due to peculiar circumstances not of his own making;
(E) The peculiar circumstances engendering the variance request are not applicable to other property
within the district, and therefore, that a variance would be a more appropriate remedy than an
amendment (rezoning); and
(F) The variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the area where the premises in
question is located, nor materially frustrate implementation of this municipality's comprehensive
plan. (Ord. 253, 4-18-1983, eff. 5-23-1983; amd. Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-13-20: TERMS OF RELIEF, FINDINGS OF FACT:
The board of appeals shall render a decision on every variance request within a reasonable time after
the public hearing. In accordance with state law5, the board of appeals shall specify the terms of relief
granted (if any) in one statement and their findings of fact in another statement. The findings of fact
shall clearly indicate the board's reasons for granting or denying any requested variance. (Ord. 253, 4-
18-1983, eff. 5-23-1983; amd. Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
Chapter 14
INTERPRETATION
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 372/396
12-14-1: INTERPRETATION AND APPLICATION:
In the interpretation and application, the provisions of this title shall be held to be minimum
requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, morals, safety, comfort, convenience or
general welfare. It is not intended by this title to repeal, abrogate, annul, or in any way to impair or
interfere with any existing provision of law or ordinance other than the above described zoning
ordinance, or with any rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued or which shall be
adopted or issued pursuant to the law relating to the use of buildings or premises; provided, however,
that where this title imposes a greater restriction than is required by existing ordinance or by rules,
regulations or permits, the provisions of this title shall control. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
Chapter 15
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS1
12-15-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to this city by 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-2, 5/11-30-8, and 5/11-31-2 in order to accomplish the following
purposes:
(A) To prevent unwise developments from increasing flood or drainage hazards to others;
(B) To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood damage;
(C) To protect human life and health from hazards of flooding;
(D) To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control projects, repairs to flood damaged public
facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief operations;
(E) To maintain property values and a stable tax base by minimizing the potential for creating flood
blighted areas; and
(F) To make federally subsidized flood insurance available for property in the city by fulfilling the
requirements of the national flood insurance program. (Ord. 398, 4-13-1987; amd. Ord. 867, 11-5-
2001)
12-15-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions are adopted:
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) probability of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year flood. The base flood elevation at any
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 373/396
location is as defined in section 12-15-5 of this chapter.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The elevation in relation to mean sea level of the crest of the base
flood.
BASEMENT: That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
BUILDING: All walled and roofed structure, including gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally
aboveground, including manufactured homes, prefabricated buildings and gas or liquid storage tanks.
The term includes recreational vehicles and travel trailers installed on a site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days per year.
CRITICAL FACILITY: Any facility which is critical to the health and welfare of the population and, if
flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster. Damage to these critical facilities can
impact the delivery of vital services, can cause greater damage to other sectors of the community, or
can put special populations at risk.
Examples of critical facilities where flood protection should be required include: emergency services
facilities (such as fire and police stations), schools, hospitals, retirement homes and senior care
facilities, major roads and bridges, critical utility sites (telephone switching stations or electrical
transformers), and hazardous material storage facilities (chemicals, petrochemicals, hazardous or
toxic substances).
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to real estate including, but not necessarily limited to:
(A) Demolition, construction, reconstruction, repair, placement of a building, or any structural
alteration to a building;
(B) Substantial improvement of an existing building;
(C) Installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a manufactured home, or
installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days per year;
(D) Installation of utilities, construction of roads, bridges, culverts or similar projects;
(E) Construction or erection of levees, dams, walls or fences;
(F) Drilling, mining, filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving, or other alterations of the ground
surface;
(G) Storage of materials including the placement of gas and liquid storage tanks, and channel
modifications or any other activity that might change the direction, height, or velocity of flood or
surface waters.
"Development" does not include routine maintenance of existing buildings and facilities, resurfacing
roads, or gardening, plowing, and similar practices that do not involve filling, grading, or construction
of levees.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured
homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed (including, at a minimum, the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 374/396
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured
homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final
site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FEMA: Federal emergency management agency.
FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land
areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid accumulation, or the runoff of surface waters from any
source.
FLOOD FRINGE: That portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory floodway.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP: A map prepared by the federal emergency management agency
that depicts the floodplain or special flood hazard area (SFHA) within a community. This map includes
insurance rate zones and may or may not depict floodways and show base flood elevations.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: An examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if
appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): The elevation of the base flood plus one foot (1') of
freeboard at any given location in the floodplain.
FLOODPLAIN AND SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): These two (2) terms are
synonymous. Those lands within the jurisdiction of the city of Clinton, Illinois, the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the city of Clinton, Illinois, or that may be annexed into the city of Clinton, Illinois, that
are subject to inundation by the base flood. The floodplains of the city of Clinton, Illinois, are generally
identified as such on panel numbers 0215E and 0220E of the countywide flood insurance rate map of
the county of DeWitt prepared by the federal emergency management agency and dated November 2,
2007. Floodplain also includes those areas of known flooding as identified by the community.
The floodplains of those parts of unincorporated county of DeWitt that are within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the city of Clinton, Illinois, or that may be annexed into the city of Clinton, Illinois, are
generally identified as such on the flood insurance rate map prepared for DeWitt County by the federal
emergency management agency and dated November 2, 2007.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural or nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments
to structures which reduce or eliminated flood damage to real estate, property and their contents.
FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE: A form published by the federal emergency management agency
that is used to certify that a building has been designed and constructed to be structurally dry and
floodproofed to the flood protection elevation.
FLOODWAY: That portion of the floodplain required to store and convey the base flood. The floodway
for the floodplains of Coon, Goose and Ten Mile Creeks shall be as delineated on the countywide
flood insurance rate map of DeWitt County prepared by FEMA and dated November 2, 2007. The
floodways for each of the remaining floodplains of the city of Clinton, Illinois, shall be according to the
best data available from federal, state, or other sources.
FREEBOARD: An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to provide a factor of
safety for uncertainties in calculations, future watershed development, unknown localized conditions,
wave actions and unpredictable effects such as those caused by ice or debris jams.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 375/396
(A) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or preliminarily determined by the
secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National
Register.
(B) Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered
historic district.
(C) Individually listed on the state inventory of historic places by the Illinois historic preservation
agency.
(D) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that has been certified by the Illinois
historic preservation agency.
IDNR/OWR: Illinois department of natural resources/office of water resources.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished
or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area
other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is
not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of
section 12-15-15 of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure transportable in one or more sections, that is built on a
permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when
connected to required utilities.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided
into two (2) or more lots for rent or sale.
NFIP: National flood insurance program.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: Structures for which the start of construction commenced or after the
effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community and includes any
subsequent improvements of such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or subdivision
for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed or buildings to be constructed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or
after the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE OR TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicle which is:
(A) Built on a single chassis;
(B) Four hundred (400) square feet or less in size;
(C) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck and designed
primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational,
camping, travel or seasonal use.
REPETITIVE LOSS: Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two (2) separate occasions
during a ten (10) year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event on the
average equals or exceeds twenty five percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 376/396
SFHA: See definition of Floodplain And Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA).
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement and means the date the building
permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition placement or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date.
The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site,
such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns or any
work beyond the stage of excavation; or placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. For a
substantial improvement, actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor
or other structural part of a building whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the building.
STRUCTURE: See definition of Building.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by structure whereby the cumulative
percentage of damage subsequent to the adoption of this chapter equals or exceeds fifty percent
(50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred regardless of actual repair
work performed. Volunteer labor and materials must be included in this determination. The term
includes "repetitive loss buildings" (see definition of Repetitive Loss).
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or improvement of a
structure taking place subsequent to the adoption of this chapter in which the cumulative percentage
of improvements:
(A) Equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
improvement or repair is started, or
(B) Increases the floor area by more than twenty percent (20%).
"Substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or
other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the structure. This term includes structures which have incurred repetitive loss or
substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work done. The term does not include:
(A) Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary,
or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
(B) Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the Illinois
Register of Historic Places.
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's
floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the required federal,
state, and/or local permits and elevation certification is presumed to be in violation until such time as
the documentation is provided. (Ord. 1094, 10-15-2007)
12-15-3: OFFICE OF BUILDING OFFICIAL:
There is hereby created the office of building official of the city, an administrative office of the city. The
office shall be filled by appointment of a person educated, trained or experienced in construction
practices or by contract with another governmental inspection agency. The appointment or contract
shall be made by the mayor, subject to the approval of the city council. (Ord. 470, 9-18-1989; amd.
Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 377/396
12-15-4: DUTIES OF THE BUILDING OFFICIAL:
The building official shall be responsible for the general administration and enforcement of this
chapter, including, but not limited to, the following duties:
(A) Ensure that all development activities within the SFHAs of the jurisdiction of the city meet the
requirements of this chapter.
(B) Provide information and assistance to citizens upon request about permit procedures and
floodplain construction techniques.
(C) Ensure that construction authorization has been granted by the Illinois department of
transportation, division of water resources for all development projects subject to section 12-15-14
of this chapter, and maintain a record of such authorization.
(D) Maintain a record of the as built elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all buildings
subject to section 12-15-15 of this chapter.
(E) Maintain a record of the engineer's certificate and the as built floodproofed elevation of all
buildings subject to subsection 12-15-15(D) of this chapter.
(F) Inspect all development projects to ensure they comply with the provisions of this chapter.
(G) Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to improve base flood and
floodway data and to improve the administration of this chapter. Submit reports as required for the
national flood insurance program.
(H) Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request base flood data, SFHA maps, copies of
federal or state permit documents and as built elevation and floodproofing data for all buildings
constructed subject to this chapter. (Ord. 398, 4-13-1987; amd. Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-15-5: BASE FLOOD ELEVATION:
This chapter's protection standard is the base flood. The best available base flood data are listed
below. Whenever a party disagrees with the best available data, the party may finance the detailed
engineering study needed to replace existing data with better data and submit it to the state water
survey and the federal emergency management agency. (Ord. 398, 4-13-1987; amd. Ord. 867, 11-5-
2001)
(A) The base flood elevation for the SFHAs of Goose, Coon and Ten Mile Creeks shall be as
delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the flood insurance study of the city prepared by the
federal emergency management agency and dated November 2, 2007. (Ord. 1094, 10-15-2007)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 378/396
(B) The base flood elevation for each SFHA delineated as an "AH zone" or "AO zone" shall be that
elevation (or depth) delineated on the flood insurance rate map of the city.
(C) The base flood elevation for each of the remaining SFHAs delineated as an "A zone" on the flood
insurance rate map of the city shall be according to the best data available to the Illinois state
water survey floodplain information repository. When no base flood elevation exists, the base flood
elevation shall be the 100-year flood depth calculated according to the formulas presented in depth
and frequency of floods in Illinois published by the U.S. geological survey, 1976. (Ord. 398, 4-13-
1987; amd. Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
(D) The base flood elevation for the SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated DeWitt County that are
within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city or that may be annexed into the city shall be as
delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the flood insurance study of DeWitt County prepared by
the federal emergency management agency and dated November 2, 2007. (Ord. 1094, 10-15-
2007)
12-15-6: DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not exempted by state law shall commence any
development in the SFHA without first obtaining a development permit from the building official. The
building official shall not issue a development permit if the proposed development does not meet the
requirements of this chapter.
(A) The application for a development permit shall be accompanied by drawings of the site, drawn to
scale showing property line dimensions; existing grade elevations and all changes in grade
resulting from excavation or filling; the location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to
buildings; and the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed buildings
subject to the requirements of section 12-15-15 of this chapter.
(B) Upon receipt of an application for a development permit, the building official shall compare the
elevation of the site to the base flood elevation. Any development located on land that can be
shown to have been higher than the base flood elevation as of the date of the site's first flood
insurance rate map identification is not located in the SFHA and therefore not subject to the
requirements of this chapter. The building official shall maintain documentation of the existing
ground elevation at the development site and certification that this ground elevation existed prior to
the date of the site's first flood insurance rate map identification.
(C) The building official shall inform the applicant of any and all other local, state, and federal permits
that may be required for this type of development activity. The building official shall not issue the
development permit unless all required federal and state permits have been obtained. (Ord. 398, 4-
13-1987; amd. Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-15-7: USE PERMITS:
It shall be unlawful to use or occupy any buildings or any development site or any part thereof
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 379/396
hereafter constructed in the SFHA without first making application for obtaining a use permit from the
building official. Request for a use permit shall be submitted to the building official upon completion of
the work authorized in the development permit issued for the project in question. If, upon final
inspection of a building or development site, the building official finds that the work has been
performed in accordance with the approved application and plans of the development permit, a use
permit shall be issued. If final inspection reveals otherwise, a use permit may not be issued until all
deficiencies are corrected. (Ord. 398, 4-13-1987; amd. Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-15-8: PERMIT REVIEW:
The building official shall examine each application for a permit within three (3) days' time after filing.
If, after examination, it appears that the proposed development or use of the site will be in compliance
with this chapter and such other ordinances and resolutions passed by the city council applicable
thereto, the building official shall approve such application and issue the appropriate permit as soon
as practicable. If the examination reveals otherwise, the application shall be rejected and the building
official's findings shall be noted in a written report to be attached to the application. A copy of the
report shall be provided to the applicant upon request. (Ord. 398, 4-13-1987; amd. Ord. 867, 11-5-
2001)
12-15-9: DEVELOPMENT PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
(A) All work performed under a development permit shall conform to the approved application and
plans, and approved amendments thereto.
(B) A copy of the development permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises, in plain
view from a public road, during the execution of the work and until completion of the same.
(C) A development permit under which no work is commenced within six (6) months after issuance
shall expire by limitation and a new development permit shall be secured before work is started.
(Ord. 398, 4-13-1987; amd. Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-15-10: CONSENT FOR INSPECTIONS:
All work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official or a duly
authorized representative. It shall be unlawful to refuse to permit the building official or the
representative to enter such premises or structure at any reasonable time to make an inspection. It
shall be unlawful to interfere with or hinder the building official or the representative when in the
performance of their duties. (Ord. 398, 4-13-1987; amd. Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-15-11: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
The building official may revoke a permit in case there has been any false statement or
misrepresentation as to be material fact in the application or plans on which the permit was based.
The building official may revoke a permit or plans on which the permit was based. The building official
may revoke a permit when work is performed contrary to the provisions of the application or plans on
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 380/396
which the permit is based. When a permit is revoked, the building official shall inform the permittee in
writing of the specific steps the permittee must take in order to have the permit reissued. It shall be
unlawful to continue any work authorized by a permit after revocation of that permit and until the
permit is reissued or until a new permit is issued. (Ord. 398, 4-13-1987; amd. Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-15-12: COMPLETION OF WORK HERETOFORE AUTHORIZED:
Nothing in this chapter shall require changes in the plans, construction or designated use of a building
or other development project or portion thereof which has been otherwise lawfully authorized, or the
construction of which shall have been actually begun and which entire building or development project
shall be completed within one year of the effective date of this chapter. (Ord. 398, 4-13-1987; amd.
Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-15-13: FEES:
Fees for permits shall be as follows:
(A) For a use permit: No fee.
(B) For a development for clearing debris, demolishing buildings, or removing buildings out of the
SFHA: No fee.
(C) For construction of a building valued at more than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00):
One hundred dollars ($100.00).
(D) For construction or reconstruction of a building valued at less than one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) and for any other development project that required three (3) site inspections by the
building official: Seventy five dollars ($75.00).
(E) For improvements made to an existing building, for installing a manufactured home on a
permanent site, and for any other development project: Fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord. 398, 4-13-
1987; amd. Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-15-14: PREVENTING INCREASED DAMAGES:
No development in the SFHA shall create a damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood
heights or velocity or threat to public health and safety. (Ord. 398, 4-13-1987; amd. Ord. 867, 11-5-
2001)
(A) Within the floodway identified on the flood insurance rate map, the following standards shall apply:
(Ord. 398, 4-13-1987; amd. Ord. 470, 9-18-1989; Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 381/396
1. Except as provided in subsection (A)2 of this section, no development shall be allowed which,
acting in combination with existing or future similar works, will cause any increase in the base
flood elevation. The specific development activities identified in subsection (B)2 of this section
shall be considered as meeting this requirement.
2. No increase in the base flood elevation may be permitted unless:
(a) The total cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development, will not increase the base flood elevation more than one
foot (1') for the affected hydraulic reach of the stream and will not increase flood damages or
potential flood damages;
(b) A permit has been issued by the Illinois department of transportation, division of water
resources as required in subsection (B)1 of this section; and
(c) For all projects involving channel modifications or fill (including levees), the city shall submit
sufficient data to the federal emergency management agency to revise the regulatory flood
data.
(B) Within all other riverine SFHAs, the following standards shall apply:
1. In addition to the other requirements of this chapter, a development permit for a site located in a
floodway (or in a riverine SFHA where no floodway has been identified) shall not be issued
unless the applicant first obtains a permit or written documentation that a permit is not required
from the Illinois department of transportation, division of water resources, issued pursuant to 615
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/52 et seq.
2. The following activities may be constructed without the individual permit required in
subsection (B)1 of this section in accordance with statewide permits issued by the Illinois
department of transportation, division of water resources, provided the activities do not involve
placement of fill, change of grade, or construction in the normal channel. Such activities must
still meet the other requirements of this chapter.
(a) The construction of wells, septic tanks, and underground utility lines not crossing a lake or
stream;
(b) The construction of light poles, signposts and similar structures;
(c) The construction of sidewalks, driveways, athletic fields (excluding fences), patios and similar
surfaces which are built at grade;
(d) The construction of properly anchored, unwalled, open structures such as playground
equipment, pavilions, and carports;
(e) The placement of properly anchored buildings not exceeding seventy (70) square feet in size,
nor ten feet (10') in any dimension (e.g., animal shelters and toolsheds); and
(f) The construction of additions to existing buildings which do not increase the first floor area by
more than twenty percent (20%), which are located on the upstream or downstream side of
the existing building, and which do not extend beyond the sides of the existing building that
are parallel to the flow of floodwaters.
3. The total cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing
and anticipated development, will not increase the base flood elevation more than one foot (1')
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 382/396
for the affected hydraulic reach of the stream and will not increase flood damages or potential
flood damages.
(C) Public health standards in all SFHAs:
1. No development in the SFHA shall include locating or storing chemicals, explosives, buoyant
materials, flammable liquids, pollutants, or other hazardous or toxic materials below the FPE
unless such materials are stored in a storage tank or floodproofed building constructed
according to the requirements of subsection 12-15-15(D) of this chapter.
2. New and replacement sanitary sewer lines and on site waste disposal systems may be
permitted, providing all manholes or other aboveground openings located below the FPE are
watertight. (Ord. 398, 4-13-1987; amd. Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-15-15: PROTECTING BUILDINGS:
In addition to the damage prevention requirements of section 12-15-14 of this chapter, all buildings to
be located in the SFHA shall be protected from flood damage below the FPE. This building protection
requirement applies to the following situations:
Construction or placement of a new building valued at more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00);
Structural alterations made to an existing building that increases the floor area by more than twenty
percent (20%), or the market value of the building by more than fifty percent (50%);
Reconstruction or repairs made to a damaged building that are valued at or more than fifty percent
(50%) of the market value of the building before the damage occurred;
Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured home on an existing site. This
chapter does not apply to returning a manufactured home to the same site it lawfully occupied before
it was removed to avoid flood damage; and
Installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days.
This building protection requirement may be met by one of the following methods. The building official
shall maintain a record of compliance with these building protection standards as required in section
12-15-4 of this chapter.
(A) A residential or nonresidential building may be constructed on permanent landfill in accordance
with the following:
1. The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than one foot (1') deep before compaction.
2. The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the FPE. The fill should extend at
least ten feet (10') beyond the foundation of the building before sloping below the FPE.
3. The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during flooding by vegetative cover, riprap,
or bulkheading. If vegetative cover is used, the slopes shall be no steeper than three (3)
horizontal to one vertical.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 383/396
4. The fill shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage from or onto neighboring
properties.
(B) A residential or nonresidential building may be elevated in accordance with the following:
1. The building or improvements shall be elevated on crawlspace, walls, stilts, piles, or other
foundation provided:
(a) The walls have permanent openings no more than one foot (1') above grade; and
(b) The walls and floor are not subject to damage by hydrostatic pressures associated with the
base flood.
2. The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored and aligned in relation to flood flows
and adjoining structures so as to minimize exposure to known hydrodynamic forces such as
current, waves, ice, and floating debris.
3. All areas below the FPE shall be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage. The lowest
floor (including basement) and all electrical, heating, ventilating, plumbing, and air conditioning
equipment and utility meters shall be located at or above the FPE. Water and sewer pipes,
electrical and telephone lines, submersible pumps, and other waterproofed service facilities may
be located below the FPE.
(C) Manufactured homes and travel trailers to be installed on a site for more than one hundred eighty
(180) days shall be:
1. Elevated at or above the FPE in accordance with subsection (A) or (B) of this section, and
2. Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by being tied down in accordance with
the rules and regulations for the Illinois mobile home tie down act issued pursuant to 210 Illinois
Compiled Statutes.
(D) Only a nonresidential building may be floodproofed in accordance with the following:
1. A registered professional engineer shall certify that the building has been designed so that
below the FPE, the structure and attendant utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting
the effects of the base flood. The building design shall take into account flood velocities,
duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and impacts
from debris or ice.
2. Floodproofing measures shall be operable without human intervention and without an outside
source of electricity. (Ord. 398, 4-13-1987; amd. Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-15-16: OTHER DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS:
The city council shall take into account flood hazards, to the extent that they are known, in all official
actions related to land management, use and development.
(A) New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, travel trailer parks, annexation agreements, planned
unit developments (PUDs) and additions to manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 384/396
the requirements of sections 12-15-14 and 12-15-15 of this chapter. Plats or plans for new
subdivisions, manufactured home parks, and planned unit developments (PUDs) shall include a
signed statement by a registered professional engineer that the plat or plan accounts for changes
in the drainage of surface waters in accordance with the plat act2.
(B) Proposals for new subdivisions, manufactured home parks, travel trailer parks, planned unit
developments (PUDs) and additions to manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall include
base flood elevation data and floodway delineations. Where this information is not available from
an existing study filed with the Illinois state water survey, the applicant shall be responsible for
calculating the base flood elevation and the floodway delineation and submitting it to the state
water survey for review and approval as best available regulatory data. (Ord. 398, 4-13-1987; amd.
Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-15-17: VARIANCES:
Whenever the standards of this chapter place undue hardship on a specific development proposal, the
applicant may apply to the zoning administrator for a variance. The zoning administrator shall review
the applicant's request for a variance and shall submit its recommendation to the city council. The city
council may attach such conditions to granting of a variance as it deems necessary to further the
intent of this chapter.
(A) No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that:
1. The development activity cannot be located outside the SFHA;
2. An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not granted;
3. The relief requested is the minimum necessary;
4. There will be no additional threat to public health or safety or creation of a nuisance;
5. There will be no additional public expense for flood protection, rescue or relief operations,
policing, or repairs to roads, utilities, or other public facilities; and
6. The provisions of subsection 12-15-6(C) of this chapter are met; and
7. The provisions of subsection 12-15-14(A) of this chapter are met.
(B) The zoning administrator shall notify an applicant in writing that a variance from the requirements
of section 12-15-15 of this chapter that would lessen the degree of protection to a building will:
1. Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance coverage;
2. Increase the risks to life and property; and
3. Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and that the applicant
acknowledge in writing the assumption of the risk and liability.
(C) Variances to the building protection requirements of section 12-15-15 of this chapter requested in
connection with the reconstruction, repair or alteration of a site or building included on the National
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 385/396
Register of Historic Places or the Illinois Register of Historic Places may be granted using criteria
more permissive than the requirements of subsections (A)1 through (A)5 of this section. (Ord. 398,
4-13-1987; amd. Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-15-18: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes and is based on available information derived from engineering and scientific methods of
study. Larger floods may occur or flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that development either inside or outside of the SFHA will be free from
flooding or damage. This chapter does not create liability on the part of the city or any officer or
employee thereof for any flood damage that results from reliance on this chapter or any administrative
decision made lawfully thereunder. (Ord. 398, 4-13-1987; amd. Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-15-19: PENALTY:
Failure to obtain a permit for development in the SFHA or failure to comply with the requirements of a
permit or conditions of a variance resolution shall be deemed to be a violation of this chapter. Upon
due investigation, the city attorney may determine that a violation of the minimum standards of this
chapter exist. The city attorney shall notify the owner in writing of such violation.
(A) If such owner fails after ten (10) days' notice to correct the violation:
1. The city may make application to the circuit court for an injunction requiring conformance with
this chapter or make such other order as the court deems necessary to secure compliance with
this chapter.
2. Any person who violates this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than five
dollars ($5.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
3. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
(B) The city attorney shall inform the owner that any such violation is considered a wilful act to
increase flood damages and therefore may cause coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to
be suspended.
(C) Nothing herein shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action to prevent or remedy any
violations. All costs connected therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible. (Ord.
398, 4-13-1987; amd. Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-15-20: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This chapter repeals and replaces other ordinances adopted by city council to fulfill the requirements
of the national flood insurance program including: n/a.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 386/396
However, this chapter does not repeal the original resolution or ordinance adopted to achieve eligibility
in the program. Nor does this chapter repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants,
or deed restrictions. Where this chapter and other ordinance easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord.
398, 4-13-1987; amd. Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
12-15-21: CARRYING CAPACITY AND NOTIFICATION:
For all projects involving channel modification, fill, or stream maintenance (including levees), the flood
carrying capacity of the watercourse shall be maintained.
In addition, the city of Clinton, Illinois, shall notify adjacent communities in writing thirty (30) days prior
to the issuance of a permit for the alteration or relocation of the watercourse. (Ord. 1094, 10-15-2007)
Chapter 16
VESTED RIGHT; SEVERABILITY; REPEALER
12-16-1: VESTED RIGHT; SEVERABILITY; REPEALER:
(A) Vested Right: Nothing in this title should be interpreted or construed to give rise to any permanent
vested rights in the continuation of any particular use, district, zoning classification or any
permissible activities therein; and, they are hereby declared to be subject to subsequent
amendment, change or modification as may be necessary to the preservation or protection of
public health, safety, and welfare.
(B) Severance Clause: This title and the various parts, sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences,
phrases and clauses thereof are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, section, subsection,
paragraph, sentence, phrase or clause is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid, it is hereby provided
that the remainder of this title shall not be affected thereby.
(C) Repeal Of Prior Ordinance: The zoning ordinance adopted by the city of Clinton, known as title 12
of this code and all amendments thereto, are hereby repealed. The repeal of the above ordinance
and its amendments does not affect or impair any act done, offense committed or right accruing,
accrued, or acquired or liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred prior to the time
enforced, prosecuted or inflicted. (Ord. 867, 11-5-2001)
Title 13
BUILDING CODES
Chapter 1
BUILDING CODE
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 387/396
13-1-1: ADOPTED:
For the purpose of establishing minimum regulations governing the conditions and maintenance of all
property, building and structures in the city of Clinton, Illinois, that certain code known as the
international building code, 2000 edition, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., and as
amended by a document entitled city of Clinton, Illinois, additions, deletions and amendments to the
international building code, 2000, which said code, together with the amendments referenced, has
been and now is filed in the office of the city clerk and the same is hereby adopted and represented as
fully as if set out at length herein, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the
city of Clinton, Illinois. (Ord. 1126, 8-4-2008)
Chapter 2
RESIDENTIAL CODE
13-2-1: ADOPTED:
For the purpose of regulating and controlling the design, construction, quality of materials, erection,
installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of
one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses, that certain code known as the international
residential code for one- and two-family dwellings, 2000 edition, as published by the International
Code Council, Inc., and as amended by a document entitled city of Clinton, Illinois, additions, deletions
and amendments to the international residential code for one- and two-family dwellings, 2000 edition,
which code, together with the amendments referenced, has been and now is filed in the office of the
city clerk and the same is hereby adopted and represented as fully as if set out at length herein, and
the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city of Clinton, Illinois. (Ord. 1126, 8-4-
2008)
Chapter 3
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
13-3-1: ADOPTED:
For the purpose of regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings
and structures, that certain code known as the international property maintenance code, 2003 edition,
as published by the International Code Council, Inc., as amended by a document entitled city of
Clinton, Illinois, additions, deletions and amendments to the international property maintenance code,
2003 edition, both of which have been and now are filed in the office of the city clerk of the city of
Clinton, Illinois, and the same are hereby adopted and represented as fully as if set out in length
herein, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city of Clinton, Illinois.
(Ord. 1126, 8-4-2008)
Chapter 4
MOBILE HOMES
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 388/396
13-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
BALING: A method of wrapping a cross section and the main frame of a mobile home with tie down
straps. This essentially ties the walls, roof and floor to the frame.
CLERESTORY ROOF: A roof that rises above an adjoining roof and contains windows.
DIAGONAL TIE: An anchor tie designed primarily to resist sliding by applying a force to the mobile
home in a direction more than forty degrees (40) from the vertical.
LENGTH OF MOBILE HOME: The distance from the exterior of the front wall (nearest to the drawbar
and coupling mechanism) to the exterior of the near wall (at the opposite end of the home) where such
walls enclose living or other interior space and such distance includes expandable rooms but not bay
windows, porches, drawbars, couplings, hitches, wall and room extensions, or other attachments.
MOBILE HOME: A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is eight (8) body feet or
more in width and is thirty two (32) body feet or more in length, and which is built on a permanent
chassis, and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without permanent foundation, when
connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical
systems contained therein.
ROOF PROTECTOR: A device designed to prevent over the top straps from damaging or penetrating
the roof material.
SITE: The lot on which the mobile home is harbored.
STEEL OUTRIGGERS: A triangular piece of steel two feet (2') to four feet (4') long that connects from
the steel I-beam every four feet (4') and holds up the side of the home.
THIMBLE: A piece of steel made at an angle which consists of a loop and sits on the side of the
mobile home and keeps the cable from touching the side of the home and keeps the home from
sliding.
TIE DOWN MANUFACTURER: Any person engaged in the manufacturing of tie down equipment
which is offered for sale or use in the state.
VERTICAL TIE: A tie intended to primarily resist the uplifting and overturning faces. (Ord. 185, 2-16-
1981, eff. 3-2-1981; amd. Ord. 1126, 8-4-2008)
13-4-2: MOBILE HOMES ON PRIVATE LOTS:
(A) No mobile home shall be placed on any private lot unless the minimum lot size and setback
requirements of the R-3 district in which such lot is located are met.
(B) Not more than one mobile home shall be placed on any private lot, nor shall any mobile home be
placed on any private lot whereon another principal building exists.
(C) Every mobile home shall be skirted with fire resistant material. The skirting shall be equipped with
an inspection door at least twenty four inches (24") wide to allow access to the underside of the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 389/396
home. (Ord. 185, 2-16-1981, eff. 3-2-1981; amd. Ord. 1126, 8-4-2008)
13-4-3: TIE DOWN STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
(A) Compliance Required:
1. Time Limit: All mobile homes sold or moved after the effective date hereof must be tied down in
accordance with the tie down standards within thirty (30) days after the home is set up on the
site, moved or resold.
Only in the case where frozen soil prevents the installation of ground anchors, this thirty (30) day
limit shall not apply. The home must, in this case, be anchored at the earliest possible date after
the soil thaws.
2. Equipment And Method Of Installation: All tie down equipment and method of installation shall
be shown to be in compliance with the tie down standards adopted by the department.
To aid in compliance with the specifications set forth herein, table 1, figures 1, 2 and 3, and
exhibits A and B are attached to the ordinance codified herein as pictorial instructions to those
regulations hereunder.
(B) Placement On Piers: Every mobile home shall be immobilized and placed on piers to provide
adequate support therefor.
1. Piers, Less Than Forty Inches In Height: Piers less than forty inches (40") in height shall be
constructed of open or closed cell, eight inch by eight inch by sixteen inch (8" x 8" x 16"),
concrete blocks (if open celled, vertically placed upon the footer). Single stacked block piers
shall be installed with the sixteen inch (16") dimensions perpendicular to the main I-beam frame.
The piers shall be covered with a two inch by eight inch by sixteen inch (2" x 8" x 16") wood or
concrete cap, as shown in figure 1, attached to the ordinance codified herein.
2. Piers, Forty To Eighty Inches In Height: Piers between forty inches (40") and eighty inches (80")
in height, and all corner piers over three (3) blocks high, shall be double blocked with blocks
interlocked and capped with a four inch by sixteen inch by sixteen inch (4" x 16" x 16") solid
concrete block or equivalent, as shown in figure 2, attached to the ordinance codified herein.
3. Piers, Over Eighty Inches In Height: Piers over eighty inches (80") in height shall be constructed
as per figure 1, attached to the ordinance codified herein, and shall be laid in concrete mortar
and steel reinforcing bars with block cells filled with concrete as shown in figure 3, attached to
the ordinance codified herein.
4. Plates And Shims: A cushion of a wood plate not exceeding two inches (2") in thickness and
shims not exceeding one inch (1") in thickness may be used to fill any gap between the top of
the pier and the main frame. Two inch (2") or four inch (4") solid concrete blocks may be used to
fill the remainder of any gap. Shims shall be at least four inches (4") wide and six inches (6")
long and shall be driven tight between the wood plate or pier and main frame.
5. Types Of Piers: Other types of piers and foundations of equivalent permanence and weight
bearing ability, such as a heavy metal adjustable column anchored to both frame and foundation
or other adequate metal piers are also acceptable.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 390/396
6. Pier Spacing: Piers shall be centered under each main frame (or chassis) member with a
maximum spacing of ten feet (10') on centers. The end piers shall be no farther than five feet (5')
from the ends of the mobile home.
7. Footers: Footers shall be at least sixteen inch by sixteen inch by four inch (16" x 16" x 4") solid
concrete blocks or other products approved for the use intended, such as jacks to jack up the
home on soil with high bearing capacity or prepoured footing pads. As an alternate, two (2) eight
inch by sixteen inch by four inch (8" x 16" x 4") solid concrete blocks can be used as footers,
provided the joint between the blocks is parallel to the steel I-beam frame.
(C) Tie Downs:
1. All mobile homes shall have frame tie downs and top ties installed in accordance with table 1,
section 13-4-4 of this chapter, using either method 1 or method 2. Only diagonal frame ties are
required for doublewide mobile homes. Ties shall be evenly spaced as practicable (evenly and
uniformly spaced, not put over a window or a door - refer to table 1 of this chapter) along the
length of the mobile home, with not more than five feet (5') open end spacing on each end.
2. Over the top tiers or baling straps shall pass over the top at the stud and rafter location near
each end of the mobile home. Over the top tie downs may be installed under the skin at the
factory or may be installed over the skin at the mobile home site. They may use the same
anchors as the end frame tie downs.
3. Clerestory roofs require over the top tie downs at each end of the raised portion in addition to
those stipulated above.
4. All tie downs shall be fastened to ground anchors as described in exhibit A, attached to the
ordinance codified herein, and be drawn tight with one-half inch (1/2") or larger galvanized, drop
forged turnbuckles or other equivalent tensioning device (refer to exhibit A, attached to the
ordinance codified herein). Turnbuckles shall be ended with jaws or forged or welded eyes.
Turnbuckles with hook ends are not approved because the tension will cause the hook end to
yield and open up, losing the effect of the tie down.
5. When the cable is used for ties it shall be of either galvanized steel or stainless steel for strength
and wear purposes. The steel cable shall be three-eighths inch (3/8") diameter (7 x 7 - strands of
7 wires each) or larger, or one-fourth inch (1/4") diameter (7 x 19 - 7 strands of 19 wires each
called "aircraft cable") or larger. Criteria to evaluate - refer to subsection (C)7 of this section.
6. All cable ends shall be secured with at least two (2) U-bolt type clamps or other fastening device
as approved by the department.
7. When flat steel strapping is used, it must be in accordance with federal specifications QQ-S-781,
i.e., 11/4" x 0.35", type 1, class B, grade 1. Zinc coating must be a minimum of 0.03 ounces per
square foot of surface. Edges of strapping must be equally zinc coated. Breaking strength must
be a minimum of four thousand seven hundred twenty five (4,725) pounds. Any other material
shall be at least equal to the above specifications in tensile strength and weather resistance.
8. Steel bands used for ties must terminate with a D-ring, bolt or other device that will not cause
distortion of the band. A tensioning device should be supplied to tighten down securely a part of
the equipment sold to the mobile home owner.
9. Sharp edges of the mobile home that would tend to cut the cable or strap (in over the top, on
site installation) when the home is buffeted by the wind, must be protected by a thimble (refer to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 391/396
exhibit A, attached to the ordinance codified herein) or other device that will prevent such
cutting.
10. Connection of a cable frame tie down to the I-beam should be by a five-eighths inch (5/8") drop
forged closed eye, bolted through a hole drilled through the beam. A washer, or equivalent,
should be used so that the beam is sufficiently fishplated around the hole (refer to exhibit A,
attached to the ordinance codified herein). If steel strapping is used, it may be secured around
the I-beam using an appropriate connecting device. Care should be exercised to ensure that the
minimum bending radius is adhered to, so that the breaking strength of the strapping is not
reduced.
11. Other connectors of equivalent holding power and permanence are acceptable.
12. Ties shall not connect to steel outriggers, unless specifically stated in the manufacturer's
installation instructions (refer to table 1, section 13-4-4 of this chapter).
(D) Anchors:
1. Ground anchors shall be spaced evenly along the length of the home (refer to table 1, section
13-4-4 of this chapter). They should also be situated immediately below the outer wall, so as to
accommodate over the top tie downs if this placement allows for sufficient angle for the anchor
to frame connection.
2. Anchor rod shall be of five-eighths inch (5/8") minimum diameter steel with a forged eye, welded
eye, or approved tensioning head at the top.
3. When auger anchors are used, the augers shall be of minimum diameter of six inches (6"), and
shall be sunk to a depth of at least four feet (4').
4. When arrowhead anchors are used, the arrowheads shall be sunk to a depth of at least four feet
(4').
5. When frame ties are used alone, concrete shall be placed around the anchor, forming an eight
inch (8") cylinder unless the anchor is designed and installed to resist an applied load of three
thousand one hundred fifty (3,150) pounds at forty five degrees (45) from horizontal without
displacing the anchor more than four inches (4") horizontally at the point where the tie attaches
to the anchor.
6. When deadman anchors are used, the bottom of the rod shall be hooked into the concrete. Rod
ends bent into hooks shall have a maximum inside bending radius of three-eighths inch (3/8")
and the hook shall be at least four inches (4") in length. Deadman anchors shall have a
minimum vertical dimension of two feet (2') and a diameter of at least six inches (6"). They shall
be sunk to a depth of at least five feet (5').
7. Anchors to reinforce concrete slabs supporting the mobile home must be of strength comparable
to above.
(E) Cabanas And Awnings: Cabanas and awnings shall be secured to the ground by two (2) rows of
support bars (maximum spacing of 12 feet). The first row should be attached to the outermost
edge of the auxiliary structure, and the second row can be either down the middle or at the mobile
home edge of the structure. The posts must be adequately secured to the roof and the concrete
patio or equivalent footing.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 392/396
(F) Soil Test: It is assumed that the ground on which the mobile home is situated will support two
thousand (2,000) pounds per square foot. Anchoring specifications assume normal soil, but pull
out and soil tests may be made to be certain that the anchorage specified herein will hold three
hundred seventy five (375) pounds of pull per foot of mobile home to be held.
(G) Frost Heave: Frost heave can have an adverse effect on the mobile home through displacement
of the mobile home anchoring and blocking system. If a mobile home is located in an area subject
to frost heave, one of the following additional steps should be considered:
1. Periodic maintenance should be achieved by the homeowner through adjustment of tie down
tension to ensure that tension does not build up because of earth movement; or
2. Footers and the load carrying portion of the ground anchors should extend below frost line; or
3. The mobile home shall be placed on a reinforced concrete pad.
4. Method 2 using baling straps is recommended to alleviate the frost heave problem. (Ord. 185, 2-
16-1981, eff. 3-2-1981; amd. Ord. 1126, 8-4-2008)
13-4-4: TABLES, FIGURES AND EXHIBITS:
See table 1 below and ordinance 185 on file in the city clerk's office for figures and exhibits applicable
to this chapter.
TABLE 1
NUMBER OF TIES REQUIRED PER SIDE OF SINGLE WIDE MOBILE HOMES
Method 1
Method 2
(Optional)
Length Of Mobile Home
(Feet)
Number Of Diagonal
Ties
Number Of Baling
Straps
Number Of Diagonal
Ties
32 - 54 3 2 3
55 - 64 4 2 4
65 - 73 4 2 5
74 - 83 5 2 5
NOTE: Over the top or baling straps are not required.
CAUTION: See subsection 13-4-3(G), "Frost Heave", of this chapter.
All ground anchors shall be encased in concrete unless the anchor is shown to be in compliance
with subsection 13-4-3(C)5 of this chapter.
(Ord. 185, 2-16-1981, eff. 3-2-1981; amd. Ord. 1126, 8-4-2008)
Chapter 5
FAIR HOUSING
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 393/396
13-5-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the FAIR HOUSING ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF
CLINTON, ILLINOIS. (Ord. 456, 3-6-1989)
13-5-2: PURPOSE AND DECLARATION OF POLICY:
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city and the purpose of this chapter, in the exercise by the
city of its police and regulatory powers for the protection of the public safety, for the health, morals,
safety, and welfare of the persons in and residing in the city, and for the maintenance and promotion
of commerce, industry, and good government in the city, to secure to all persons living and desiring to
live in the city a fair opportunity to purchase, lease, rent or occupy housing without discrimination
based on race, color, religion, national origin, familial status or physical or mental handicaps. (Ord.
1010, 5-16-2005)
13-5-3: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held
invalid, the remainder of the chapter and the application of the provision to other persons not similarly
situated or to other circumstances shall not be affected thereby. (Ord. 456, 3-6-1989)
13-5-4: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter:
DWELLING: Any building or structure, or portion thereof, within the city of Clinton, which is arranged,
designed or used as a home, residence or living quarters of one or more individuals.
HOUSING: Includes any building or structure, or portion thereof, within the city of Clinton, which is
used or occupied or is intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied as the home, residence
or living quarters of one or more individuals, groups or families, and includes any vacant land within
the city of Clinton which is zoned and intended to be used for the construction of any such building or
structure.
LEASE: Includes sublease, assignment, and rent (or rental), and includes any contract to do any of
the foregoing.
NATIONAL ORIGIN: Includes the national origin of an ancestor.
OWNER: Any person who holds legal or equitable title to, or owns any beneficial interest in, any
dwelling or housing, or who holds legal or equitable title to shares of, or holds any beneficial interest
in, any real estate cooperative which owns any dwelling or housing.
PERSON: Includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, legal
representatives, mutual companies, unincorporated organizations, trusts, trustees, trustees in
bankruptcy, receivers and fiduciaries.
PURCHASE: Includes any contract to purchase.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 394/396
REAL ESTATE AGENT: Any real estate broker, any real estate salesman, and any other person who,
as employee or agent or otherwise, engages in the management or operation of any dwelling or
housing.
REAL ESTATE BROKER: Any person licensed as a real estate broker in accordance with the
provisions of 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes, or required thereby to be so licensed.
REAL ESTATE SALESMAN: Any person licensed as a real estate salesman in accordance with the
provisions of 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes, or required thereby to be so licensed.
REAL ESTATE TRANSACTION: The purchase, sale, exchange, or lease of any dwelling or housing,
and an option to do any of the foregoing.
SALE: Includes any contract to sell, exchange, or to convey, transfer or assign legal or equitable title
to or a beneficial interest in real estate. (Ord. 456, 3-6-1989)
13-5-5: DISCRIMINATION:
It shall be an unlawful housing practice and a violation of this chapter for any owner, real estate agent
or other person to do any of the following: (Ord. 456, 3-6-1989)
(A) Discriminatory Terms: Sell or lease a dwelling or housing on terms, conditions or privileges that
discriminate between persons because of race, color, religion, national origin, familial status, or
physical or mental handicaps. (Ord. 1010, 5-16-2005)
(B) Refusals To Deal: Refuse to negotiate for, enter into, or perform any sale or lease of any dwelling
or housing, because of the race, color, religion, national origin, familial status, or physical or mental
handicaps of any party to such sale or lease, or of any member of the family of any such party, or
of any person using or occupying or intending to use or occupy such dwelling or housing, or of any
person using or occupying any dwelling or housing in the area in which such dwelling or housing is
located.
(C) Withholding Housing: Represent to any person that any dwelling or housing is not available for
inspection, purchase, sale, lease, or occupancy when in fact it is so available, or otherwise to
withhold housing from any person because of race, color, religion, national origin, familial status, or
physical or mental handicaps. (Ord. 456, 3-6-1989; amd. Ord. 1010, 5-16-2005)
(D) Advertisements: Publish or circulate a statement, advertisement or notice of an intention to sell or
lease any dwelling or housing in a manner that is unlawful under this chapter.
(E) Signs And Notices: Post or erect, or cause any person to post or erect, any sign or notice upon
any dwelling or housing, indicating an intent to sell or lease any dwelling or housing in a manner
that is unlawful under this chapter. (Ord. 456, 3-6-1989)
13-5-6: EXEMPTIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 395/396
This chapter shall not apply to the rental of any room or dwelling unit in any owner occupied dwelling
which consists of more than one but less than five (5) dwelling units. As used herein, the term
"dwelling unit" means one or more rooms which are arranged, designed, or used as living quarters for
one family or one individual. The term "owner" includes the spouse or any lineal descendant or
ancestor of the owner. (Ord. 456, 3-6-1989)
13-5-7: LIMITATIONS:
Nothing in this chapter shall require an owner to offer property to the public at large before selling or
renting it, providing he complies with all other provisions of this chapter. Nor shall this chapter be
deemed to prohibit owners from giving preference to prospective tenants or buyers for any reason
other than religion, race, color, national origin, familial status or physical or mental handicaps. Nothing
in this chapter shall require an owner to offer property for sale or lease or to show his property to any
person if such person is not negotiating for the purchase or lease of such property in good faith. (Ord.
1010, 5-16-2005)
13-5-8: WITHHOLDING HOUSING:
It shall be an unlawful housing practice and a violation of this chapter for any real estate agent or other
person to: (Ord. 456, 3-6-1989)
(A) Availability; Withholding Housing: Represent to any person that any dwelling or housing is not
available for inspection, sale, lease or occupancy, or otherwise to withhold housing from any
person because of race, color, religion, national origin, familial status or physical or mental
handicaps.
(B) Refusals Of Offers: To refuse to receive or to fail to transmit a bona fide offer for the purchase,
sale, exchange or lease of any dwelling or housing because of the race, color, religion, national
origin, familial status or physical or mental handicaps of the person making such offer. (Ord. 1010,
5-16-2005)
(C) Advertisements: Publish or circulate a statement, advertisement or notice of an intention to sell or
lease any dwelling or housing in a manner that is unlawful under this chapter.
(D) Signs And Notices: Post or erect, or cause or permit any person to post or erect, any sign or notice
upon any dwelling or housing, managed by or in the custody, care or control of such real estate
agent or other person, indicating an intent to sell or lease any dwelling or housing in a manner that
is unlawful under this chapter. (Ord. 456, 3-6-1989)
13-5-9: OTHER VIOLATIONS:
It shall be an unlawful housing practice and a violation of this chapter for any person:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=624 396/396
(A) To aid, abet, incite, or coerce a person to engage in an unlawful housing practice,
(B) Wilfully to interfere with the performance of a duty or the exercise of a power by the city council or
one of its members or representatives, or
(C) Wilfully to obstruct or prevent a person from complying with the provision of this chapter or an
order issued thereunder. (Ord. 456, 3-6-1989)
13-5-10: FINES:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a fine not less than five
dollars ($5.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 456, 3-6-1989)