MUNICIPAL CODE OF CALUMET CITY, ILLINOIS 
____________ 
GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY 
____________ 
Published by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
 
> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF CALUMET CITY, ILLINOIS 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Michelle Markiewicz Qualkinbush 
Mayor 
____________ 
Edward Gonzalez, 1st Ward 
Magdalena Wosczynski, 2nd Ward 
Thaddeus Jones, 3rd Ward 
Louise A. Muszynski, 4th Ward 
Gerry Tarka, 5th Ward 
Nikolaos Manousopoulos, 6th Ward 
Cynthia M. Pallick, 7th Ward 
Aldermen 
____________ 
Gloria L. Dooley 
City Clerk 
____________ 
Michael J. Zimmerman 
City Treasurer 
____________ 
Burton S. Odelson 
City Attorney 
CURRENT 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF CALUMET CITY, ILLINOIS 
____________ 
Michelle Markiewicz Qualkinbush 
Mayor 
____________ 
Eric Schneider, 1st Ward 
Magdalena Wosczynski, 2nd Ward 
Thaddeus Jones, 3rd Ward 
Ramonde Williams, 4th Ward 
Roger Munda, 5th Ward 
Nikolaos Manousopoulos, 6th Ward 
Antoine Collins, 7th Ward 
Aldermen 
____________ 
Nyota T. Figgs 
City Clerk 
____________ 
Gerald A. Tarka 
City Treasurer 
____________ 
Burton S. Odelson 
City Attorney 
PREFACE 
This Code is a recodification of the 1980 Municipal Code of Calumet City, Illinois, containing ordinances of a general and permanent nature. As expressed in the Adopting Ordinance, the Code supersedes all such ordinances not included therein or recognized as continuing in force by reference thereto. 
The chapters of the Code are arranged in alphabetical order and the sections within each chapter are catchlined to facilitate usage. Footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant provisions of the state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations setting forth their location within the Code volume is included at the back of this volume. The source of each section is indicated by the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the Comparative Table also appearing in the back of the volume, any ordinance included herein can be readily found in the code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and municipal codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash representing the chapter number and the figure after the dash indicating the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-1 and the fourteenth section of Chapter 20 is 20-14. Under this system each section is identified with its chapter and, at the same time, new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper places, simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three sections that would logically come between Sections 4-4 and 4-5 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 4-4.1, 4-4.2 and 4-4.3, respectively. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation representing a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
 
Index 
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by municipal officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this Code is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental service, by which the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to the holders of the Code with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. Each such amendment, when incorporated into the Code, may be cited as a part thereof, as provided in the Adopting Ordinance. 
The successful maintenance of this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
The publication of this Code was under the direct supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Senior Code Attorney, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publishers are most grateful to Mr. Burton N. Odelson, City Attorney, and Sara Gadola (editor of the Code) for their cooperation and interest during the progress of the work on this Code. 
This Code is presented for the use and benefit of the citizens of the City of Calumet City, Illinois. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Calumet City, Illinois. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; pre-chapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Calumet City, Illinois. 
© Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Calumet City, Illinois. 2004. 
ORDINANCE NO. 04-18 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF CALUMET CITY, ILLINOIS; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF CALUMET CITY, ILLINOIS: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Municipal Code of Calumet City, Illinois," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 98, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before December 29, 2003, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to review any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $750.00 or incarceration in a penal institution other than the state penitentiary for a period of not to exceed six months. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after December 29, 2003, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall before effective upon passage, approval and publication as provided by law. 
Passed this 10th day of May, A.D. 2004. 
Approved by me this 10th day of May, A.D. 2004. 
	/s/   
      Mayor 
 	 
ATTEST: 
/s/   
      City Clerk 	
 	 
 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Municipal Code of Calumet City, Illinois," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1980, § 1-1) 
State Law reference— Revision and codification of ordinances, 65 ILCS 5/1-2-3 et seq.  
Sec. 1-2. - Rules of construction and definitions. 
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the rules and definitions set out in this section shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council. The rules of construction and definitions set out herein shall not be applied to any section of this Code which shall contain any express provision excluding such construction, or where the subject matter or context of such section may be repugnant thereto. 
Generally. All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the city council may be fully carried out. Terms used in this Code, unless otherwise specifically provided, shall have the meanings prescribed by the statutes of the state for the same terms. 
In the interpretation and application of any provisions of this Code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
Aldermen shall refer to the elected members of the city council. 
City shall mean the City of Calumet City, Illinois. 
City council, council shall be construed to mean the city council of the City of Calumet City, Illinois. 
Code. The term "Code" or "this Code" shall mean the Code of Ordinances, City of Calumet City, Illinois. 
Computation of time. The time within which any act provided by this Code or other city ordinance is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless the last day is Saturday or Sunday or is a holiday as defined or fixed in any statute now or hereafter enforced in this state, and then it shall also be excluded. If the day succeeding such Saturday, Sunday or holiday is also a holiday or a Saturday or Sunday, then such succeeding day shall also be excluded. 
Corporate limits or city limits shall mean the legal boundaries of the City of Calumet City. 
County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean the County of Cook in the State of Illinois. 
Court shall mean the circuit court of Cook County. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or some other city officer to do some act or perform some duty, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department or other officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section specify otherwise. 
Electors shall mean persons qualified to vote for elective officers at municipal elections. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
Mayor shall mean the mayor of the city. 
Month shall mean a calendar month. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. The use of the plural number shall be deemed to include any single person or thing. 
Oath shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Officers generally. Whenever any officer is referred to by title, such as "clerk," "engineer," "chief of police," etc., such reference shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the City of Calumet City." 
Ordinances shall mean the ordinances of the City of Calumet City and all amendments thereto. 
Owner, applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person shall extend and be applied to associations, trusts, firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to individuals. Whenever the word "person" is used in any section prescribing a penalty or fine as applied to partnerships or associations, the word shall include the partners or members thereof; and as applied to corporations, the word shall include officers, agents or employees thereof who are responsible for any violation of the section. 
Personal property shall include every species of property except real property, as herein defined. 
Preceding, following shall mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Property shall include real and personal property. 
Real property shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Shall is mandatory. 
Sidewalk shall mean a walk for pedestrians at the side of a street. 
Signature or subscription shall include a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Illinois. 
Street shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, courts, roads, alleys, lanes, parkways, thoroughfares, viaducts and all other public ways in the city, and shall include all areas thereof embraced between the property lines and dedicated to the public use. 
Tenant or occupant, applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Wholesale, wholesaler, etc. In all cases where the term "wholesale," "wholesaler," or "wholesale dealer" is used in this Code, unless otherwise specifically defined, it shall be understood and held to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in quantity to persons who purchase for purposes of resale, as distinguished from a retail dealer who sells in smaller quantities direct to the consumer. 
Written or in writing shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year shall mean a calendar year. 
(Code 1980, § 1-2) 
State Law reference— Similar rules of statutory construction, 5 ILCS 5/70/0.01 et seq.  
Sec. 1-3. - Jurisdiction of Code. 
This Code shall apply to all acts performed within the corporate limits of the city. Provisions of this Code shall also apply to acts performed outside the corporate limits, but within the territorial limits where state statutes confer power on the city to regulate such particular acts outside the corporate limits. 
(Code 1980, § 1-3) 
State Law reference— Territorial jurisdiction of municipalities, 65 ILCS 5/7-4-1 et seq.  
Sec. 1-4. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1980, § 1-4)  
Sec. 1-5. - Amendments to Code. 
All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein, or in the case of the repeal chapters, sections and subsections (or any part thereof), by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time as this Code of Ordinances and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code of ordinances by the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 1-5)  
Sec. 1-6. - Unauthorized alteration or tampering with Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. 
(Code 1980, § 1-6)  
Sec. 1-7. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision shall be itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive such former ordinance, clause or provision unless it shall be therein so expressly provided. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1980, § 1-7)  
Sec. 1-8. - Severability of parts of Code. 
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 1-8)  
Sec. 1-9. - Publication of Code. 
This Code shall be, and the same is hereby, authorized to be printed and published in book form, by authority of the corporate authorities. 
(Code 1980, § 1-10)  
Sec. 1-10. - Custody, distribution of Code copies. 
All the printed books containing this Code shall be deposited with the city clerk. He shall deliver one copy thereof to each officer of the city, to each alderman and to such other persons as the council may direct. The mayor or city clerk or city attorney shall have the power to extend or to reciprocate courtesies of other municipal corporations by presenting to them a copy of this Code, in such manner as to him may seem suitable. Copies of this Code shall be offered for sale by the city clerk at a price to be determined by the city council from time to time by ordinance. 
(Code 1980, § 1-11)  
Sec. 1-11. - General penalty for violation of Code; continuing violations; commitment. 
Except as otherwise provided by state law, whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or a misdemeanor, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or a misdemeanor or is prohibited, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any ordinance is hereby declared to be a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) or incarceration in a penal institution other than the state penitentiary for a period not to exceed six (6) months, or both. Each day any violation of any provision of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1980, § 1-12; Ord. No. 99-38, § 1, 6-24-99) 
State Law reference— Limitation on penalties, 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1; power to imprison, 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1.1.  
Sec. 1-12. - Officers, employees not liable to fine for failure to perform duties. 
No provision of this Code designating the duties of any city officer or employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine or penalty provided in this Code for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of the city council to impose such a fine or penalty on such officer or employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. 
(Code 1980, § 1-13)  
Sec. 1-13. - Acts punishable under different sections. 
In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of this Code, the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for same offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced. 
(Code 1980, § 1-14)  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration and enforcement of building code, § 14-41 et seq.; administration and enforcement of electrical code, § 14-161 et seq.; administration and enforcement of plumbing code, § 14-481 et seq.; administration and enforcement of housing code, § 14-571 et seq.; administration and enforcement of swimming pools, § 14-811 et seq.; community development, ch. 18; human relations, ch. 42; law enforcement, ch. 46; library, ch. 50; planning, ch. 66; administration and enforcement of signs, § 70-51 et seq.; taxation, ch. 82; administration and enforcement of traffic and vehicles, § 90-41 et seq.; utilities, ch. 94; administration of zoning, app. B, § XII. 
State Law reference— Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/1-1-1 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-1. - Fees for copies of public records or documents; collection. 
(a)  The following fees are hereby established for copies of the following public records or documents: 
Written document or record, per page ..... $0.25 
Oversized copy, per page ..... $2.00 
Microfiche copy, per page ..... $2.00 
Photograph, per photograph ..... $5.00 
Copy of videotape ..... Actual cost 
Copy of audiotape ..... Actual cost 
Certification ..... No charge 
Fire or police department report, per report ..... $5.00 
Police department domestic violence packet ..... No charge 
Police department fingerprinting, two cards ..... $15.00 
Police department impound record (all police-initiated tows) ..... $10.00 
Police department record search, per hour ..... $10.00 
Police department reproduction of voice log, first 20 minutes ..... $50.00 
Each additional minute ..... $1.00 
(b)  All fees for copies of public records or documents shall be collected by the city clerk acting as city collector except those fees received by the police department for police reports which shall be promptly remitted to the city collector and a proper accounting made thereof. 
(c)  Fees for copies of public records or documents that total fifty dollars ($50.00) or more shall be paid in advance. 
(Code 1980, § 2-4; Ord. No. 79-4, § 1, 2-8-1979; Ord. No. 85-25, § 1, 7-11-1985; Ord. No. 90-5, § 1, 2-8-1990; Ord. No. 98-68, § 1, 11-5-1998; Ord. No. 09-14, § 2, 4-23-2009)  
Sec. 2-2. - Numbering of ordinances and resolutions. 
Every ordinance and resolution passed by the city council and approved by the mayor shall be numbered by the city clerk by affixing thereto the term "ordinance number" or "resolution number," as appropriate, and the last two (2) digits of the year in which it was approved by the mayor and then followed by a dash and a number which represents the number of ordinances or resolutions, as appropriate, which have been approved by the mayor in that particular year. Ordinances and resolutions shall be separately numbered. 
(Code 1980, § 2-2; Ord. of 7-24-1975, § 1)  
Sec. 2-3. - Record of ordinances. 
All ordinances passed by the city council shall be consecutively numbered and recorded by the city clerk in a proper book or books with indexes. The original shall be filed in the office of the clerk and due proof of publication of all ordinances requiring publication shall be procured by the clerk, and such proof or affidavit of publications shall be attached to and filed with each such ordinance. The clerk shall also note on his book of ordinances, at the foot of the record of each ordinance, a memorandum of the date of the passage, and if published or posted, the date of the publication or posting of such ordinance. 
(Code 1980, § 1-9)  
Secs. 2-4—2-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - MAYOR 
 
Sec. 2-31. - Election. 
The mayor shall be elected for a four-year term and shall serve until his successor is elected and qualified as is provided by statute. 
(Code 1970, § 1.001; Code 1980, § 2-119)  
Sec. 2-32. - Duties. 
The mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the city, shall preside over the meetings of the council, and shall perform such duties as may be required of him by statute or ordinance. He shall have supervision over all of the executive officers and employees of the city, and shall have the power and authority to inspect all books and records pertaining to city affairs and kept by any officer or employee of the city at any reasonable time. 
(Code 1970, § 1.002; Code 1980, § 2-120)  
Sec. 2-33. - Appointment of officers. 
The mayor shall appoint, by and with the advice and consent of the city council, all officers of the city whose election or appointment is not otherwise provided for. Any vacancies occurring in an appointive office shall be filled in the same manner. 
(Code 1970, § 1.003; Code 1980, § 2-121)  
Sec. 2-34. - Designation of officers' duties. 
Whenever there is a dispute as to the respective duties or powers of any appointed officer of the city, this dispute shall be settled by the mayor after consultation with the city attorney; and the mayor shall have the power to delegate to any appointed officer any duty which is to be performed when no specific officer has been directed to perform that duty. 
(Code 1970, § 1.004; Code 1980, § 2-122)  
Sec. 2-35. - Acting mayor. 
In the event of a vacancy in the office of mayor, the council may appoint one of the members as acting mayor to serve until the vacancy is filled at a regular or special election as provided by law. 
(Code 1970, § 1.004; Code 1980, § 2-123)  
Sec. 2-36. - Formal occasions. 
The mayor shall act for and on behalf of the city on formal occasions and receptions; but in his absence or inability to attend any such function, the council may select any other city officer to so act. 
(Code 1970, § 1.005; Code 1980, § 2-124)  
Sec. 2-37. - Bond. 
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the mayor shall execute a bond in such amount and with such sureties as may be required by the council, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of his office, provided the amount of such bond shall not be less than three thousand dollars ($3,000.00). 
(Code 1970, § 1.006; Code 1980, § 2-125)  
Sec. 2-38. - Salary. 
The persons elected to the office of mayor in the year 1969 and subsequent years shall receive an annual salary of twelve thousand dollars ($12,000.00). All salaries shall be paid in equal monthly installments, unless provision is made to the contrary, by the council. The city treasurer shall prepare a payroll list monthly which, when signed by the mayor, city clerk and city treasurer, shall authorize the issuance of checks for the salaries indicated to be due. Deductions as provided by law shall be made for pension funds, social security, withholding (income tax) and insurance. 
(Code 1970, § 1.007; Code 1980, § 2-126)  
Secs. 2-39—2-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CITY COUNCIL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Powers of corporate authorities generally, 65 ILCS 5/11-1-1 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-61. - Composition. 
The city council shall consist of the mayor and aldermen. 
(Code 1980, § 2-48) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-5.  
Sec. 2-62. - Regular meetings. 
The city council shall meet every second and fourth Thursday of the month. When this Thursday is a holiday, the meeting shall be held on the Wednesday preceding, unless otherwise provided for by motion. The place of meeting shall be in the council chambers in the municipal building. The time of the meetings shall be 8:00 p.m., except in the case of an emergency. 
(Code 1980, § 2-49; Ord. of 1-20-1964, § 1) 
State Law reference— Power of council to provide by ordinance for meeting times, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-25; meetings on legal holidays, 5 ILCS 120/2.01.  
Sec. 2-63. - Special meetings; calling; scope; notice. 
Special meetings of the city council may be called by three (3) or more aldermen, or by the mayor. The city clerk shall receive a request from those calling the meeting for a special meeting in writing, stating time, place and purpose. No business may be transacted at a special meeting except that for which it is called. The city clerk shall prepare a notice of the special meeting stating time, place and purpose. This notice shall be delivered to each alderman or left at his place of residence, at least twenty-four (24) hours before the time of the meeting. The mayor or the three (3) aldermen calling the meeting may request that a return receipt be demanded at the time the notice is delivered. In addition, such public notice as is required by state law shall be given. 
(Code 1980, § 2-50; Ord. of 1-20-1964, § 2) 
State Law reference— Power of mayor or three aldermen to call special meeting of council, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-25; notice of meeting, 5 ILCS 120/2.02.  
Sec. 2-64. - Adjourned meetings. 
A regular or special meeting of the city council may be adjourned to a later date, but not beyond the date of the next regular council meeting. The council may consider any transaction at an adjourned meeting which could have been considered at the meeting so adjourned. After a meeting is adjourned, no further legal action can be taken by the council. If it is desired to continue a meeting to a later time that day, a motion to recess should be made. Upon reconvening a meeting after a recess a roll call should be called again. 
(Code 1980, § 2-51; Ord. of 1-20-1964, § 3)  
Sec. 2-65. - Salary. 
(a)  The persons elected to the office of alderman on or after April 19, 1977, shall receive as compensation the sum of one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) for each meeting of the city council attended. Aldermen are allowed two (2) absences in each fiscal year for which compensation shall be paid at the rate herein provided. 
(b)  An alderman may miss more than two (2) meetings per year and still receive payment at the rate herein set; provided said alderman can show due cause for such additional absence, such as illness of the alderman, serious illness of a member of the alderman's immediate family, a death in the alderman's immediate family, or other like cause. 
(c)  Payments of the compensation herein provided shall be paid semimonthly, and deductions made as provided by law for pension funds, social security, withholding (income tax) and the like. 
(Code 1980, § 2-52; Ord. No. 77-12, §§ 1—4, 3-17-1977)  
Secs. 2-66—2-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - WARDS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Wards generally, 65 ILCS 5/3-4-7 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-81. - Wards created—Basis—Redistricting. 
The city is hereby divided into seven wards and redistricted as provided in this division. 
As soon as practicable following the national decennial census, the city council shall redistrict the city on the basis of such census. In the formation of wards in such redistricting, as nearly as practicable, each ward shall be compact, contiguous, and of substantially equal population with an acceptable deviation to respect established communities of interest or to achieve other legally valid and permissible objectives. 
First Ward. The First Ward shall be all that portion of the city bounded as follows: 
See Attachment A. 
Second Ward. The Second Ward shall be all that portion of the city bounded as follows: 
See Attachment A. 
Third Ward. The Third Ward shall be all that portion of the city bounded as follows: 
See Attachment A. 
Fourth Ward. The Fourth Ward shall be all that portion of the city bounded as follows: 
See Attachment A. 
Fifth Ward. The Fifth Ward shall be all that portion of the City bounded as follows: 
See Attachment A. 
Sixth Ward. The Sixth Ward shall be all that portion of the city bounded as follows: 
See Attachment A. 
Seventh Ward. The Seventh Ward shall be all that portion of the city bounded as follows: 
See Attachment A. 
Map of Ward Boundaries. For the purpose of more definitely fixing the boundaries of said wards of the city, there will be published an outline map of the city showing the boundaries of said wards as herein before described and the same is made a part of this Code. 
Attachment A 
First Ward: Beginning at the point where the northern boundary of the city meets the centerline of State Line Road proceeding west to the centerline of the Burnham Greenway Trail formerly known as the Pennsylvania railroad tracks then south along the centerline of the Burnham Greenway Trail to the centerline of Sibley Boulevard, then east along the centerline of Sibley Boulevard to the centerline of the alley between Mackinaw and Greenbay, then south along the centerline of the alley between Mackinaw and Greenbay to the center line of Pulaski Road then west along the centerline of Pulaski Road to the center line of May Street, then east along the center line of 155th Street to the centerline of Burnham Avenue, then proceeding north along the centerline Burnham Avenue to the centerline of Pulaski Road, then proceeding east along the centerline of Pulaski Road to the centerline of State Line Road, then north along the centerline of State Line Road to the point of beginning. 
Second Ward: Beginning at the point where the northern boundary of the city meets the centerline of the Burnham Greenway Trail formerly known as the Pennsylvania Railroad tracks then proceeding west along the centerline of State Street to the centerline of Torrence Avenue, then south along the centerline of Torrence to the centerline of Stewart Avenue, then west along the centerline of Stewart Avenue to the centerline of Yates Avenue, then south along the centerline of Yates Avenue to the centerline of 153rd Street, then east along the centerline of 153rd Street to the centerline of Torrence Avenue, then south along the centerline of Torrence Avenue to the centerline of Pulaski Road (154th Street), then east along the centerline of Pulaski Road (154th Street) to the centerline of the Burnham Greenway Trail, then north along the centerline of the Burnham Greenway Trail to the point of beginning. 
Third Ward: Beginning at the point where the northern boundary of the city meets the centerline of Yates Avenue, then proceeding west along the northern boundary of the city to the centerline of the Calumet Expressway, then south along the centerline of the Calumet Expressway to the centerline of Wilson Avenue, then east along the centerline of Wilson Avenue to the centerline of Jeffrey Avenue, then north along the centerline of Jeffrey Avenue to the centerline of Sibley Boulevard, then east along the centerline of Sibley Boulevard to the centerline of Luella Avenue, then north along the centerline of Luella Avenue to the centerline of Stewart Avenue, then east along the centerline of Stewart Avenue to the centerline of Crandon Avenue, then north along the centerline of Crandon Avenue to the centerline of State Street, then east along the centerline of State Street to the centerline of Yates Avenue, then north along the centerline of Yates Avenue to the point of beginning. 
Fourth Ward: Beginning at the point where the centerline of State Street meets the centerline of Crandon Avenue, then proceeding south along the centerline of Crandon Avenue to the centerline of Stewart Avenue, then proceeding west along the centerline of Stewart Avenue to the centerline of Luella Avenue, then south along the centerline of Luella Avenue to the centerline of Sibley Boulevard, then west along the centerline of Sibley Boulevard to the centerline of Jeffrey Avenue, then south along the centerline of Jeffrey Avenue to the centerline of Pulaski Road (154th Street), then east along the centerline of Pulaski Road (154th Street) to the irregular western boundary of the city, then proceeding along the irregular western boundary of the city to the point where it intersects River Oaks Drive, then east along the centerline of River Oaks Drive to the centerline of Torrence Avenue, then north along the centerline of Torrence Avenue to the centerline of Michigan City Road, then west along the centerline of Michigan City Road to the centerline of Pulaski Road (154th Street), then east along the centerline of Pulaski Road (154th Street) to the centerline of Yates Avenue, then north along the centerline of Yates Avenue to the centerline of Stewart Avenue, then east along the centerline of Stewart Avenue to the centerline of Torrence Avenue, then north along the centerline of Torrence Avenue to State Street, then west along the centerline of State Street to the centerline of Crandon Avenue, which is the point of beginning. 
Fifth Ward: Beginning at the point where the centerline of Pulaski Road meets the centerline of State Line Road, then proceeding west along the centerline of Pulaski Road (154th Street) to the centerline of Burnham Avenue, then south along the centerline of Burnham Avenue to the centerline of 155th Street, then west along the centerline of 155th Street to the centerline of May Street, then south along the centerline of May Street to the centerline of 156th Street, east along the centerline of 156th Street to the centerline of Price Street, then south along the centerline of Price Street to the centerline of Warren Street, then east along the centerline of Warren Street to the centerline of Burnham Avenue, then south along the center[line] of Burnham Avenue to the centerline of Calumet Way, then southeast along the centerline of Calumet Way to the centerline of Hirsch Avenue, then south along the centerline of Hirsch Avenue extended to the centerline of 159th Street, then east along the centerline of 159th Street, to the centerline of Price Avenue, then south along the centerline of Price Avenue to the centerline of River Oaks Drive, then east along the centerline of River Oaks Drive to the centerline of State Line Road, then north along the centerline of State Line Road to Pulaski Road which is the point of beginning. 
Sixth Ward: Beginning at the point where the centerline of 156th Street meets the centerline of Price Avenue, then proceeding west along the centerline of 156th Street extended to the Burnham Greenway Trail formerly known as the Pennsylvania Railroad tracks, then proceeding south along the centerline of the Burnham Greenway Trail to the centerline of River Oaks Drive, then east along the centerline of River Oaks Drive to the centerline of Burnham Avenue, then south along the centerline of Burnham Avenue to the Little Calumet River, said Little Calumet River being the southerly boundary of the city, then east along the said southern boundary of the city to a point where the centerline of State Line Road extended meets said Little Calumet River, then north along the centerline of State Line Road to the centerline of River Oaks Drive, then west along the centerline of River Oaks Drive to the center line of Price Avenue then north along the centerline of Price Avenue to the centerline of 159th Street, then west along the centerline of 159th Street to the centerline of Hirsch Boulevard extended, then north along the centerline of Hirsch Boulevard to the centerline of Calumet Way, then proceeding in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of Calumet Way to the centerline of Burnham Avenue, then north along the centerline of Burnham Avenue to the centerline of Warren Street, then east along the centerline of Warren Street to the centerline of Price Avenue, then north along the centerline of Price Avenue to 156th Street, the point of beginning. 
Seventh Ward: Beginning at the point where River Drive meets the Little Calumet River, the Little Calumet River being part of southern boundary of the city, then proceeding west along the southern boundary of the city to the centerline of Torrence Avenue, south on Torrence Avenue to the center line of 170th Street, proceeding west along southern boundary to the point where the southern boundary of the city meets the centerline of River Oaks Drive, then east along the centerline of River Oaks Drive to the centerline of Torrence Avenue, then north along the centerline of Torrence Avenue to the centerline of Michigan City Road, then west along the centerline of Michigan City Road to the centerline of Pulaski Road, then east along the centerline of Pulaski Road to the centerline of Yates Avenue, then north along the centerline of Yates Avenue to the centerline of 153rd Street, then east along the centerline of 153rd Street to the centerline of Torrence Avenue, then south along the centerline of Torrence Avenue to the centerline of Pulaski Road, then east along the centerline of Pulaski Road to the centerline of the Burnham Greenway Trail formerly known as the Pennsylvania Railroad tracks, then north along the centerline of the Burnham Greenway Trail to the centerline of Sibley Boulevard, then east along the centerline of Sibley Boulevard to the centerline of the alley between Mackinaw Avenue and Greenbay Avenue, then south along the centerline of the alley between Mackinaw Avenue and Greenbay Avenue, to the centerline of Pulaski Road (154th Street), then west along the centerline of Pulaski Road (154th Street) to the centerline of May Street, then south along the centerline of May Street to the centerline of 156th Street, then west along the centerline of 156th Street extended to the centerline of the Burnham Greenway Trail then south along the Burnham Greenway Trail to the centerline of River Oaks Drive, then east along the centerline of River Oaks Drive to the centerline of Burnham Avenue, then south along the centerline of Burnham Avenue to the Little Calumet River, the point of beginning. 
(Code 1970, § 3.001; Code 1980, § 2-61; Ord. No. 76-48, § 1, 11-29-1976; Ord. No. 93-1, § 1, 1-23-1993; Ord. No. 04-68, § 1, 9-30-2004; Ord. 12-25, § 1, 6-7-2012) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-25, § 1, adopted 12-25, changed the title of § 2-81 from "Boundaries designated" to "Wards created—Basis—Redistricting." This historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes. 
State Law reference— Redistricting, 65 ILCS 5/3-4-7, 5/3-4-10.  
Sec. 2-82. - Map. 
The city clerk shall cause to be printed a map showing the boundaries of the wards. Said map shall be posted in a conspicuous place in said city clerk's office in plain view of the public. 
(Code 1980, § 2-62; Ord. No. 76-48, § 1, 11-29-1976)  
Sec. 2-83. - Annexations. 
In the event the boundaries of the city are increased by annexation, the area annexed shall become part of the ward adjoining said annexed area. In the event the annexed area adjoins two (2) or more wards, then the city council by ordinances shall designate the portion of the annexed area which is to become a part of each ward. 
(Code 1980, § 2-63; Ord. No. 76-48, § 1, 11-29-1976)  
Secs. 2-84—2-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - RULES OF ORDER AND PROCEDURE[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Power of council to determine its rules of order and procedure, 65 ILCS 5/3-11-11. 
 
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 2-101. - Scope and applicability. 
The provisions of this division shall govern the conduct of meetings of the city council and shall, except for things which by their nature can have no application, also govern the meetings of any committees thereof. 
(Code 1980, § 2-71)  
Sec. 2-102. - Meetings to be public; records. 
The city council shall sit with open doors, except that closed meetings may be held as permitted by 5 ILCS 120/2 and 5 ILCS 120/2a. It shall keep a journal of its own proceedings. 
(Code 1980, § 2-72)  
Sec. 2-103. - Order of business. 
The business of all regular meetings of the city council shall be transacted in the following order: 
(1)  Roll call. 
(2)  Reading of the minutes. 
(3)  Reports of officers. 
(4)  Reports of committees. 
(5)  Acceptance of petitions and communications. 
(6)  Introduction of ordinances and resolutions. 
(7)  Special and unfinished business. 
(8)  New business. 
(9)  Adjournment. 
(Code 1980, § 2-73; Ord. of 1-20-1964, § 20; Ord. No. 77-36, § 1, 9-26-1977)  
Sec. 2-104. - Approval of minutes. 
At each city council meeting, the minutes of the preceding meeting shall be approved by a majority of the aldermen present. If no objection is made to the minutes, the same shall be approved. The motion shall be, "I move to accept the minutes of the previous meeting as printed and read." 
(Code 1980, § 2-74; Ord. of 1-20-1964, § 20; Ord. No. 77-36, § 1, 9-26-1977)  
Sec. 2-105. - Presiding officer. 
The presiding officer of the city council shall be the mayor or mayor pro tem, whose powers and/or duties during the council meeting shall be as follows: 
(1)  To open the meeting and call the members to order. 
(2)  To call the order of business. 
(3)  To recognize members entitled to the floor. 
(4)  To state and put to vote all questions or motions which are regularly moved or necessarily arise in the course of the proceedings and to announce the result of the vote. 
(5)  To protect the council from frivolous or dilatory action. 
(6)  To restrain the members when engaged in debate within the rules of order. 
(7)  To require the council room cleared in the event of disturbances or disorderly conduct. 
(8)  To assist in the expediting of business in every way compatible with the rights of the council. 
(9)  To preserve decorum. 
(10)  To decide all questions of order, subject to appeal to the council. 
Such powers and duties shall be in addition to all others provided by this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 2-75; Ord. of 1-20-1964, §§ 5, 9) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 65 ILCS 5/3-11-14.  
Sec. 2-106. - Right of mayor to make motions or second them; debate. 
The mayor may not move or second motions. He may comment on pending matters being debated. 
(Code 1980, § 2-76; Ord. of 1-20-1964, § 7)  
Sec. 2-107. - Chairman pro tem. 
The chairman of the committee on finance of the city council shall be the deputy mayor. In the absence of the chairman of the committee on finance, the most senior alderman shall act as the temporary chairman. In the absence of the chairman of the committee on finance and the most senior alderman, the city council may elect an alderman to act as a temporary chairman. The temporary chairman shall have only the powers of a presiding officer and a right to vote in his capacity as alderman on any ordinance, resolution or motion. The deputy mayor shall assist the mayor on matters as directed by the mayor. 
(Code 1980, § 2-77; Ord. of 1-20-1964, § 8; Ord. No. 81-17, § 1, 5-21-1981; Ord. No. 85-19, § 1, 5-23-1985; Ord. No. 92-43, § 1, 10-8-1992; Ord. No. 11-7, § 2, 2-24-2011)  
Sec. 2-108. - Sergeant at arms. 
The mayor is hereby authorized to appoint a sergeant at arms to assist him in maintaining decorum. 
(Code 1980, § 2-78; Ord. of 1-20-1964, § 9)  
Sec. 2-109. - Quorum; compelling attendance. 
A majority of the city council shall constitute a quorum to do business. A smaller number, however, may adjourn from time to time, and may compel the attendance of absentees, under whatever penalties, including a fine for a failure to attend, the council may prescribe by ordinance. 
(Code 1980, § 2-79; Ord. of 1-20-1964, § 6) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 65 ILCS 5/3-11-12.  
Sec. 2-110. - Voting. 
Every alderman present at a city council meeting shall vote except members having conflicts of interest in the question, who shall ask to and be excused from voting. Any passed or silent vote shall count with the majority. 
(Code 1980, § 2-84; Ord. of 1-20-1964, § 15)  
Sec. 2-111. - Roll call vote. 
It shall be the right of any alderman to demand a roll call vote of the city council on any question or motion on the floor. No member shall comment further while a vote is being taken. 
(Code 1980, § 2-85; Ord. of 1-20-1964, § 16)  
Sec. 2-112. - Voting by presiding officer. 
The mayor shall not vote in a city council meeting on any ordinance, resolution or motion except where the vote of the aldermen has resulted in a tie, or where one-half (½) of the aldermen elected have voted in favor of an ordinance, resolution or motion even though there is no tie vote, or where a vote greater than a majority of the city council is required by state law to adopt an ordinance, resolution or motion. In each such instance specified, the mayor shall vote. Nothing in this section shall deprive an acting mayor or mayor pro tem from voting in his capacity as alderman, but he shall not be entitled to another vote in his capacity as acting mayor or mayor pro tem. 
(Code 1980, § 2-86) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-30.  
Sec. 2-113. - Reconsideration of vote at special meetings. 
No vote of the city council shall be reconsidered or rescinded at a special meeting, unless there are present at the special meeting at least as many aldermen as were present when the vote was taken. 
(Code 1980, § 2-92; Ord. of 1-20-1964, § 32) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-55.  
Sec. 2-114. - Deadline for submitting matter for consideration; agenda changes. 
(a)  No petitions, or communications, shall be acted upon by the city council at any meeting which have not been delivered to the city clerk by 12:00 noon on the Thursday preceding any regular council meeting; provided, however, that this provision may be waived by unanimous vote of the city council and provided further, that no changes shall be made on any agenda without unanimous vote of the city council. 
(b)  All ordinances and resolutions presented by the ordinance and resolution committee shall be placed on the agenda for the next council meeting. All ordinances and resolutions shall be posted in the city clerk's office after presentation by the ordinance and resolution committee prior to adoption; provided, however, that a majority vote of the council members present and voting at the meeting may waive the posting of the ordinance or resolution in the clerk's office prior to passage. A majority vote of the council members present and voting at a meeting may direct that an ordinance or resolution be placed on the agenda for that meeting. 
(Code 1970, §§ 2.221, 2.239; Code 1980, § 2-93; Ord. of 2-22-1973, § 1; Ord. of 10-24-1974, § 1; Ord. No. 77-36, § 2, 9-26-1977)  
Sec. 2-115. - Requests for street lighting. 
Any request or petition for a street light installation shall be referred to the committee on public utilities prior to any action by the full city council. The committee on public utilities shall consider said request and consult with representatives of the public utility electric company to determine whether said installation is proper. The committee shall report any action taken in regard to any street light request to the city council. 
(Code 1970, § 2.239; Code 1980, § 2-93.1; Ord. of 7-24-1975, § 1)  
Sec. 2-116. - Withdrawal of motions. 
A motion may not be withdrawn by the mover without consent of the member seconding it. 
(Code 1980, § 2-94; Ord. of 1-20-1964, § 22)  
Sec. 2-117. - Stating of motions by chair. 
When a motion is made by an alderman, it shall be stated by the chair, before debate. 
(Code 1980, § 2-95; Ord. of 1-20-1964, § 22)  
Sec. 2-118. - Motion for the previous question. 
When the previous question is moved in a city council meeting, and seconded and carried by a majority vote, it shall be voted upon. There shall be no further amendment or debate, but pending amendments shall be put in their order before the main question. 
(Code 1980, § 2-96; Ord. of 1-20-1964, § 23)  
Sec. 2-119. - Motion to lay on the table. 
A motion to lay on the table shall preclude all amendments or debate of the subject under consideration and the subject may be resumed only upon motion of a member voting with the majority and with the consent of two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the members present. 
(Code 1980, § 2-97; Ord. of 1-20-1964, § 24)  
Sec. 2-120. - Amendments to ordinances or resolutions generally. 
It shall be in order to amend a proposed ordinance or resolution at any time prior to the voting by the aldermen. 
(Code 1980, § 2-98; Ord. of 1-20-1964, § 25)  
Sec. 2-121. - Amendments to strike out and insert. 
On an amendment before the city council to strike out and insert material in a resolution or ordinance, the paragraph to be amended shall first be read as it stands, then the words proposed to be stricken out and those to be inserted shall be read, and finally, the paragraph as it would stand if so amended shall be read. 
(Code 1980, § 2-99; Ord. of 1-20-1964, § 26)  
Sec. 2-122. - Amendments to amendments. 
A motion to amend an amendment shall be in order, but one to amend an amendment to an amendment shall not be introduced. 
(Code 1980, § 2-100; Ord. of 1-20-1964, § 27)  
Sec. 2-123. - Motion to postpone. 
All motions to postpone may be amended as to time. If a motion to postpone indefinitely is carried, the principal question shall be declared lost. 
(Code 1980, § 2-101; Ord. of 1-20-1964, § 28)  
Sec. 2-124. - Motion to adjourn. 
A motion to adjourn shall be in order at any time, except in the following circumstances: 
(1)  When another alderman has the floor. 
(2)  When the aldermen are voting. 
(3)  When adjournment was the last preceding motion. 
(4)  When it has been decided that the previous question shall be taken. 
(Code 1980, § 2-102; Ord. of 1-20-1964, § 30)  
Sec. 2-125. - Dissents and protests. 
Any member shall have the right to express an opinion or views on any ordinance or any resolution of the city council and have said opinion recorded in the minutes of the meeting. 
(Code 1980, § 2-103; Ord. of 1-20-1964, § 18)  
Sec. 2-126. - Requests for ordinances or resolutions. 
Any council member may move that the ordinances and resolutions committee prepare an ordinance or resolution. Upon approval of such request by the council, the ordinances and resolutions committee shall prepare and submit copies of all proposed ordinances or resolutions as provided in this division. 
(Code 1980, § 2-104; Ord. of 1-20-1964, § 36)  
Sec. 2-127. - Conduct of aldermen generally. 
During city council meetings, the aldermen shall preserve order and decorum and shall, neither by conversation or otherwise, delay or interrupt the proceedings. Aldermen desiring to speak shall address the chair, and upon recognition by the presiding officer, shall confine themselves to the question under debate and shall avoid all personalities. A council member once recognized, shall not be interrupted while speaking unless called to order by the presiding officer, unless a point of order is raised by another member or unless the speaker chooses to yield to questions from another member. All aldermen desiring to speak shall be heard. 
(Code 1980, § 2-105; Ord. of 1-20-1964, § 9)  
Sec. 2-128. - Limits on debate. 
No alderman shall be allowed to speak more than once on the same question, until every other alderman desiring to speak shall have had an opportunity to do so. No alderman shall speak longer than five (5) minutes at any one (1) time except by consent of the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 2-106; Ord. of 1-20-1964, § 14)  
Sec. 2-129. - Seating of members. 
All aldermen shall occupy the respective seats assigned to them by the mayor, but any two (2) or more members may exchange seats by submitting their intentions in writing to the mayor. 
(Code 1980, § 2-107; Ord. of 1-20-1964, § 11)  
Sec. 2-130. - Conduct while a member is speaking. 
While an alderman is speaking to the city council, no alderman shall hold any private discourse, or pass between the speaker and the chair. 
(Code 1980, § 2-108; Ord. of 1-20-1964, § 14)  
Sec. 2-131. - Personal privilege. 
An alderman shall have the right to address the city council on a question of personal privilege, but said right shall be limited to cases in which his integrity, character or motives are assailed, questioned or impugned. 
(Code 1980, § 2-109; Ord. of 1-20-1964, § 17)  
Sec. 2-132. - Impugning other's motive; addressing chair when another speaking. 
When recognized by the chair, a council member shall refrain from impugning the motives of other members' argument or vote. No member shall address the chair or demand the floor while any vote is being taken. 
(Code 1980, § 2-110; Ord. of 1-20-1964, § 12)  
Sec. 2-133. - Conduct of public at meetings generally. 
All members of the public attending city council meetings shall observe the same rules of propriety, decorum and good conduct applicable to aldermen. Any person making personal, impertinent, and slanderous remarks, or who becomes boisterous while addressing the council or while attending the council meetings, shall be removed from the room, by the sergeant at arms, if so directed by the presiding officer. In case the presiding officer fails to act, any council member may move to require him to enforce the rules, and by the affirmative vote of the majority present, the council shall require the presiding officer to act. 
(Code 1980, § 2-111; Ord. of 1-20-1964, § 9)  
Sec. 2-134. - Conduct of public when addressing council. 
Any member of the public desiring to address the city council may be recognized by the chair, and shall state his name and address in an audible tone, and shall limit his remarks to the question under discussion. All remarks or questions shall be addressed to the presiding officer and not to an alderman. 
(Code 1980, § 2-112; Ord. of 1-20-1964, § 9)  
Sec. 2-135. - Appeal from ruling of presiding officer. 
Any alderman may appeal to the city council from a ruling of the presiding officer. The member making the appeal may briefly state his reason for appealing and the presiding officer may briefly state his ruling. There shall be no debate on the appeal, and no other alderman shall participate in the discussion. If a majority of the members present vote to sustain the action of the presiding officer, the ruling of the chair shall be sustained, otherwise, it shall be overruled. 
(Code 1980, § 2-113; Ord. of 1-20-1964, § 13)  
Sec. 2-136. - Applicability of Robert's Rules. 
The rules of parliamentary practice contained in Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised Edition, shall govern the council in all cases to which they are applicable and in which they are not inconsistent with this article or state law. 
(Code 1980, § 2-114; Ord. of 1-20-1964, § 31)  
Sec. 2-137. - Suspension of rules. 
Except where the provisions of this division are required by state law, the city council may, by a majority vote, vary the rules and procedures contained in this division. 
(Code 1980, § 2-115)  
Secs. 2-138—2-160. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Committees 
 
Sec. 2-161. - Standing committees. 
(a)  The following shall be standing committees of the city council: 
(1)  Committee on finance. The finance committee shall have the responsibility to oversee the functions of the following areas: finance department, purchasing and personnel departments, personnel evaluation and council rules. 
(2)  Committee on public safety. The public safety committee shall have the responsibility to oversee the functions of the following areas: police department, fire department, civil defense and animal control. 
(3)  Committee on public works. The public works committee shall have the responsibility to oversee the functions of the following areas: building department, street and alley department, maintenance department, sewer department and public buildings, equipment and property and department for community development and department of inspectional services. 
(4)  Committee on public utilities. The public utilities committee shall have the responsibility to oversee the functions of the following areas: water department, electrical, plumbing, public lighting systems, natural gas, public telephone systems, railroads and transportation. 
(5)  Committee on health, education and welfare. The health, education and welfare committee shall have the responsibility to oversee the functions of the following areas: public health department, youth service, senior citizens, library, waterways and housing committee. 
(6)  Committee on ordinances and resolutions. The ordinances and resolutions committee shall have the responsibility to oversee the functions of the following areas: legal department, ordinances and resolutions, zoning, judiciary and public relations. 
(7)  Committee on permits and licenses. The permits and licenses committee shall have the responsibility to oversee the functions associated with business permits and licenses. 
(b)  The mayor shall appoint the members of the standing committees, and shall appoint the chairman thereof. Each of the committees shall consist of three (3) members. 
(c)  Each alderman shall be a member of two (2) standing committees and the chairman of one (1) standing committee. Vacancies on any committee shall be filled as herein provided for original appointments. 
(Code 1980, § 2-80; Ord. No. 77-20, § 1, 5-26-1977; Ord. No. 78-23, § 1, 6-8-1978; Ord. No. 78-45, § 1, 10-12-1978; Ord. No. 80-5, § 1, 4-10-1980; Ord. No. 81-16, § 1, 5-14-1981; Ord. No. 85-26, § 1, 7-11-1985; Ord. No. 87-3, § 1, 2-26-1987; Ord. No. 89-16, § 1, 5-11-1989; Ord. No. 11-10, § 2, 2-24-2011; Ord. No. 13-24, § 2, 6-13-2013)  
Sec. 2-162. - Special committees. 
The city council, by majority vote, may appoint special committees. Such committees shall be discharged upon the acceptance of a final report without a vote unless otherwise ordered. 
(Code 1980, § 2-81; Ord. of 1-20-1964, § 35; Ord. No. 87-4, § 1, 2-26-1987)  
Sec. 2-163. - Referral of new business to committees; reports. 
All petitions, motions and communications shall be referred to the appropriate committee or committees. Whenever any referred matter shall not have been reported back to the city council by the committee to which referred, within a period of sixty (60) days, the chairman of the committee shall, at the request of any alderman, submit a report in writing to the council at its next regular meeting, giving a brief summary of the proceedings had in said committee, in relation to such referred matter. 
(Code 1980, § 2-82; Ord. of 1-20-1964, § 38)  
Sec. 2-164. - Deferment of committee report. 
Upon the request of any two (2) aldermen present at a city council meeting, any report of a committee of the council shall be deferred, for final action thereon, to the next regular meeting of the council after the report is made. 
(Code 1980, § 2-83) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-35.  
Secs. 2-165—2-190. - Reserved.  
Subdivision III. - Legislation 
 
Sec. 2-191. - Passage of certain matters. 
The passage of all ordinances for whatever purposes, and of any resolution or motion to create any liability against the city or for the expenditure or appropriation of its money, shall require the concurrence of a majority of all members then holding office on the city council, including the mayor, unless otherwise expressly provided by state law; provided that, if the council consists of an odd number of aldermen, the vote of the majority of the aldermen shall be sufficient to pass an ordinance. The yeas and nays shall be taken upon the question of the passage of the designated ordinances, resolutions or motions and recorded in the journal of the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 2-87) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-40.  
Sec. 2-192. - Reading and passage of ordinance and resolution. 
It shall not be required prior to adoption, that an ordinance or resolution be read. A motion may be made that the following "ordinance" or the following "resolution" shall be adopted as presented. An ordinance or resolution may be read pursuant to motion adopted by a majority vote of the council members present and voting at the meeting. 
(Code 1980, § 2-87.1; Ord. No. 77-37, § 1, 9-22-1977)  
Sec. 2-193. - Adoption of ordinance at initial presentation. 
No ordinance shall be adopted at the council meeting at which it was initially presented except upon a two-thirds vote of the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 2-88; Ord. of 1-20-1964, § 37)  
Sec. 2-194. - Approval and veto of ordinances. 
All resolutions and motions which create any liability against the city, or which provide for the expenditure or appropriation of its money, and all ordinances passed by the city council shall be deposited with the city clerk. If the mayor approves of them, he shall sign them. Those of which he disapproves he shall return to the city council, with his written objections, at the next regular meeting of the city council occurring not less than five (5) days after their passage. The mayor may disapprove of any one or more sums appropriated in any ordinance, resolution or motion making an appropriation, and, if so, the remainder shall be effective. However, the mayor may disapprove entirely of an ordinance, resolution or motion making an appropriation. If the mayor fails to return any ordinance or any specified resolution or motion with his written objections, within the designated time, it shall become effective despite the absence of his signature. 
(Code 1980, § 2-89) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-45.  
Sec. 2-195. - Passage over veto. 
Every resolution and motion specified in section 2-194 of this Code, and every ordinance which is returned to the city council by the mayor shall be reconsidered by the city council at its next regular meeting. If, after such reconsideration, two-thirds of all the aldermen then holding office on the city council shall agree to pass an ordinance, resolution or motion, notwithstanding the mayor's refusal to approve it, then it shall be effective. The vote on the question of passage over the mayor's veto shall be by yeas and nays, and shall be recorded in the journal. 
(Code 1980, § 2-90) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-50.  
Sec. 2-196. - Motion for reconsideration generally. 
(a)  A vote or question may be reconsidered at any time during the same meeting, or at the first regular meeting held thereafter. A motion for reconsideration, having been once made and decided in the negative, shall not be renewed, nor shall a motion to reconsider be reconsidered. 
(b)  A motion to reconsider must be made and seconded by aldermen who voted on the prevailing side of the question to be reconsidered, unless otherwise provided by law; provided, however, that where a motion has received a majority vote in the affirmative, but is declared lost solely on the ground that a greater number of affirmative votes is required by statute for the passage or adoption of such motion, then in such case a motion to reconsider may be made and seconded only by those who voted in the affirmative on such question to be reconsidered. 
(Code 1980, § 2-91; Ord. of 1-20-1964, § 29) 
State Law reference— Motions to reconsider, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-55.  
Secs. 2-197—2-230. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Plumbing inspector, § 14-501 et seq.; fire chief, deputy chief, assistant chief—generally, § 30-33; chief of police—generally, § 46-35; supervisor of records and communications, § 46-48. 
State Law reference— Powers of city with reference to employees generally, 65 ILCS 5/10-4-1. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-231. - Appointments generally. 
(a)  Except as may be otherwise provided by this Code or by state law, all officers shall be appointed by the mayor by and with the advice and consent of the city council. 
(b)  Whenever under any ordinance, an officer is appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council, the name of said officer shall be submitted for appointment and confirmation to the city council not later than the last regularly scheduled council meeting in May of each year. 
(c)  In the event the mayor appoints an employee who has worked for the city in excess of three (3) years to head any department of the city or in a supervisory position not covered by any union contract, such employee shall be entitled to return to the position held with the city prior to the appointment as such department head or supervisor in the event such appointment does not receive the consent of the city council or such appointment is not renewed after the term has expired. 
(Code 1980, § 2-16; Ord. No. 78-12, § 1, 4-27-1978; Ord. No. 02-20, 5-23-2002) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-30-5.  
Sec. 2-232. - Term of office of elected officials. 
Elected officials of the city shall serve for a four (4) year terms, according to the method provided by statute. Each elected official, having been duly elected and qualified, shall take office and begin his term at the first regular meeting of the corporate authorities held in the month of May following his election or at a properly-noticed special meeting held in the month of May prior to the first regular meeting. 
(Code 1980, § 2-16.1; Ord. No. 01-17, § 1, 4-26-2001)  
Sec. 2-233. - Commission of office; certificate of appointment. 
Whenever a person has been appointed or elected to a city office, the mayor shall issue a certificate of appointment or election, under the corporate seal, to the city clerk. All officers elected or appointed under the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/1-1-1 et seq.), except the city clerk, aldermen and mayor shall be commissioned by warrant, under the corporate seal, signed by the city clerk and the mayor, acting mayor, or mayor pro tem. 
(Code 1980, § 2-17)  
Sec. 2-234. - Oath of office. 
(a)  Before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, all city officers, whether elected or appointed shall take and subscribe the following oath: 
I do solemnly swear (affirm) that I will support the Constitution of the United States, and the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and that I will faithfully discharge the duties of the office of _______ according to the best of my ability. 
(b)  This oath, so subscribed, shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1980, § 2-18) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-25.  
Sec. 2-235. - Bond. 
Before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, all municipal officers, except the aldermen, shall execute a bond with security, to be approved by the mayor and council. The bond shall be payable to the city in whatever penal sum may be directed by resolution or ordinance, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of the office and the payment of all money received by such officer, according to law and ordinances. Such bond may provide that the obligation of the sureties shall not extend to any loss sustained by the insolvency, failure or closing of any bank organized and operating either under the laws of the state or the United States wherein such officer has placed funds in his custody, if the bank has been approved by the city council as a depository for these funds. These bonds shall be filed with the city clerk except the bond of the clerk, which shall be filed with the city treasurer. 
(Code 1980, § 2-19) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-30.  
Sec. 2-236. - Salary. 
All city officers and employees shall receive such salary as may be provided by ordinance. 
(Code 1980, § 2-20)  
Sec. 2-237. - Duty to surrender effects of office. 
Within five (5) days after notification and request, any person who has been an officer of the city shall deliver to his successor in office all property, books and effects in his possession, belonging to the city, or appertaining to the office he has held. Upon his refusal to do so, he shall be liable for all the damages caused thereby, and to the penalty prescribed by this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 2-21) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-35.  
Sec. 2-238. - Attendance at council meetings. 
(a)  Any officer, department head or any employee may be requested by the mayor or any alderman to attend a council meeting to discuss matters relating to the city. 
(b)  Any department head may be requested by any council member or city council committee chairman to attend a meeting of the city council committee to discuss matters relative to said person's department, and to discuss matters relative to the city; said department head must attend provided that he is advised of the meeting within a reasonable time. 
(c)  The following department heads shall submit to the city council at the first regular council meeting each month, a monthly report of all activities for the prior month: city clerk/collector, cultural center, Faith Baily Health Center director, purchasing and personnel director, police chief, fire chief, recycling director, animal control department, finance department, building department, water department, housing administration department, street and alley commissioner, community development director and youth and family services department. 
(Code 1980, § 2-23; Ord. of 1-20-1964, § 10; Ord. No. 77-15, § 1, 3-24-1977; Ord. No. 91-26, § 1, 7-11-1991)  
Sec. 2-239. - Armed forces active duty compensation and benefit differential. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases when used in this section shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
Benefits includes salary, based on full-time compensation, plus benefits, including insurance coverage, pension rights, employment and promotional rights, not including overtime, or any other fringe benefit (holidays, vacation, life insurance, sick time, etc.) This compensation, minus the salary paid to the employee by the United States, shall be paid to the employee as specified in this section. 
Duration means the compensation and health benefit to be paid to, or on behalf of, the employee, which shall continue for the duration of his or her active military service. 
Employee for the purposes of this section, means a full-time employee of the city, employed at the time he or she is ordered to active duty. 
(b)  Application. This section and all of its benefits shall only apply to servicemen or women called into active duty because of a war, or peacekeeping mission as declared by the President of the United States. This section shall not apply to employees who enlist, or are on their required reserve status for summer or weekend duty. The employee shall notify the city as to his call to duty and when they anticipate departure. 
(c)  Career status. The benefits of this section may be terminated immediately upon the employee/soldier deciding to stay in the Armed Forces after his/her tour of duty is completed. 
(d)  Military service credit. Any employee of the city, past or present shall be entitled to military service credit pursuant to the rules of the IMRF, and the resolution attached to Ordinance No. 03-63. 
(e)  Pension and seniority protection. Any employee called to active duty shall be considered on "furlough" or "leave of absence" for purposes of his or her pension and seniority. Payments shall continue to be made to any pension fund during this period of "furlough" or "leave of absence." Any employee called to active duty shall be restored to his or her position without loss of seniority or to any other such position as the employee's status would have entitled the employee had the employee been continuously in the active service of the city during the period of such "furlough" or "leave of absence." 
(Ord. No. 03-63, §§ 1—4, 10-23-2003; Ord. No. 10-52, § 2, 10-14-2010) 
Editor's note— The Resolution referred to in this section is not set forth herein but can be found on file in the city clerk's office.  
Sec. 2-240. - Indemnification. 
The city hereby authorizes, approves and provides for the indemnification, to the fullest extent permitted by law, and payment of legal defense costs from any and all claims, causes of action and suits of every kind and nature that is associated with the official's term in office for actions brought against an official, in either their individual or official capacity, and incurred or suffered as a result of litigation, provided, however: (1) that the actions taken by the official were on behalf of the city; (2) that the litigation or proceeding against the official was not initiated by the city or state or federal government or agency nor pertains to the defense of any criminal proceeding; or (3) that the litigation or proceeding was not initiated by the official. The city hereby further authorizes, approves and provides an official the ability to retain legal representation of their choosing when a defense is required, desirable, or has been undertaken and shall further hold the official harmless from the payment of any and all reasonable attorney fees (provided, however, that the rate to be paid by the city for such attorney fees shall be no greater than the hourly rate charged by the city attorney) and costs associated with said defense arising as a result of any litigation herein contemplated or costs incurred in connection therewith. 
(Ord. No. 10-9, § 2, 1-28-2010)  
Secs. 2-241—2-260. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 2-261. - Residency requirements. 
All officers and employees of the city shall be residents of the City of Calumet City at the time of appointment or employment and, if not, as a condition of appointment or employment, shall become a resident within the city within one (1) year of said appointment or employment. All current and new officers and employees must remain residents of the city during their appointment or employment by the city unless different residency requirements as herinafter set forth apply. These requirements shall not apply to municipal engineers, city attorneys, prosecuting attorneys, special counsel, auditors, architects, economic development coordinator or engineers of the city. Each department head, deputy director, office manager, assistant police chief or deputy fire chief and any other executive level non-union employees shall observe the same residency requirement as the rank and file of their respective departments as more fully set forth in the collective bargaining agreements for employees working in those departments. This section is enacted independent of any negotiated collective bargaining agreement and nothing contained herein is intended to delete from or create any rights relative to any existing collective bargaining agreement. 
(Code 1980, § 2-39; Ord. No. 94-56, § 1, 9-22-1994; Ord. No. 95-30, § 1, 7-13-1995; Ord. No. 11-4, § 3, 1-27-2011; Ord. No. 13-67, § 2, 12-30-2013; Ord. No. 17-13, § 2, 4-27-2017)  
Sec. 2-262. - Violations. 
Any person in violation of the provisions of section 2-261 of this Code shall be subject to suspension or termination after a hearing before the corporate authorities of the city pursuant to notice, at which time and place such person may appear and be given an opportunity to defend themselves. 
(Code 1980, § 2-40; Ord. No. 94-56, § 1, 9-22-1994)  
Sec. 2-263. - Exemptions. 
Any officer or employee, other than policemen or firemen, of the city who reside outside of the city limits at the time of adoption of Ordinance No. 94-56 shall be allowed to remain an officer or employee without being subject to the provisions of sections 2-261 and 2-262 of this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 2-41; Ord. No. 94-56, § 1, 9-22-1994)  
Sec. 2-264. - Part-time employees. 
Notwithstanding any provisions of sections 2-261, 2-262 and 2-263, all part-time employees, current and new, of the city shall be residents of the city and remain residents during their employment. 
(Code 1980, § 2-42; Ord. No. 94-56, § 1, 9-22-1994)  
Secs. 2-265—2-290. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - ETHICAL CONDUCT[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 04-23, § 1, adopted May 13, 2004, amended division 3 of article IV of chapter 2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former division 3, §§ 2-291—2-295, pertained to the local gift ban and was derived from Code 1980, §§ 2-43—2-47; and Ord. No. 99-32, § 1, adopted June 10, 1999. 
 
Sec. 2-291. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Campaign for effective office means any activity in furtherance of an effort to influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any individual to any federal, state or local public office in a political organization, or the selection, nomination, or election of presidential or vice-presidential electors, but does not include activities: 
(1)  Relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or administrative action; 
(2)  Relating to collective bargaining; or 
(3)  That are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties. 
Candidate means a person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for nomination or election to an elected office, or who has been appointed to fill a vacancy in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the ballot at a regular election, as defined in section 1-3 of the Election Code (5 ILCS 5/1-3). 
Collective bargaining has the same meaning as that term is defined in section 3 of the Illinois Public Labor Relations Act (5 ILCS 315/3). 
Compensated time means, with respect to an employee, any time worked by or credited to the employee that counts toward any minimum work time requirement imposed as a condition of his or her employment, but for purposes of this chapter, does not include any designated holidays, vacation periods, personal time, compensatory time off or any period when the employee is on a leave of absence. With respect to officers or employees whose hours are not fixed, compensated time includes any period of time when the officer is on premises under the control of the employer and any other time when the officer or employee is executing his or her official duties, regardless of location. 
Compensatory time off means authorized time off earned by or awarded to an employee to compensate in whole or in part for time worked in excess of the minimum work time required of that employee as a condition of his or her employment. 
Contribution has the same meaning as that term is defined in section 9-1.4 of the Election Code (10 ILCS 5/9-1.4). 
Employee means a person employed by the City of Calumet City, on a full-time or part-time basis or pursuant to a contract, whose duties are subject to the direction and control of an employer with regard to the material details of how the work is to be performed, but does not include an independent contractor. 
Employer means the City of Calumet City. 
Gift means any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan, forbearance, or other tangible or intangible item having monetary value including, but not limited to, cash, food and drink, and honoraria for speaking engagements related to or attributable to government employment or the official position of an officer or employee. 
Leave of absence means any period during which an employee does not receive: 
(1)  Compensation for employment; 
(2)  Service credit towards pension benefits; and 
(3)  Health insurance benefits paid for by the employer. 
Officer means a person who holds, by election or appointment, an office created by statute or ordinance, regardless of whether the officer is compensated for service in his or her official capacity. 
Political activity means any activity in support of or in connection with any campaign for elective office or any political organization, but does not include activities: 
(1)  Relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or administrative action; 
(2)  Relating to collective bargaining; or 
(3)  That are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties. 
Political organization means a party, committee, association, fund, or other organization (whether or not incorporated) that is required to file a statement of organization with the State Board of Elections or a county clerk under section 9-3 of the Election Code (10 ILCS 5/9-3), but only with regard to those activities that require filing with the State Board of Elections or a county clerk. 
Prohibited political activity means: 
(1)  Preparing for, organizing, or participating in any political meeting, political rally, political demonstration, or other political event. 
(2)  Soliciting contributions, including but not limited to the purchase of, selling, distributing, or receiving payment for tickets for any political fundraiser, political meeting or other political event. 
(3)  Soliciting, planning the solicitation of, or preparing any document or report regarding anything of value intended as a campaign contribution. 
(4)  Planning, conducting, or participating in a public opinion poll in connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question. 
(5)  Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual voters in an election to determine probable voter outcome in connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question. 
(6)  Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any political organization or candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question. 
(7)  Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or a political organization or for or against any referendum question or helping in an effort to get voters to the polls. 
(8)  Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing, or filing any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question. 
(9)  Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective office in that capacity or in connection with a campaign for elective office. 
(10)  Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires. 
(11)  Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing campaign literature, campaign signs, or other campaign material on behalf of any candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question. 
(12)  Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any referendum question. 
(13)  Managing or working on a campaign for elective office or for or against any referendum question. 
(14)  Serving as a delegate, alternate, or proxy to a political party convention. 
(15)  Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any election. 
Prohibited source means any person or entity who: 
(1)  Is seeking official action (i) by an officer or (ii) by an employee, or by the officer or another employee directing that employee; 
(2)  Does business or seeks to do business (i) with the officer or (ii) with an employee, or with the officer or another employee directing that employee; 
(3)  Conducts activities regulated (i) by the officer or (ii) by an employee, or by the officer or another employee directing that employee; or 
(4)  Has interests that may be substantially affected by the performance or non-performance of the official duties of the officer or employee. 
(Ord. No. 04-23, § 1, 5-13-2004)  
Sec. 2-292. - Prohibited political activities. 
(a)  No officer or employee shall intentionally perform any prohibited political activity during any compensated time, as defined herein. No officer or employee shall intentionally use any property or resources of the City of Calumet City in connection with any prohibited political activity. 
(b)  At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally require any other officer or employee to perform any prohibited political activity: 
(1)  As part of that officer or employee's duties; 
(2)  As a condition of employment; or 
(3)  During any compensated time off (such as holidays, vacation or personal time off). 
(c)  No officer or employee shall be required at any time to participate in any prohibited political activity in consideration for that officer or employee being awarded additional compensation or any benefit, whether in the form of a salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off, continued employment or otherwise, nor shall any officer or employee be awarded additional compensation or any benefit in consideration for his or her participation in any prohibited political activity. 
(d)  Nothing in this section prohibits activities that are permissible for an officer or employee to engage in as part of his or her official duties, or activities that are undertaken by an officer or employee on a voluntary basis which are not prohibited by this division. 
(e)  No person either (i) in a position that is subject to recognized merit principles of public employment or (ii) in a position the salary for which is paid in whole or in part by federal funds and that is subject to the federal standards for a merit system of personnel administration applicable to grant-in-aid programs, shall be denied or deprived of employment or tenure solely because he or she is a member or an officer of a political committee, of a political party, or of a political organization or club. 
(Ord. No. 04-23, § 1, 5-13-2004)  
Sec. 2-293. - Gift ban. 
(a)  Except as permitted by this section, no officer or employee and no spouse of or immediate family member living with any officer or employee (collectively referred to herein as "recipients") shall intentionally solicit or accept any gift from any prohibited source, as defined herein, or which is otherwise prohibited by law or ordinance. No prohibited source shall intentionally offer to make a gift that violates this section. 
(b)  This section is not applicable to the following: 
(1)  Opportunities, benefits, and services that are available on the same conditions as for the general public. 
(2)  Anything for which the officer or employee, or his or her spouse or immediate family member, pays the fair market value. 
(3)  Any (i) contribution that is lawfully made under the election code or (ii) activities associated with a fundraising event in support of a political organization or candidate. 
(4)  Educational materials and missions. 
(5)  Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss business. 
(6)  A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to the individual as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt, great aunt, great uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife, grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather, stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, half sister, and including the father, mother, grandfather, or grandmother of the individual's spouse and the individual's fiance or fiancee. 
(7)  Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal friendship unless the recipient has reason to believe that, under the circumstances, the gift was provided because of the official position or employment of the recipient or his or her spouse or immediate family member and not because of the personal friendship. In determining whether a gift is provided on the basis of personal friendship, the recipient shall consider the circumstances under which the gift was offered, such as: 
a.  The history of the relationship between the individual giving the gift and the recipient of the gift, including any previous exchange of gifts between those individuals; 
b.  Whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the individual who gave the gift personally paid for the gift or sought a tax deduction or business reimbursement for the gift; and 
c.  Whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the individual who gave the gift also at the same time gave the same or similar gifts to other officers or employees or their spouses or immediate family members. 
(8)  Food or refreshments not exceeding seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per person in value on a single calendar day; provided that the food or refreshments are consumed on the premises from which they were purchased or prepared or catered. For the purposes of this section, "catered" means food or refreshments that are purchased ready to consume which are delivered by any means. 
(9)  Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation and other benefits resulting from outside business or employment activities (or outside activities that are not connected to the official duties of an officer or employee), if the benefits have not been offered or enhanced because of the official position or employment of the officer or employee, and are customarily provided to others in similar circumstances. 
(10)  Intra-governmental and inter-governmental gifts. For the purpose of this division, "intra-governmental gift" means any gift given to an officer or employee from another officer or employee, and "inter-governmental" means any gift given to an officer or employee by an officer or employee of another governmental entity. 
(11)  Bequests, inheritances, and other transfers at death. 
(12)  Any item or items from any one prohibited source during any calendar year having a cumulative total value of less than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
Each of the exceptions listed in this subsection is mutually exclusive and independent of every other. 
(c)  An officer or employee, his or her spouse or an immediate family member living with the officer or employee, does not violate this section if the recipient promptly takes reasonable action to return a gift from a prohibited source to its source or gives the gift or an amount equal to its value to an appropriate charity that is exempt from income taxation under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as now or hereafter amended, renumbered, or succeeded. 
(Ord. No. 04-23, § 1, 5-13-2004)  
Sec. 2-294. - Penalties. 
(a)  A person who intentionally violates any provision of section 2-292 may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal institution other than a penitentiary or a period of not more than three hundred sixty-four (364) days, and may be fined in an amount not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). 
(b)  A person who intentionally violates any provision of section 2-293 is subject to a fine in an amount of not less than one thousand one dollars ($1,001.00) and not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). 
(c)  Any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a violation of any provision of this division to the local enforcement authorities, the state's attorney or any other law enforcement official may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal institution other than a penitentiary for a period of not more than three hundred sixty-four (364) days, and may be fined in an amount not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,500.00). 
(d)  A violation of section 2-292 shall be prosecuted as a criminal offense by an attorney for the City of Calumet City by filing in the circuit court an information, or sworn complaint, charging such offense. The prosecution shall be under and conform to the rules of criminal procedure. Conviction shall require the establishment of the guilt of the defendant beyond a reasonable doubt. 
(e)  A violation of section 2-293 may be prosecuted as a quasi-criminal offense by an attorney for the City of Calumet City. 
(f)  In additional to any other penalty that may be applicable, whether criminal or civil, an officer or employee who intentionally violates any provision of sections 2-292 or 2-293 is subject to discipline or discharge. 
(Ord. No. 04-23, § 1, 5-13-2004)  
Secs. 2-295—2-330. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - CITY CLERK[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— City clerk required, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-15-5. 
 
Sec. 2-331. - Powers and duties. 
In addition to the powers and duties provided for in this Code, the city clerk shall have the powers and duties provided for by state law. 
(Code 1980, § 2-127) 
State Law reference— Duties of clerk generally, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-90.  
Secs. 2-332—2-360. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - CITY COLLECTOR 
 
Sec. 2-361. - Position established. 
There is hereby established the position of city collector. 
(Code 1980, § 2-139; Ord. of 2-24-1966, § 1)  
Sec. 2-362. - Clerk to serve. 
The city clerk shall hold the office of city collector. 
(Code 1980, § 2-140; Ord. of 2-24-1966, § 1) 
State Law reference— Power of city to require clerk to be collector, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-30-135.  
Sec. 2-363. - Bond. 
The city collector, before assuming his office, shall post a bond in an amount prescribed by the city council and with sureties approved by it. 
(Code 1980, § 2-141; Ord. of 2-24-1966, § 3) 
State Law reference— Bond, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-30.  
Sec. 2-364. - Turning over of moneys. 
Not less than once per week the city collector shall turn over to the city treasurer all money collected by him from any source whatsoever, taking said treasurer's receipt therefor in duplicate and filing one of the receipts immediately with the city clerk. At that time, or on demand, the city collector shall obtain a copy of any receipts so filed from the city clerk. 
(Code 1980, § 2-142; Ord. of 2-24-1966, § 3) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-120.  
Sec. 2-365. - Annual financial statement; publication. 
(a)  Between the first and tenth of April of each year, the city collector shall file with the city clerk a statement of all the money collected by him during the year, the particular warrant, special assessment or account on which collected, the balance of money uncollected on all warrants in his possession and the balance remaining uncollected at the time of the return on all warrants which he returned to the city clerk during the preceding fiscal year. 
(b)  The city clerk shall publish said statement at least once within ten (10) days in one or more newspapers published in the city or in one or more newspapers with a general circulation within the city. 
(Code 1980, § 2-143; Ord. of 2-24-1966, §§ 3, 4) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-125.  
Sec. 2-366. - Other duties. 
In addition to the duties prescribed hereinbefore, the city collector shall perform the following additional duties: 
(1)  Preserving all warrants returned to him. 
(2)  Keeping his books and accounts in the manner prescribed by the city council. 
(3)  Presenting all warrants, books, vouchers and papers pertaining to his office for examination at any time to the mayor, city clerk or any member or committee of the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 2-144; Ord. of 2-24-1966, § 3) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-120.  
Secs. 2-367—2-400. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - CITY ADMINISTRATOR/COMPTROLLER[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-32, adopted June 28, 2018, amended div. 6 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former div. 6 pertained to the director of purchasing and personnel, consisted of §§ 2-401—2-411, and derived from the 1980 Code; an ordinance adopted July 13, 1972; Ord. No. 03-49, adopted Sept. 10-2003; Ord. No. 06-47, adopted June 22, 2006; Ord. No. 09-51, adopted Sept. 10, 2009; and Ord. No. 18-27, adopted June 14, 2018. 
 
Sec. 2-401. - City administrator. 
There is hereby created the office of city administrator/comptroller pursuant to the above recitals and provisions herein, and included in this section as if restated herein. 
(Ord. No. 18-32, § 1, 6-28-2018; Ord. No. 18-33, § 1, 6-28-2018)  
Sec. 2-402. - Appointment—City administrator. 
The city administrator shall be appointed by the mayor, and report directly to the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 18-32, § 2, 6-28-2018; Ord. No. 18-33, § 2, 6-28-2018)  
Sec. 2-403. - Director of purchasing and personnel abolished. 
All of the duties of the director of purchasing and personnel found in 2-401, et seq., of the Municipal Code of Calumet City shall be incorporated and included as the duties of the city administrator with the result being the office of director of purchasing and personnel shall be abolished. 
(Ord. No. 18-32, § 3, 6-28-2018; Ord. No. 18-33, § 3, 6-28-2018)  
Sec. 2-404. - Comptroller. 
There is hereby created the office of comptroller, as stated in the recitals and provisions above, and incorporated and repeated herein, pursuant to the Illinois Statutes as recited above and repeated herein. 
(Ord. No. 18-32, § 4, 6-28-2018)  
Sec. 2-405. - Appointment—Comptroller. 
The comptroller shall be appointed by the mayor, and report directly to the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 18-32, § 5, 6-28-2018)  
Sec. 2-406. - Duties of comptroller. 
The comptroller shall perform all duties as specified in the Illinois Statutes as set forth in the recitals and incorporated herein. 
(Ord. No. 18-32, § 6, 6-28-2018)  
Sec. 2-407. - Combined office. 
The offices of city administrator and comptroller shall be combined and performed by one (1) person and any authorized subordinates, and known as the office of city administrator/comptroller. 
(Ord. No. 18-32, § 7, 6-28-2018)  
Sec. 2-408. - Compensation. 
The city administrator/comptroller shall be paid the same as currently designated for the office of director of purchasing and personnel until adjusted by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 18-32, § 8, 6-28-2018; Ord. No. 18-33, § 4, 6-28-2018)  
Secs. 2-409—2-430. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-51, § 2, adopted Sept. 20, 2009, repealed § 2-411 in its entirety, which formerly pertained to duties of director of personnel and derived from Ord. No. 03-49, § 4, adopted Sept. 10, 2003; Ord. No. 06-47, adopted June 22, 2006.  
DIVISION 7. - ARCHITECT 
 
Sec. 2-431. - Creation of position; appointment. 
There is hereby created the position of architect for the city. He shall be appointed by the mayor, by and with the advice and consent of the city council. 
(Code 1970, § 7.901; Code 1980, § 2-361; Ord. No. 76-7, § 1, 3-25-1976)  
Sec. 2-432. - Duties. 
The architect shall perform such architectural duties and functions as directed from time to time by the city council. 
(Code 1970, § 7.902; Code 1980, § 2-362; Ord. No. 76-7, § 1, 3-25-1976)  
Secs. 2-433—2-460. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - COMMISSIONER OF STREETS AND ALLEYS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78. 
State Law reference— Appointment of officers, 65 ILCS, 5/3.1-30-5. 
 
Sec. 2-461. - Position established; appointment. 
There is hereby established the position of commissioner of streets and alleys, who shall be appointed by the mayor by and with the advice and consent of the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 25-1(a))  
Sec. 2-462. - Responsibilities and duties. 
(a)  The commissioner shall have charge of the construction and repair of all street improvements, paving, curbing, sidewalks, bridges, viaducts, subways and all other public improvements. 
(b)  The commissioner shall report to the city council any ordinance violation with relation to the care or use of streets, alleys or sidewalks in the city, of which he may become cognizant. 
(Code 1980, § 25-1(b), (c))  
Sec. 2-463. - Deputy commissioners; positions established; appointments; duties. 
(a)  There is hereby established deputy commissioners of streets, alleys, water and sewer, each of which shall be appointed by the mayor. 
(b)  Each deputy commissioner shall report to the commissioner and shall be responsible for the maintenance and repair of city infrastructure and all appurtenances thereto and such other duties, as assigned by the commissioner. 
(Ord. No. 09-50, § 2, 9-10-2009; Ord. No. 10-12, § 1, 2-11-2010)  
Secs. 2-464—2-480. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - SUPERINTENDENT OF MAINTENANCE 
 
Sec. 2-481. - Position established; appointment. 
There is hereby established the position of superintendent of maintenance, who shall be appointed by the mayor by and with the advice and consent of the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 25-2(a))  
Sec. 2-482. - Responsibilities and duties. 
The superintendent shall be charged with the duty of keeping clean the streets and alleys, parkways and all appurtenances thereto. 
(Code 1980, § 25-1(b))  
Secs. 2-483—2-490. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 10. - CORPORATION COUNSEL 
 
Sec. 2-491. - Position established; appointment. 
(a)  There shall be established the office of corporation counsel of the City of Calumet City. 
(b)  The corporation counsel shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 03-43, §§ 1, 2, 9-5-2003)  
Sec. 2-492. - Duties; compensation. 
(a)  The corporation counsel shall be assigned legal work by the mayor or city attorney to be done on behalf of the city. 
(b)  The corporation counsel shall be compensated in like manner as the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 03-43, § 3, 9-5-2003)  
Secs. 2-493—2-500. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 11. - INDEPENDENT INSPECTOR GENERAL[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-65, §§ 1—11, adopted Nov. 10, 2011, amended Div. 11 in its entirety to read as set out herein. Former Div. 11, §§ 2-500.1—2.500.11, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 07-58, §§ 1—11, adopted May 17, 2007; Ord. No. 07-67, §§ 1—11, adopted June 14, 2007. 
 
Sec. 2-500.1. - Inspector general establishment. 
There is hereby established an office of city government (city) to be known as the office of independent inspector general (OIIG). The independent inspector general shall head the OIIG. The organization and administration of the OIIG shall be sufficiently independent to assure that no interference or influence external to the office adversely affects the independence and objectivity of the independent inspector general. The OIIG shall include an inspector general and such deputies, assistants and other employees as may be provided in the annual appropriation ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 11-65, § 1, 11-10-2011)  
Sec. 2-500.2. - Qualifications, appointment and term. 
(a)  The independent inspector general shall be a person who has at least one (1) of the following characteristics: 
(1)  At least ten (10) years of federal, state, or local government experience as a law enforcement officer, judge, or government attorney. 
(2)  Progressive supervisory experience in an investigative public agency similar to an inspector general's office. 
(3)  Has managed and completed complex investigations involving allegations of fraud, theft, deception, or conspiracy. 
(4)  Has demonstrated the ability to work with local, state and federal law enforcement agencies and the judiciary. 
(b)  The independent inspector general shall have a four-year degree from an accredited institution of higher learning or the equivalent law enforcement experience. 
(c)  The independent inspector general shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 11-65, § 2, 11-10-2011)  
Sec. 2-500.3. - Purpose of office. 
The purpose of the office of independent inspector general is to detect, deter and prevent corruption, fraud, waste, mismanagement, unlawful political discrimination or misconduct in the operations of city government. Additionally, the OIIG shall assist the city attorney and the other departments in the city as called upon by the mayor or city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 11-65, § 3, 11-10-2011)  
Sec. 2-500.4. - Functions, authority and powers; duties. 
In addition to other powers conferred herein, the OIIG shall have the following functions, authority and powers: 
(1)  To receive and register complaints and information concerning corruption, fraud, waste, mismanagement, unlawful political discrimination and misconduct in the operations of city government; including, but not limited to any city contract, grant, lease, license, or application or certification of eligibility for the same; all city employees, departments, bureaus, boards, agencies, agents, or independent contractors; and appointed officials, in the performance of their official duties; contractors and subcontractors providing goods and services pursuant to a city contract; and all persons and business entities seeking city contracts or certification of eligibility for city contracts. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, the OIIG shall have no power or authority over, or relating to matters concerning, the corporate authorities. 
(2)  To investigate litigation filed against the city at the direction of the mayor and/or city attorney or city prosecutor. 
(3)  To promulgate rules and regulations for the conduct of investigations consistent with the requirements of equal protection, due process and this division. 
(4)  To request information from and to conduct interviews under oath with city employees, officials, agents, contractors, sub-contractors, licensees, grantees or persons or businesses seeking city contracts, grants, licenses, or certification of eligibility for city contracts, for the purpose of investigation of corruption, fraud, waste, mismanagement or misconduct. This includes the power to review past, present, and proposed city programs, accounts, records, contracts and transactions. 
(5)  To prepare confidential reports and make recommendations for corrective action as outlined in section 2-500.5. 
(6)  To notify the state's attorney or other appropriate law enforcement authority if the independent inspector general determines or suspects that possible criminal conduct has occurred, and to promptly tender to such authorities any evidence or information which has been obtained by the independent inspector general. In the event an investigation by the OIIG threatens to interfere with an investigation by a different county, city, state, or federal law enforcement agency, the OIIG will cooperate in all respects with such law enforcement agency. The OIIG shall acquiesce in its investigation only upon written request of another law enforcement agency. 
(7)  To serve as liaison between city government and law enforcement authorities regarding any matters which have been referred to such authorities by the independent inspector general. 
(8)  To provide quarterly reports to the mayor and members of the city council as outlined in section 2-500.7. 
(9)  To create and maintain a toll-free office of the independent inspector general hotline for the purpose of receiving citizen and employee reports of corruption, fraud, waste, mismanagement, unlawful political discrimination and misconduct. The identity of any individual placing a call to the office of the inspector general hotline shall be kept confidential during and after the investigation of any complaint made by the caller, unless the caller consents to disclosure of his or her name or disclosure of the caller's identity is otherwise required by law. Alternatively, reports may be made anonymously. 
(10)  The independent inspector general shall be able to request such assistants, employees and personnel and establish personnel procedures as deemed necessary for the efficient and effective administration of the OIIG. The request shall be subject to budgetary approval by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 11-65, § 4, 11-10-2011)  
Sec. 2-500.5. - Cooperation. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of all city employees, officials, agents, contractors, sub-contractors, licensees, grantees or persons or businesses seeking city contracts, grants, licenses, or certification of eligibility for city contracts, to cooperate with the OIIG in the conduct of investigations undertaken pursuant to this division. Every city contract and every bid, proposal, application or solicitation for a city contract and every application for certification of eligibility for a city contract or program shall contain a statement that the person, individually and on behalf of the applicant, will abide by all provisions of this division. It shall be unlawful for any person subject to this section to refuse to cooperate with the independent inspector general as required by this section. The penalty for such violation shall be governed by section 2-500.11. 
(b)  All persons with whom the OIIG requests an interview are required to comply in a timely fashion. Within constitutional limitations, failure by any city employee, official, agent, contractor, sub-contractor, licensee, grantee or person or business seeking city contracts, grants, licenses, or certification of eligibility for city contracts, to cooperate with any reasonable request by the OIIG carries the threat of sanctions and/or criminal contempt proceedings, and any other penalties the city council has within its scope to assess. 
(c)  Nothing in this compliance section may be interpreted to allow the OIIG to violate any individual's constitutional rights, including the 5th Amendment right against self-incrimination. 
(d)  It is the duty of every employee, department and elected official to cooperate with the independent inspector general in any investigation or hearing. Each department's premises, equipment, personnel, books, records and papers shall be made readily available to the independent inspector general. 
(e)  The IIG may make recommendations regarding city departments to the mayor and city council. 
(f)  It shall be the duty of every employee of the city to report, directly and without undue delay, to the independent inspector general any and all information concerning conduct which they know to involve corruption, allegations of political discrimination in non-exempt positions or other criminal activity, by another city employee or official, which concerns his or her office of employment. The knowing failure of any employee to report as required above shall constitute cause for discipline up to and including termination. For purposes of this division, a report made to the inspector general hotline shall be considered a direct report. 
(Ord. No. 11-65, § 5, 11-10-2011)  
Sec. 2-500.6. - Subpoenas. 
The independent inspector general with the advice and cooperation of the city attorney and/or city prosecutor shall be authorized to issue subpoenas to request documents or testimony related to an investigation authorized by this division. Subpoenas shall be served in the manner provided under the Rules of the Illinois Supreme Court and shall identify the person to whom the subpoena is directed and the documents or items sought, stating the date, time and place for appearance of the witness and production of the documents or other items described in the subpoena. In no event shall the date for appearance or production be less than seven (7) days after service of the subpoena. No later than the time for appearance or production requested by subpoena, the person to whom the subpoena is directed may object to the subpoena in whole or in part. The independent inspector general shall consider the grounds for the objection and may resolve the objection through negotiation. No documents or testimony may be sought from representatives of labor organizations relating to the function of representing an employee subject to investigation, or for documents or information which are privileged or confidential under state or federal law, including but not limited to documents or information maintained under the Mental Health and Developmental Disabilities Confidentiality Act. 
(Ord. No. 11-65, § 6, 11-10-2011)  
Sec. 2-500.7. - Quarterly reports. 
No later than the fifteenth day of January, April, July and October of each year, the independent inspector general shall submit to the mayor and city council, a publicly available report, accurate as of the last day of the preceding month, indicating: 
(1)  The number and type of investigations initiated, concluded, or pending since the date of the last report. 
(2)  The number and type of investigations of the conduct (corruption, fraud, waste, mismanagement, unlawful political discrimination or misconduct) of any city employee, appointed officials, elected officials, contractors, subcontractors, persons seeking city contracts, or persons seeking certification of eligibility for city contracts or other city programs. 
(3)  The number of and types of investigations conducted by the OIIG regarding employees under the separately elected officials. 
(4)  The number and type of recommendations made to any department heads or elected official and whether or not the recommendation was followed. 
(Ord. No. 11-65, § 7, 11-10-2011)  
Sec. 2-500.8. - Summary reports. 
Upon conclusion of any investigation, the independent inspector general shall submit a confidential summary report to the mayor, the appropriate head of any department whose office the investigation pertains, and to the purchasing agent in the case of a sustained finding regarding a contractor, subcontractor, applicant for a contract, or person seeking certification of eligibility for a contract. If the independent inspector general has conducted any investigations regarding the office, or an employee, contractor or subcontractor the independent inspector general also shall submit the confidential summary report to the elected official. 
(1)  The report shall include the following: 
a.  A description of any complaints or other information received by the independent inspector general pertinent to the investigation. 
b.  A description of any illegal conduct, corruption, fraud, waste, mismanagement, unlawful political discrimination, misconduct, or inefficiencies observed or discovered in the course of the investigation. 
c.  Recommendations for correction of any illegal conduct, corruption, fraud, waste, mismanagement, unlawful political discrimination, misconduct, or inefficiencies described in the report and a timeline for corrective action. 
d.  Such other information as the independent inspector general may deem relevant to the investigation or resulting recommendations. 
(2)  The report shall not mention the name of any informant, complainant, witness, or person investigated, except in the following instances: 
a.  Where the copy of the report given to the head of any department or agency recommends disciplinary action against an employee of that agency. 
b.  Where the copy of the report given to the purchasing agent makes recommendations concerning any contractor, subcontractor, applicant for a contract, or person seeking certification of eligibility for a contract. 
c.  Where the copy of the report given to the head of a department or agency makes recommendation concerning a person seeking certification of eligibility of a program administered by the department or agency. 
d.  Where the copy given to the mayor recommends disciplinary action against the head or any employee of any executive department or agency. 
(3)  If any investigation is not concluded within one hundred eighty (180) days after its initiation, the independent inspector general shall notify the mayor and city council of the general nature of the complaint or information giving rise to the investigation and the reasons for failure to complete the investigation within one hundred eighty (180) days. 
(Ord. No. 11-65, § 8, 11-10-2011)  
Sec. 2-500.9. - Confidentiality. 
Investigatory files and summary reports concerning alleged corruption, fraud, waste, mismanagement, unlawful political discrimination or misconduct by any person shall be confidential. 
(1)  Summary reports shall not be divulged by the independent inspector general to any person except to the mayor and the head of any department whose office the investigation pertains, the accused, purchasing agent where applicable and to the separately elected official to whose office the investigation pertains. 
(2)  Investigatory files shall be confidential, however, said files may be divulged with the summary report to the head of any department and elected official to whose office the investigation pertains in order to effectively address matters of discipline or ethical violations. Notwithstanding the foregoing, information or evidence obtained by the independent inspector general which pertains to possible criminal activity shall be may be promptly provided to the appropriate law enforcement authorities. 
(Ord. No. 11-65, § 9, 11-10-2011)  
Sec. 2-500.10. - Removal of independent inspector general. 
The independent inspector general may be removed prior to the expiration of his term only for cause and in accordance with the provisions of this section. The mayor shall give written notice to the city council of intent to remove the independent inspector general, stating the cause for removal. A copy of the notice shall be served upon the independent inspector general. Within ten (10) days of receipt, the independent inspector general may file with the city council a request for hearing on the cause for removal. If no such request is made within ten (10) days, the independent inspector general shall be deemed to have resigned his office as of the tenth day after receipt of notice. If a request for hearing is made, the city council shall convene a hearing on the cause for removal of the independent inspector general, at which the independent inspector general may appear and be heard. The hearing shall be convened within fourteen (14) days after the request and shall be concluded within fourteen (14) days thereafter. The hearing shall be conducted in closed session with notice given in accordance with the Illinois Open Meetings Act (5 ILCS 120/1 et seq.). The mayor's notice of cause for removal shall constitute the charge against the independent inspector general. Removal of the independent inspector general shall require the affirmative vote of two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the members of the city council then holding office. 
(Ord. No. 11-65, § 10, 11-10-2011)  
Sec. 2-500.11. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this division for any person to: 
(1)  Retaliate against, punish, harass, threaten or penalize any other person for communicating, cooperating or assisting the independent inspector general in the performance of duties. 
(2)  Interfere, obstruct or attempt to interfere or obstruct an investigation conducted by the independent inspector general. 
(b)  In addition to all other available remedies, civil and criminal, the following penalties shall apply to violations of this division: 
(1)  Any city employee who is found to have willfully violated this division as provided in section 2-500.5 or subsection (a) of this section shall be subject to disciplinary action, up to and including discharge. Disciplinary action shall be instituted in accordance with procedures applicable to the employee, including, but not limited to, those established by the collective bargaining agreements, employee manuals, handbooks or at-will practice of the employer. 
(2)  Any agent, independent contractor or appointed official found to have willfully violated this division as provided in section 2-500.5 or subsection (a) of this section shall be subject to removal. 
(3)  Any contractor, subcontractor, grantee, lessee or licensee under a city contract, grant, lease or license, found to have willfully violated this division as provided in section 2-500.5 or subsection (a) of this section shall be subject to termination of existing contracts, grants, leases or licenses, and/or ineligibility from consideration for future city contracts, grants, leases or licenses for a period not to exceed two (2) years. 
(4)  Any person or business entity seeking city contracts or certification of eligibility for city contracts or participation in any city program found to have willfully violated this division shall be subject to ineligibility from consideration for future city contracts, grants, leases, licenses, or programs for a period not to exceed two (2) years. 
(5)  Any person found to have willfully violated section 2-500.5 shall also be subject to a fine of not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation. Actions seeking the imposition of a fine shall be filed as quasi-criminal actions subject to the provisions of the Illinois Code of Civil Procedure, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 11-65, § 11, 11-10-2011)  
ARTICLE V. - EMPLOYEE BENEFITS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-501. - Holidays for certain employees. 
(a)  The following shall be legal holidays for all employees of the city hereinafter designated: 
New Year's Day. 
Lincoln's Birthday. 
Washington's Birthday. 
Memorial Day. 
Good Friday. 
Independence Day. 
Labor Day. 
Columbus Day. 
Veterans Day. 
Thanksgiving Day. 
Friday following Thanksgiving. 
Christmas Day. 
The city council annually shall designate the date on which the city shall observe such holidays. 
(b)  The term "employee," as used herein, shall mean any person giving his full time services to the city for which payment is made in the form of wages or salaries and devotes no less than a minimum of thirty (30) hours per week. Any employee who is eligible for holiday benefits, and who is required to work on a day designated as a city holiday, shall receive straight time pay in addition to regular pay for that day. Any employee who is eligible for an unworked holiday and does not work on the holiday shall be paid his regular wages. This section shall not apply to policemen, firemen or personnel under a union contract. 
(Code 1980, § 2-24; Ord. No. 77-1, § 1, 1-27-1977; Ord. No. 78-16, § 1, 4-27-1978; Ord. No. 81-1, § 1, 1-8-1981)  
Secs. 2-502—2-520. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - VACATION AND OTHER LEAVE 
 
Sec. 2-521. - Scope. 
Except as otherwise provided, the provisions of this division shall not apply to members of the police and fire departments, nor any other departments or employees governed by a union contract whenever any state statutes or contracts are contrary or inconsistent to it. In such cases such applicable state statutes or union contracts shall govern. 
(Code 1980, § 2-31; Ord. of 10-8-1964, § 5.1)  
Sec. 2-522. - Roster. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of each head of each department to maintain a roster of employees who have taken any leave in accordance with any terms and conditions of this division. 
(b)  A copy of the roster will be delivered to the office of the city clerk on or before the tenth and twenty-fifth day of each month covering the prior payroll period. 
(Code 1980, § 2-32; Ord. of 10-8-1964, §§ 6.1, 6.2)  
Sec. 2-523. - Vacations. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this division, the following terms shall mean as indicated below: 
Employee: means any person giving his full-time service to the city for which payment is made in the form of wages or salaries. 
Full-time employee: means any employee who devotes his services to the city for not less than thirty (30) hours per week. 
Vacation of two (2) weeks, three (3) weeks, four (4) weeks or five (5) weeks. Vacation time respectively equivalent to the number of regularly scheduled work hours in a period of fourteen (14), twenty-one (21), twenty-eight (28) or thirty-five (35) days. 
(b)  Eligibility. An employee who completes one (1) year of continuous service with the city shall be entitled to two (2) weeks vacation each calendar year until the year in which he completes his fourth year. An employee who completes five (5) years of continuous service with the city shall be entitled to three (3) weeks vacation each calendar year until the year in which he completes his ninth year. An employee who completes ten (10) years of continuous service with the city shall be entitled to four (4) weeks vacation each calendar year thereafter. An employee who completes fifteen (15) years of continuous service with the city shall be entitled to five (5) weeks vacation each calendar year thereafter. 
(c)  Maximum amount. Five (5) weeks is the maximum paid vacation to which any city employee shall be entitled. 
(d)  Minimum period. No vacation period shall be for less than one (1) week except upon prior approval of the department head. 
(e)  Cumulation. Vacation periods shall not be cumulative and must be completed within the calendar year. 
(f)  Prior approval. No vacation shall be taken unless approved by the head of the department, except that heads of departments shall seek the approval of the mayor. 
(g)  Seniority preference. Employees shall be entitled to vacation period preference by seniority. 
(Code 1980, § 2-33; Ord. of 10-8-1964, §§ 1.1, 1.2; Ord. No. 81-32, § 1, 10-8-1981)  
Sec. 2-524. - Sick leave and funeral leave. 
(a)  Definition. As used in this section, the term employee shall mean any person giving his full-time services to the city for which payment is made in the form of wages or salaries and who devotes no less than thirty (30) hours per week to said employment. 
(b)  Eligibility. An employee must be employed one year, with a minimum of fifteen hundred (1,500) hours of service, before he is eligible for sick leave. Upon completion of the first continuous year of service an employee shall immediately be credited with twelve (12) days sick leave. 
(c)  Waiting period. Except as provided herein, there shall be a three (3) day waiting period. A three (3) day waiting period shall not be applicable if the employee is hospitalized during any part of his absence, or if the employee, upon return to work, produces a certification by a licensed physician showing that the employee had been under the care of said physician from the first day of illness or injury which rendered him unfit to work during his absence. 
(d)  Physician's certificate. An employee must present a physician's certificate if absent for more than three (3) days. 
(e)  Computation. Sick leave shall be computed on a continuous basis and shall accumulate at the rate of one eight (8) hour working day per month to a maximum of sixty (60) eight (8) hour working days. 
(f)  Reasons allowable. Sick leave pay may be granted to a city employee for: 
(1)  Absence from duty because of personal illness. 
(2)  Legal quarantine in accordance with local and state health regulations. 
(g)  Reasons not allowable. Sick leave pay will not be granted: 
(1)  While the employee is on vacation, suspension, layoff or leave of absence. 
(2)  When an employee leaves the city employment under a retirement plan. 
(3)  In case of sickness or disability directly or indirectly due to intoxication, use of stimulants or drugs or narcotics, unless prescribed by a licensed physician; nor in cases of unlawful acts, immoralities, fighting, (unless in self-defense against unprovoked assaults) nor the willful intent on the part of an employee to injure himself or another. 
(h)  Funeral leave. A maximum of five (5) days leave may be granted in case of death in the employee's immediate family or spouse's family in order to attend the funeral. Proof of death shall be presented. As used in this subsection, immediate family shall mean the husband, wife, children, stepchildren, father, mother, sister, brother, grandparent, mother-in-law or father-in-law. 
(i)  Laid off employees. An employee who is laid off from his position for reasons that are not discreditable to him, may, if reappointed within twelve (12) months, have available for his necessary use any unused sick leave existing at the time of his lay off. 
(j)  Notice. If sick, an employee shall notify his department head no later than one (1) hour after he is to begin his regular duties. 
(k)  Not a right. Sick leave shall not be considered a right which an employee may use at his discretion, but shall be allowed only in the case of injury or sickness of an employee. 
(l)  Examination and investigations. An employee shall permit a physician designated by the city to make such examination as may be necessary in order to determine the employee's condition. The city may rely upon the findings of such physician in deciding whether an employee shall be given sick-leave benefits, and any decision of the city based on its findings shall be final, or the city may make a final decision in its discretion based upon such other investigations as it may decide upon. An employee shall give correct information to the physician or to others designated by the city to make investigations concerning his sickness or disability. 
(m)  Alternative work. If an employee is unable to perform his normal duties due to a temporary sickness or disability, but in the opinion of a physician designated by the city is able to perform light work or work of a different nature, in the same department, he shall be assigned such other work whenever it is available. No sick-leave benefits shall be paid if the employee is unable to perform his regular duties and refuses to perform light work or work of a different nature, when in the opinion of a physician designated by the city he is able to do so. 
(n)  Accumulation. Officers and employees who are in the service of the city, and are eligible for sick leave, as of October 8, 1964, shall be entitled to an accumulation of sick leave days as follows: 
Years of service 	Eight-hour working days allowed 
20 and over ..... 	60 
Over 15, less than 20 ..... 	50 
Over 10, less than 15 ..... 	40 
Over 5, less than 10 ..... 	30 
Over 2, less than 5 ..... 	20 
Over 1, less than 2 ..... 	12 
 
(Code 1980, § 2-34; Ord. of 10-8-1964, §§ 2.1—2.10; Ord. No. 85-12, § 1, 3-14-1985)  
Sec. 2-525. - Injury leave. 
(a)  Defined. Injury leave as distinguished from sick leave shall mean leave allowed to an employee due to absence from duty because of an accident or injury that occurred in the line of duty and during his normal work period. 
(b)  Reports of injury. If an employee is injured in the line of duty and during his normal work period, he must report to his department head immediately no matter how slight the injury. 
(c)  Application for other benefits. An employee who is injured and unable to work shall apply for workmen's compensation, or any other compensation he is entitled to either by contract, agreement or statute. 
(d)  Payments. If a physician designated by the city certifies that an employee's injuries prevent him from working, he will be eligible to receive full regular pay for a period of three (3) months, except that members of the police and fire departments shall be eligible to receive full regular pay for a period of six (6) months arising out of a single injury or occurrence. 
(e)  Other compensation. An employee's full pay received from the city shall be subject to the deduction of any compensation as may be derived from workmen's compensation or any other compensation received as a result of employment by the city. 
(f)  Alternative work. Benefits shall not be paid if the employee is unable to perform his regular duties and refuses to perform light work or work of a different nature when in the opinion of a physician designated by the city he is able to do so. 
(g)  Extension of benefits. Benefits may be extended for not more than an additional six (6) month period by approval of the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 2-35; Ord. of 10-8-1964, §§ 3.1—3.5)  
Sec. 2-526. - Leaves of absence—Generally. 
(a)  With pay. Leave of absence, with pay, may be granted by the mayor, with the consent of the city council, to permit an employee to attend professional meetings or conferences in the interest of the city. 
(b)  Without pay. A leave without pay, for not more than sixty (60) days, may be granted by the department head and the mayor when requested by an employee when such leave is deemed to be justified. Any requests for a leave period beyond sixty (60) days shall be submitted to the city council for approval. 
(c)  Written request. A written request for leave of absence must be submitted to the department head for his approval and forwarded to the city council where applicable. 
(Code 1980, § 2-36; Ord. of 10-8-1964, §§ 4.1—4.3)  
Sec. 2-527. - Same—Computation of fringe benefits. 
(a)  It is hereby established that all employees of the city who shall be granted leave of absence in accordance with the ordinance in such case made and provided shall be paid as follows: 
(1)  Clothing allowance. The clothing allowance provided by ordinance shall be paid on a fiscal year basis, pro rata, according to the period worked in the prior fiscal year. 
(2)  Longevity. Any person on leave of absence shall not accumulate longevity time. 
(3)  Seniority. Any person on leave of absence shall not accumulate seniority time. 
(4)  Insurance premiums. Any employee granted a leave of absence shall pay in advance their proportionate share of insurance premiums, to conform with current insurance policy provisions, to cover the period of leave of absence granted. 
(5)  Holiday and holiday pay. An employee granted a leave of absence shall not be entitled to receive holiday pay nor credited for a holiday compensatory day when such holiday occurs within the leave of absence period. 
(6)  Vacations. Any vacation that an employee is entitled to must be taken at the beginning of the leave of absence period; provided, however, that no vacation or sick leave time will accrue during the leave of absence period. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, in computing the exact date that an individual is entitled to fringe benefits, the date provided for said fringe benefits shall be fiscal year date, annual year date, or the individual anniversary year date of the employee as provided by the specific ordinance in each case. 
(Code 1980, § 2-37; Ord. No. 79-36, § 1, 7-12-1979)  
Sec. 2-528. - Accounting of accrued sick leave, vacation time and holidays. 
The city treasurer is hereby authorized and directed to account for accrued sick leave, vacation time and holidays for city employees, including superintendents and department heads, in accordance with federal and state requirements and regulations. 
(Code 1980, § 2-38; Ord. No. 85-14, § 1, 4-25-1985)  
Secs. 2-529—2-565. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - DEPARTMENTS[11] 
Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Cross reference— Animal control department, § 10-61 et seq.; electrical inspection department, § 14-211 et seq.; fire department, § 30-31 et seq.; community/human relations department, § 42-31 et seq.; police department, § 46-31 et seq.; sewer and water department, § 94-31 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-566—2-580. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DEPARTMENT OF LAW  
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 2-581. - Established; composition. 
There is hereby established an executive department of the municipal government which shall be known as the department of law, and which shall embrace the city attorney and the city prosecutor. 
(Code 1980, § 2-156; Ord. of 5-24-1962, § 1)  
Sec. 2-582. - Head. 
The city attorney shall be the head of the department of law. 
(Code 1980, § 2-157; Ord. of 5-24-1962, § 2)  
Secs. 2-583—2-600. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - City Attorney 
 
Sec. 2-601. - Position established; appointment. 
There is hereby established the position of city attorney, an executive office of the city. The city attorney shall be appointed by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 2-164; Ord. of 5-24-1962, § 2) 
State Law reference— Appointment of city attorney, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-30-5.  
Sec. 2-602. - Compensation. 
The city attorney shall receive compensation for the performance of his duties based upon the fair and reasonable value of his services or as contractually agreed upon by and between the city attorney and the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 2-165; Ord. of 5-24-1962, §§ 2, 3)  
Sec. 2-603. - Duties. 
The city attorney shall perform such legal duties relating to the city as are not required to be performed by the city prosecutor. 
(Code 1980, § 2-166) 
State Law reference— Power of council to prescribe duties of appointed officials, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-40.  
Secs. 2-604—2-630. - Reserved.  
Subdivision III. - City Prosecutor 
 
Sec. 2-631. - Position established; appointment. 
There is hereby established the position of city prosecutor. The city prosecutor shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 2-174; Ord. of 5-24-1962, § 4)  
Sec. 2-632. - Compensation. 
The compensation of the city prosecutor for the performance of his duties shall be such as is fixed from time to time by the city council, and if no such compensation is fixed, he shall be entitled to the fair and reasonable value for his services. 
(Code 1980, § 2-175; Ord. of 5-24-1962, § 4)  
Sec. 2-633. - Duties. 
The city prosecutor shall prosecute all city charges before the circuit court and all public boards, commissions and bodies. 
(Code 1980, § 2-176) 
State Law reference— Power of council to prescribe duties of appointed officials, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-40.  
Secs. 2-634—2-645. - Reserved.  
Subdivision IV. - Corporation Counsel 
 
Sec. 2-646. - Established. 
There shall be established the office of corporation counsel of the City of Calumet City. 
(Ord. No. 03-43, § 1, 9-5-2003)  
Sec. 2-647. - Appointment. 
The corporation counsel shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 03-43, § 2, 9-5-2003)  
Sec. 2-648. - Duties. 
The corporation counsel shall be assigned legal work by the mayor or city attorney to be done on behalf of the city and be compensated in like manner as the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 03-43, § 3, 9-5-2003)  
Secs. 2-649—2-660. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE  
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 2-661. - Established. 
There is hereby established a department to be known as the department of finance. 
(Code 1980, § 2-188; Ord. of 4-30-1965, § 1)  
Sec. 2-662. - Composition. 
The department of finance shall be composed of the elected city treasurer, a bookkeeper and such other personnel as shall from time to time be designated by the mayor and city council. 
(Code 1980, § 2-189; Ord. of 4-30-1965, § 2)  
Sec. 2-663. - Supervisor. 
The elected city treasurer shall be supervisor of all employees in the department of finance and all such employees shall perform their duties subject to his directions. 
(Code 1980, § 2-190; Ord. of 4-30-1965, § 3)  
Sec. 2-664. - Departmental duties. 
In addition to the duties prescribed in this article, the city treasurer and all personnel in the department of finance shall perform such other duties as may be required by ordinance, all to the end that the purposes of the department of finance shall be faithfully and efficiently administered and carried out. 
(Code 1980, § 2-191; Ord. of 4-30-1965, § 5)  
Sec. 2-665. - General duties of treasurer. 
The city treasurer shall present to the city council regular reports covering the work of the finance department for which he is responsible, together with such other reports as may be required by the city council and mayor. He shall act in an advisory capacity to the council in financial matters and at the end of each fiscal year, he shall assist the council in the preparation of a budget estimate of income and expenditures of the ensuing year. 
(Code 1980, § 2-192; Ord. of 4-30-1965, § 4)  
Secs. 2-666—2-690. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Director 
 
Sec. 2-691. - Position established. 
There is hereby established the position of director of finance. Said director shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council. The person appointed as director of finance shall possess a bachelor's degree from an accredited college or university and shall be a certified public accountant. Said position may be filled on a part-time basis or by an independent contractor as needed. 
(Code 1980, § 2-201; Ord. No. 90-2, § 1, 1-25-1990)  
Sec. 2-692. - Compensation. 
Any person appointed as director of finance on a full-time basis shall receive such compensation as established from time to time by the city council. Any person appointed as director of finance on a part-time basis or as an independent contractor shall be paid an hourly rate of thirty dollars ($30.00) per hour; provided, however, that any person appointed between the effective date of this division and April 30, 1990, shall not be paid an amount of money which exceeds five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) unless approved by the city council prior to exceeding said five-thousand-dollar ($5,000.00) limit. 
(Code 1980, § 2-202; Ord. No. 90-2, § 1, 1-25-1990)  
Secs. 2-693—2-710. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - DEPARTMENT OF INSPECTIONAL SERVICES 
 
Sec. 2-711. - Established. 
A department of inspectional services is hereby created to oversee all inspectional services required by the city pursuant to all pertinent sections of this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 2-268; Ord. No. 96-40, § 1, 7-11-1996; Ord. No. 07-123, § 2, 12-13-2007)  
Sec. 2-712. - Director, deputy directors. 
The department of inspectional services shall be headed by a director of inspectional services who shall be appointed by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council. All inspectional functions of the city shall be coordinated and supervised by the director of inspectional services. The building commissioner shall be named as deputy director of inspectional services The building commissioner, electrical inspector, plumbing inspector, housing administrator and all department inspectors and staff shall report to and be under the supervision of the director of inspectional services. 
(Code 1980, § 2-269; Ord. No. 96-40, § 1, 7-11-1996; Ord. No. 03-48, § 1, 9-10-2003; Ord. No. 07-123, § 3, 12-13-2007)  
Secs. 2-713—2-727. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - HEALTH, YOUTH AND FAMILY SERVICES DEPARTMENT  
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 2-728. - Established; purpose. 
There is hereby created a department which shall be known as the health, youth and family services department. 
(Code 1980, §§ 2-308, 2-315; Ord. of 10-12-1972, § 1; Ord. No. 80-31, § 1, 12-11-1980; Ord. No. 03-50, §§ 1, 3, 9-10-2003)  
Secs. 2-729—2-742. - Reserved.  
Subdvision II. - Commissioner of Health[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Cross reference— Health and sanitation, ch. 38. 
 
Sec. 2-743. - Qualifications. 
The commissioner of health shall be a licensed physician, in good standing with the Illinois Department of Professional Regulation. 
(Ord. No. 04-72, § 2, 10-14-2004)  
Sec. 2-744. - Office created. 
There is hereby created the office of commissioner of health, an executive office of the city. He/She shall be appointed by the mayor and with the advice and consent of the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 2-336; Ord. No. 04-72, § 1, 10-14-2004)  
Sec. 2-745. - Duties. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the commissioner of health to enforce all ordinances containing provisions for the protection of public health. He shall advise the director of health, as well as the city health inspector, of issues concerning public health. 
(b)  He shall oversee all immunization programs for the residents of this city, which shall include, but not be limited to, well-baby clinics. In addition, it shall be the duty of the commissioner of health to coordinate, in conjunction with the director of health, the implementation of state mandated vaccinations to school-aged children through combined initiatives with the city public school nurses in an effort to bridge the gap between health and education. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the commissioner of health to educate the residents of this city on chronic prevalent diseases common to the community, i.e., including but not limited to hypertension, diabetes, and obesity; and he shall govern the implementation of community health initiatives including the creation of appropriate health-related support groups. 
(d)  He shall perform any other duties and functions that may be required by statute or ordinance. 
(Code 1980, § 2-337; Ord. No. 04-72, § 3, 10-14-2004)  
Sec. 2-746. - Reports. 
The commissioner of health shall make such reports to the city council as may be required. He shall also make recommendations for rulings, orders or ordinances respecting the public health whenever he is requested to do so, or whenever he deems it necessary or advisable. 
(Code 1980, § 2-338)  
Sec. 2-747. - Powers. 
(a)  The commissioner of health shall exercise general supervision over the health of the city with full power to make such rules and regulations not inconsistent with the rules of the state department of public health. 
(b)  He shall govern the prevention, restriction, and suppression of contagious and infectious diseases in accordance with the provisions of this article and the rules and regulations of the state department of public health. 
(Code 1980, § 2-339; Ord. No. 81-43, § 3, 12-10-1981; Ord. No. 04-72, § 4, 10-14-2004)  
Secs. 2-748—2-762. - Reserved.  
Subdivision III. - Director of the Health Center and Youth and Family Services 
 
Sec. 2-763. - Position created; appointment. 
There is hereby created the position of director of the health center and youth and family services of the health department. Said person shall be appointed by the mayor, by and with the advice and consent of the city council. 
(Code 1970, § 7.1001; Code 1980, § 2-346; Ord. No. 76-13, § 1, 6-10-1976; Ord. No. 03-50, § 5, 9-10-2003)  
Sec. 2-764. - Reports. 
The director of the health center and youth and family services shall present to the city council monthly reports and mandatory quarterly reports as requested by the Illinois Law Enforcement Commission together with such other special reports as may be requested by the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 2-312; Ord. of 10-12-1972, § 1; Ord. No. 03-50, § 4, 9-10-2003)  
Sec. 2-765. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The director of the health center and youth and family services shall have supervision over all persons under his jurisdiction. The director shall have the power to employ those qualified and necessary persons and the power to discharge said personnel. 
(b)  The director of the health center and youth and family services shall perform such duties as are necessary to the end that the purposes and policies of the mayor and city council shall be faithfully and efficiently administered and carried out in regard to those services necessary to promote the general welfare, conduct and assistance regarding the youth of the city. The director shall utilize the services and coordinate the activities of the health, youth and family services department with the police department and all public and private agencies necessary to implement a complete program regarding youth and related activities, including but not limited to drug prevention, recreation and counseling. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the director of the health center and youth and family services to be in charge and responsible for the health center and personnel employed therein. The health commissioner and the director of the health center and youth and family services shall mutually cooperate with each other for the good and welfare of the residents of the city. 
(Code 1970, § 7.1003; Code 1980, §§ 2-311, 2-313, 2-348; Ord. of 10-12-1972 § 1; Ord. No. 76-13, § 1, 6-10-1976; Ord. No. 80-31, § 1, 2-11-1980; Ord. No. 03-50, §§ 4, 5, 7, 9-10-2003)  
Secs. 2-766—2-781. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - DEPARTMENT OF ETHICS AND PROFESSIONAL STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 2-782. - Established. 
There is hereby established the department of ethics and professional standards. 
(Ord. No. 03-51, § 1, 9-10-2003)  
Sec. 2-783. - Director. 
(a)  Appointment. The department shall be staffed by a director who shall be appointed by a mayor with the advice and consent of the city council. This director shall be a professional and not be required to reside in the City of Calumet City. 
(b)  Duties and responsibilities. 
(1)  The director also shall act as the ethics officer pursuant to section 2-292 of the City of Calumet City Code and as the equal employment opportunity officer. 
(2)  The director shall initiate and receive complaints of any actual or perceived violation of the appointed officials' public duties from other appointed officials or employees of the city. In addition, the director shall receive and process any complaints from residents or other interested parties who may have complaints regarding the appointed officials of Calumet City government. The director may conduct investigations concerning any matter which the director may find to possibly violate any city ordinance or state law. When the director determines that assistance may be needed in conducting investigations, or when required by law, the director shall request the assistance of other appropriate agencies or the city attorney. The director also shall have the authority to consult with all other city departments, officials and employees on matters involving ethical conduct. 
(3)  The director shall make recommendations to the mayor and city council as to further legislation and rules in regard to complaints, hearings and possible sanctions. 
(4)  The director shall be responsible for hearing any complaints regarding discrimination or harassment based on any cause, including, but not limited to, race, sex, religion or political affiliation. 
(5)  The director shall maintain a presence in the city via a phone number and office accessible to the general public. 
(c)  Compensation. The director shall be compensated in an amount to be determined by the corporate authorities. 
(Ord. No. 03-51, §§ 2—8, 9-10-2003)  
Secs. 2-784—2-798. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[13] 
Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Cross reference— Local liquor control commission, § 6-31 et seq.; electrical commission, § 14-181 et seq.; foreign fire insurance board, § 30-131 et seq.; community/human relations commission, § 42-71 et seq.; board of library directors, § 50-21 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-799—2-810. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 30; law enforcement, ch. 46. 
State Law reference— Board of fire and police commissioners generally, 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-811. - Established. 
There is hereby established a board of fire and police commissioners. 
(Code 1980, § 2-234) 
State Law reference— Board required, 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-1.  
Sec. 2-812. - Composition. 
The board of fire and police commissioners shall consist of three (3) members. 
(Code 1980, § 2-235) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-1.  
Sec. 2-813. - Appointment. 
The members of the board of fire and police commissioners shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 2-236) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-1.  
Sec. 2-814. - Qualifications. 
The members of the board of fire and police commissioners shall have the qualifications provided by state law. 
(Code 1980, § 2-237) 
State Law reference— Qualifications, 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-3.  
Sec. 2-815. - Terms. 
The members of the board of fire and police commissioners shall serve for terms of three (3) years each, and until their successors are appointed and qualified. 
(Code 1980, § 2-238) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Il65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-1.  
Sec. 2-816. - Removal. 
The members of the board of fire and police commissioners shall be removable for the grounds specified in state law and in the manner provided in state law. 
(Code 1980, § 2-239) 
State Law reference— Removal of members, 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-3.  
Sec. 2-817. - Powers and duties. 
The board of fire and police commissioners shall have the powers and duties provided by state law, except that it shall have no power to appoint the fire chief or the police chief. 
(Code 1980, § 2-240) 
State Law reference— Powers of board, 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-4 et seq.  
Secs. 2-818—2-840. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - BOARD OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS 
[15]
Footnotes: 
 
Sec. 2-841. - Established; composition. 
There is hereby established a board of local improvements which shall consist of the mayor and all the members of the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 2-252; Ord. of 7-10-1969, § 1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 65 ILCS 5/9-2-7.  
Sec. 2-842. - Attorney. 
There is hereby established the position of special assessment attorney to advise the board of local improvements and to process all special assessment proceedings. The special assessment attorney shall receive such compensation as is provided by law, and generally paid to attorneys specializing in special assessment practice in the county. 
(Code 1980, § 2-253; Ord. of 7-10-1969, § 3)  
Sec. 2-843. - Engineer. 
There is hereby established the position of engineer for the board of local improvements. It shall be the duty of the engineer to prepare all necessary plans, specifications and estimates for improvements when authorized and directed by the board of local improvements. He shall receive such compensation as is authorized by law and generally paid to engineers specializing in this type of work in the county. 
(Code 1980, § 2-254; Ord. of 7-10-1969, § 4)  
Sec. 2-844. - Secretary. 
There is hereby established the position of secretary of the board of local improvements. The city clerk shall serve as secretary of the board of local improvements. It shall be the duty of the secretary to keep minutes of all of its regular and special meetings, prepare and publish notices and perform other duties as are prescribed by statute or authorized by the board of local improvements. 
(Code 1980, § 2-255; Ord. of 7-10-1969, § 5; Ord. No. 85-29, § 1, 8-22-1985)  
Sec. 2-845. - Duties. 
The board of local improvements shall have the powers and perform the duties assigned to it by state law or ordinance. 
(Code 1980, § 2-256; Ord. of 7-10-1969, § 2) 
State Law reference— Duties of board generally, 65 ILCS 5/9-1-1 et seq.  
Secs. 2-846—2-880. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - FINANCE[16] 
Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Cross reference— Taxation, ch. 82. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-881. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the city shall begin on the first day of May of each year and end on the last day of April of the following year. 
(Code 1980, § 2-1; Ord. of 10-26-1961, § II) 
State Law reference— Fiscal year, 65 ILCS 5/1-1-2(5).  
Sec. 2-882. - Payment of bills. 
(a)  All bills which are payable by the city, other than those for the payment of salaries established by the city council, shall be submitted to the city council for approval before payment. 
(b)  Whenever an unforeseen or emergency payment is required prior to submission to the city council for approval for payment, payment may be made provided the following terms and conditions are complied with: 
(1)  The treasurer and either the mayor, city clerk or chairman of the finance committee shall certify in writing that an unforeseen or emergency payment is required, not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per payment. 
(2)  The request for payment should be in writing signed by the department head on a form provided by the treasurer, and the payment request should be provided for in the current appropriation ordinance, and the payment request will not over-expend said appropriation. 
(3)  The payment request shall be included on the bills submitted for payment by council approval at the next regular council meeting. 
(4)  The treasurer shall determine whether all of the above conditions have been complied with prior to authorizing issuance of any check as herein provided. 
(c)  The above provisions notwithstanding, water bills payable by the city to the City of Chicago or the Hammond Water Works Department shall be paid when deemed necessary by the treasurer in order to secure prompt payment discounts prior to submission to the city council for approval before payment; however, such action of the treasurer shall be submitted to the city council for ratification and approval of his action at the next regular council meeting. 
(d)  The above provisions notwithstanding, bills payable by the city to any provider of electrical service to any city-owned or managed properties shall be paid when deemed necessary by the treasurer in order to secure prompt payment discounts prior to submission to the city council for approval before payment; however, such action of the treasurer shall be submitted to the city council for ratification and approval of his action at the next regular council meeting. 
(e)  The above provisions notwithstanding, the treasurer may authorize the payment of postage and the reimbursement of the petty cash fund prior to city council approval but shall report such action for approval and ratification at the next regular council meeting. 
(Code 1980, § 2-3; Ord. of 11-25-1975, § 1; Ord. No. 76-41, § 1, 10-28-1976; Ord. No. 12-53, § 2, 11-20-2012; Ord. No. 13-31, § 2, 6-27-2013)  
Sec. 2-883. - Competitive bidding requirements waived for asbestos removal in certain emergency situations. 
(a)  It is hereby ordained that no advertising or competitive bidding shall be required to remove the asbestos from any vacant or deteriorating structure or to demolish such structure determined to be detrimental to the life, safety and health of the citizens of the city and such determination shall be without regard to whether or not the cost thereof exceeds ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) where the condition of such structure is determined to be a threat to said life, safety and health of any person so as to create an emergency situation and the need to avoid serious hazard. 
(b)  It is hereby determined and ordained that the waiving of the bidding requirement shall only occur where there is written direction from the director of inspectional services, which indicates a requirement for immediate asbestos removal and demolition approved by the chief of the fire department or the chief of police and further, that such direction indicates in writing that appropriate notice requirements to the owner or owners of the property have been attempted and that an emergency demolition is required. 
(Code 1980, § 2-6; Ord. No. 96-55, §§ 1, 2, 8-22-1996)  
Sec. 2-884. - Special assessment unclaimed rebate fund established; use of fund. 
(a)  There is hereby established a special assessment unclaimed rebate fund for the city pursuant to the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/9-1-5—9-1-10, as amended. 
(b)  The corporate authorities by ordinance may direct the use of the money in the unclaimed rebate fund for any public purpose for which the municipality is authorized by law to expend funds. 
(Code 1980, § 26-161; Ord. No. 88-14, §§ 1, 2, 6-23-1988)  
Secs. 2-885—2-900. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ISSUANCE PROCEDURES FOR INDUSTRIAL REVENUE AND POLLUTION CONTROL REVENUE BONDS 
 
Sec. 2-901. - Definitions. 
Whenever used in this division, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed: 
Economic development project means any building or facility or any area, industrial park or portion thereof or combination or part thereof occupied or utilized by an industrial manufacturing or business enterprise located within or partially within the municipality, including any land, interest in land, building, structure, facility, system, fixture, improvement, addition, appurtenance, machinery or equipment, or any combination thereof, and all real and personal property deemed necessary in connection therewith, for use by any person, provided that the existence of such economic development project will create or retain employment opportunities in or near the municipality. 
Municipality means the City of Calumet City, Cook County, Illinois. 
Person means any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation (including public utilities), association, joint stock company, trust, estate, political subdivision, state agency, or any other legal entity, or its legal representative, agent or assigns. 
Pollution means any form of environmental pollution including, but not limited to, water pollution, air pollution, land pollution, solid waste pollution, thermal pollution, radiation contamination, or noise pollution as determined by the various standards prescribed by this state, the federal government or other governmental entities and including but not limited to, anything which is considered as pollution or environmental damage in the Environmental Protection Act (415 ILCS 5/1 et seq.), and any amendment thereto and substitution therefor. 
Pollution control facility means any land, interest in land, building, structure, facility, system, fixture, improvement, addition, appurtenance, machinery or equipment, or any combination thereof, and all real and personal property deemed necessary therewith, having to do with or the end purpose of which is, reducing, controlling or preventing pollution. 
Project means any economic development project or pollution control facility or any combination thereof. 
Project costs means and includes the sum total of all reasonable or necessary costs incidental to the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, repair, alteration, improvement, equipping and extension of a project including, without limitation, the cost of studies and surveys, plans, specifications, architectural and engineering services, legal, marketing or other special services, financing, acquisition, demolition, construction, equipment and site development of new and rehabilitated buildings, rehabilitation, reconstruction, repair or remodeling of existing buildings and all other necessary or incidental expenses whether directly or indirectly related to the project, including an initial bond and interest reserve together with interest on bonds issued to finance a project to a date six (6) months subsequent to the estimated date of completion and any costs or expenses which may be included under the provisions of Section 103(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended. 
Revenue agreement includes any lease, sublease, installment or direct sales contract, service contract, take or pay contract, loan agreement or similar agreement wherein a person agrees to pay the municipality funds sufficient to provide for the prompt payment of the principal of, interest on, and redemption premium, if any, on the bonds and agrees to cause the project to be acquired, constructed or improved. 
(Code 1980, § 2-375; Ord. No. 79-18, § 1, 5-24-1979)  
Sec. 2-902. - Legislative declaration of purpose. 
It is hereby determined and declared that the purpose of this division is to provide a financing device which will aid in financing the cost of projects in order to relieve conditions of unemployment, retain employment opportunities and encourage the increase of industry within or near the municipality, thereby reducing the evils attendant upon unemployment and to provide for the increased welfare and prosperity of the residents of the municipality; it is hereby further determined and declared to be the purpose of this division to provide a financing device which will aid in financing the cost of pollution control facilities in order to eliminate, abate or reduce the serious dangers to the public health and welfare caused by environmental pollution; and the same are hereby declared and determined to be public purposes and functions pertaining to the government and affairs of the municipality. 
(Code 1980, § 2-376; Ord. No. 79-18, § 2, 5-24-1979)  
Sec. 2-903. - Additional powers of municipality. 
(a)  In addition to powers which it may now have, the municipality shall have the power under this division to: 
(1)  Construct, acquire by gift, purchase or lease, to reconstruct, improve, better or extend and to finance one or more projects, whether or not now or hereafter in existence, within or without the municipality or partially within or partially without the municipality, but in no event further than ten (10) miles from the territorial boundaries of the municipality, and, if desirable, to acquire by gift, purchase or lease, lands or rights in land in connection with any project; 
(2)  Issue its revenue bonds to defray in whole or in part the project costs of any project and to designate an appropriate name for such bonds; 
(3)  Rent, lease or sell any project to any person or to loan the proceeds of its revenue bonds to any person for the payment of project costs under and pursuant to a revenue agreement; 
(4)  Pledge the revenues and receipts derived from the revenue agreement to the punctual payment of bonds authorized under this division, the interest thereon, and the redemption premiums, if any; 
(5)  Mortgage such projects in favor of the holder or holders of bonds issued therefor; 
(6)  Sell and convey such project, including without limitation, the sale and conveyance thereof subject to a mortgage, if any, as provided in this division, for such price and at such time (whether prior or subsequent to the payment in full of bonds authorized under this division) as the governing body of the municipality may determine; 
(7)  Issue its bonds to refund in whole or in part, bonds theretofore issued by such municipality under authority of this division, and to extend the term of the refunding bonds beyond the term of the refunded bonds. 
(b)  Property acquired by the municipality pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be exempt from the imposition and collection of taxes thereon while owned by the municipality, but the use of such property is subject to taxation to be paid by the lessee or occupant as provided by law. 
(Code 1980, § 2-377; Ord. No. 79-18, § 3, 5-24-1979)  
Sec. 2-904. - Authority to issue; bonds generally. 
The exercise of all powers granted by this division may be authorized, and bonds may be authorized to be issued under this division for the purposes set forth in this division, by ordinance of the governing body of the municipality which may be adopted at the same meeting at which it is introduced and shall take effect immediately upon adoption. 
The bonds shall bear interest at such rate or rates, payable at such times, may be in one or more series, may bear such date or dates, may mature at such time or times not exceeding forty (40) years from their respective dates, may be payable in such medium of payment at such place or places, may carry such registration privileges, may be subject to such terms of redemption at such premiums, may be executed in such manner, may contain such terms, covenants and conditions, and may be in such form, either coupon or registered, as such ordinance may provide or as may be subsequently determined by the governing body before the bonds are issued. The bonds may be sold at public or private sale in such manner and upon such terms as may be deemed advisable by the governing body of the municipality. Pending the preparation of the definitive bonds, interim receipts or certificates in such form and with such provisions as the governing body of the municipality may determine, may be issued to the purchaser or purchasers of bonds sold pursuant to this division. The bonds and interim receipts or certificates shall be deemed to be securities and negotiable instruments within the meaning and for all purposes of the Uniform Commercial Code (810 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.). 
(Code 1980, § 2-378; Ord. No. 79-18, § 4, 5-24-1979)  
Sec. 2-905. - Covenants in bonds. 
Any ordinance authorizing the issuance of bonds under this division may contain such covenants as the municipality may desire including, but not limited to, covenants as to: 
(a)  The use and disposition of the revenues and receipts from the project for which the bonds are to be issued, including the creation and maintenance of reserves; 
(b)  The issuance of other or additional bonds relating to the project or any rehabilitation, improvements, renovations, enlargements or additions thereto; 
(c)  The maintenance and repair of such project; 
(d)  The insurance to be carried thereon and the use and disposition of insurance moneys; 
(e)  The appointment of any bank or trust company within or outside the State of Illinois, having the necessary trust powers as trustee for the benefit of the bondholders, fiscal agent, paying agent, and bond registrar; 
(f)  The investment of any funds held by such trustee; and 
(g)  The terms and conditions upon which the holders of the bonds or any portion thereof or any trustees therefor, are entitled to the appointment of a receiver. 
Any ordinance authorizing the issuance of bonds under this division may provide that the principal of and interest on any bonds issued under this division shall be secured by a mortgage or indenture of trust covering such project for which the bonds are issued and may include any improvements or extensions thereafter made. Such mortgage or indenture or trust may contain such covenants and agreements to properly safeguard the bonds as may be provided for in the ordinance authorizing such bonds and shall be executed in the manner as may be provided for in the ordinance. The provisions of this division and any such ordinance or ordinances and any such mortgage or indenture of trust shall constitute a contract with the holder or holders of the bonds and continue in effect until the principal of, the interest on, and the redemption premiums, if any, on the bonds so issued have been fully paid, and the duties of the municipality and its corporate authorities and officers under this division and any such ordinance or ordinances and any such mortgage or indenture of trust shall be enforceable by any bondholder by mandamus, foreclosure of any such mortgage or indenture of trust or other appropriate suit, action or proceedings in any court of competent jurisdiction, provided the ordinance or any mortgage or indenture of trust under which the bonds are issued may provide that all such remedies and rights to enforcement may be vested in a trustee for the benefit of all the bondholders. 
(Code 1980, § 2-379; Ord. No. 79-18, § 5, 5-24-1979)  
Sec. 2-906. - Signatures of officers; validity of bonds. 
The bonds shall bear the manual or facsimile signatures of such officers of the municipality as may be designated in the ordinance authorizing such bonds and such manual or facsimile signatures shall be the valid and binding signatures of the officers of the municipality, notwithstanding that before the delivery thereof and payments therefor, any or all of the persons whose signatures appear thereon have ceased to be officers of the municipality issuing such bonds. The validity of the bonds is not dependent on nor affected by the validity or regularity of any proceedings relating to the acquisition, purchase, construction reconstruction, improvement, equipping, betterment or extension of the project for which the bonds are issued. The ordinance authorizing the bonds may provide that the bonds shall contain a recital that they are issued pursuant to this division, which recital shall be conclusive evidence of their validity and of the regularity of their issuance. 
(Code 1980, § 2-380; Ord. No. 79-18, § 6, 5-24-1979)  
Sec. 2-907. - Lien of bonds. 
All bonds issued under this division have a lien upon the revenues and receipts derived from the revenue agreement entered into with respect to the project for which the bonds have been issued, and the governing body may provide in the ordinance or ordinances authorizing such bonds for the issuance of additional bonds to be equally and ratably secured by a lien upon such revenues and receipts or may provide that the lien upon such revenues and receipts is subordinate. 
(Code 1980, § 2-381; Ord. No. 79-18, § 7, 5-24-1979)  
Sec. 2-908. - Liability for bonds. 
All bonds issued under and pursuant to this division shall be limited obligations of the municipality payable solely out of the revenues and receipts derived from the revenue agreement entered into with respect to the project for which such bonds are issued. No holder of any bonds issued under this division has the right to compel any exercise of taxing power of the municipality to pay the bonds, the interests or premium, if any, thereon, and the bonds do not constitute an indebtedness of the municipality or a loan of credit thereof within the meaning of any constitutional or statutory provision. It shall be plainly stated on the face of each bond that it has been issued under the provisions of this division and that it does not constitute an indebtedness of the municipality or a loan of credit thereof within the meaning of any constitutional or statutory provisions. 
(Code 1980, § 2-382; Ord. No. 79-18, § 8, 5-24-1979)  
Sec. 2-909. - Investment of funds. 
The municipality, or any trustee or fiscal agent on behalf of the municipality, may invest any funds held by it pursuant to this division in: 
(1)  Any bonds or other obligation which as to principal and interest constitute direct obligations of or are unconditionally guaranteed by the United States of America; 
(2)  Obligations of the Federal National Mortgage Association; 
(3)  Obligations of the Federal Intermediate Credit Banks; 
(4)  Obligations of federal banks for cooperatives; 
(5)  Obligations of federal land banks; 
(6)  Obligations of federal home loan banks; 
(7)  Obligations of the Federal Financing Bank; 
(8)  Time certificates of deposit of banks organized under the laws of any state of the United States and national banks which have a combined capital and surplus of at least five thousand dollars ($5,000.00); and 
(9)  Any other investments to the extent then permitted by state law. 
Any such securities may be purchased at the offering or market price thereof at the time of such purchase. 
(Code 1980, § 2-383; Ord. No. 79-18, § 9, 5-24-1979)  
Sec. 2-910. - Exemption from construction and bidding requirements for public buildings. 
The acquisition and construction of a project shall not be subject to any requirements relating to public buildings, structures, grounds, works or improvements imposed by law or any other similar requirements which may be lawfully waived by this section and any requirement of competitive bidding or restriction imposed on the procedure for award of contracts for such purpose, or the lease, sale or other disposition of property of the municipality is not applicable to any action taken under authority of this division. 
(Code 1980, § 2-384; Ord. No. 79-18, § 10, 5-24-1979)  
Sec. 2-911. - Powers conferred as additional and supplemental; limitations imposed; effect. 
The powers conferred by this division are in addition and supplemental to, and the limitations imposed by this division shall not affect, the powers conferred by any law or any other ordinance. Projects may be acquired, purchased, constructed, reconstructed, improved, bettered, equipped, extended and financed, and bonds may be issued under this division for such purposes, notwithstanding that any law or any other ordinance may provide for the acquisition, purchase, construction, reconstruction, improvement, equipping, betterment, extension and financing of a like project, or the issuance of bonds for like purposes, and without regard to the requirements, restrictions, limitations or other provisions contained in any law or any other ordinance. 
(Code 1980, § 2-385; Ord. No. 79-18, § 11, 5-24-1979)  
Secs. 2-912—2-940. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - CODE ENFORCEMENT[17] 

Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
Cross reference— Fire code prevention, § 30-161 et seq. 
State Law reference— Administrative adjudication of ordinances, 65 ILCS 5/1-2.1-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-941. - Purpose. 
The stated purpose of this article is to provide for the fair and efficient enforcement of the Municipal Code of Calumet City, Illinois, other than those ordinances pertaining to vehicular standing, parking or vehicle compliance regulation (hereafter the "City Code"), as may be allowed by law and directed by ordinance, through an administrative adjudication of violations; and, establishing a schedule of fines and penalties, and authority and procedures for collection of unpaid fines and penalties. 
(Code 1980, § 2-501; Ord. No. 99-63, § VI, 11-10-1999)  
Sec. 2-942. - Creation. 
There is hereby established a department of the city government to be known as the ordinance enforcement department and to have the power to enforce any municipal ordinance as from time to time authorized by the city council, except for (i) any offense enforced pursuant to Article VII.5 of Chapter 17 of this Code; (ii) any offense under the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.); or a similar offense that is a traffic regulation governing the movement of vehicles; and, (iii) except for any reportable offense under 625 ILCS 5/6-204. The establishment of the ordinance enforcement department does not preclude the mayor and city council from using any other method or court with jurisdiction to enforce ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 2-503; Ord. No. 99-63, 11-10-1999)  
Sec. 2-943. - Administrative composition. 
(a)  The ordinance enforcement department shall be composed of a hearing officer, an ordinance enforcement administrator, system coordinator/computer operator and hearing room security personnel, with the power and authority as hereinafter set forth. 
(1)  The hearing officer is authorized and directed to: 
a.  The hearing officer, prior to appointment, must be an attorney licensed to practice law for at least three (3) years in the State of Illinois. The hearing officer shall preside over all adjudicatory hearings and shall have the following powers and duties: 
1.  To administer oaths; 
2.  To hear testimony and accept evidence that is relevant to the existence of the City Code violation; 
3.  To issue subpoenas directing witnesses to appear and give relevant testimony at the hearing, upon the request of the parties or their representatives; 
4.  To preserve and authenticate the record of the hearing and all exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing; 
5.  To issue and sign a written finding, decision and order stating whether a City Code violation exists; 
6.  To impose penalties, sanctions or such other relief consistent with applicable City Code provisions and assessing costs upon finding a party liable for the charged violation, except however, that in no event shall the hearing officer have authority to impose a penalty of incarceration; and, 
7.  To review final determination of liability for an ordinance violation in accordance with the administrative review procedures hereinafter set forth. 
b.  Prior to conducting administrative adjudication proceedings under this article, the hearing officer shall have successfully completed a formal training program which includes the following: 
1.  Instruction on the rules of procedure of the administrative hearings over which the hearing officer shall preside; 
2.  Orientation to each subject area of the code violations that he/she will adjudicate; 
3.  Observation of administrative hearings; and 
4.  Participation in hypothetical cases, including ruling on evidence and issuing final orders. 
(2)  The ordinance enforcement administrator is authorized and directed to: 
a.  Operate and manage the ordinance enforcement department. 
b.  Adopt, distribute and process all notices as may be required under this article or as may be reasonably required to carry out the purpose of this article. 
c.  Collect moneys paid as fines and/or penalties assessed after a final determination of liability. 
d.  Certify copies of final determinations of an ordinance violation adjudicated pursuant to this article, and any factual reports verifying the final determination of any violation liability which was issued in accordance with this article. 
e.  Promulgate rules and regulations reasonably required to operate and maintain the administrative adjudication system hereby created. 
f.  Collect unpaid fines and penalties through private collection agencies and direct the pursuit of all post-judgment remedies available by law. 
(3)  The system coordinator/computer operator is hereby authorized and directed to operate and maintain the computer programs for the administrative adjudication system of the ordinance enforcement department hereby created, on a day-to-day basis, including but not limited to: 
a.  Input of violation notice information. 
b.  Establishing hearing dates and notice dates. 
c.  Record fine and penalty assessment and payments. 
d.  Issue payment receipts. 
e.  Issue succeeding notice of hearing dates and/or final determination of liability. 
f.  Keep accurate records of appearances and nonappearances at administrative hearings, pleas entered, judgments entered, sanctions imposed, if any, fines and penalties assessed and paid. 
(4)  All hearing room security personnel shall be qualified off-duty, full-time, part-time or auxiliary police officers who are hereby authorized and directed to: 
a.  Maintain hearing room decorum. 
b.  Have and execute authority as is granted to courtroom deputies of the circuit court. 
c.  Perform such other duties or acts as may reasonably be required and as directed by the hearing officer or ordinance enforcement administrator. 
(b)  The mayor is hereby authorized to appoint persons to hold the positions above set forth. Other than the hearing officer, one person may hold and fulfill the requirements of one (1) or more of the above stated positions and compensation for each of the above stated positions shall be as approved by the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 2-504; Ord. No. 99-63, 11-10-1999; Ord. No. 01-56, 11-19-2001)  
Sec. 2-944. - Procedures. 
The system of administrative adjudication of any ordinance violation authorized to be adjudicated hereunder, shall afford a party due process of law and the hearings shall be conducted in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  Violation notices of any City Code shall be issued by the persons authorized under this Code and shall contain information and shall be certified and constitute prima facie evidence of the violation cited as hereinafter set forth. 
(2)  All full-time, part-time and auxiliary police officers as well as other specifically authorized individuals of any department of the city shall have the authority to issue violation notices. 
(3)  Any individual authorized hereby to issue violation notices and who detects any ordinance violation authorized to be adjudicated under this article, is authorized to issue notice of violation thereof and shall make service thereof as is hereinafter set forth. 
(4)  The violation notice of the City Code shall contain, but shall not be limited to, the following information: 
a.  The name of the party violating the ordinance, if known. 
b.  The date, time and place of the violation (date of issuance). 
c.  The particular ordinance violated. 
d.  The fine and any penalty which may be assessed for the ordinance violation. 
e.  The signature and identification number of the person issuing the notice. 
f.  The date and location of the adjudicating hearing of ordinance violations, and the penalties for failure to appear at the hearing. 
g.  That payment of the indicated fine and any late payment shall operate as a final disposition of the violation. 
(Code 1980, § 2-505; Ord. No. 99-63, 11-10-1999; Ord. No. 01-56, 11-19-2001)  
Sec. 2-945. - Service. 
(a)  Service of any violation notice shall be made by the person issuing such notice by: 
(1)  Handing the notice to the person responsible for the ordinance violation; 
(2)  Handing the notice to the responsible person or leaving the notice with any person twelve (12) years of age or older at the residence of the responsible person; 
(3)  Mailing the notice by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the person responsible for the ordinance violation; or, 
(4)  Posting the notice upon the property where the violation is found when the person is the owner or manager of the property. 
(b)  The correctness of facts contained in any violation notice shall be verified by the person issuing said notice by: 
(1)  Signing his name to the notice at the time of issuance; or 
(2)  In the case of a notice produced by a computer device, by signing a single certificate, to be kept by the ordinance enforcement administrator, attesting to the correctness of all notices produced by the device while under his control. 
(c)  The original or a facsimile of the violation notice shall be retained by the ordinance enforcement administrator and kept as a record in the ordinary course of business. 
(d)  Any violation notice issued, signed and served in accordance herewith, or a copy of the notice, shall be prima facie correct and shall be prima facie evidence of the correctness of the facts shown on the notice. 
(Code 1980, § 2-506; Ord. No. 99-63, 11-10-1999)  
Sec. 2-946. - Administrative hearings. 
An administrative hearing to adjudicate any alleged City Code ordinance violation on its merits shall be granted to the person named in the ordinance violation notice. All administrative hearings shall be recorded and shall culminate in a determination of liability or nonliability, made by the hearing officer, who shall consider facts and/or testimony without the application of the formal or technical rules of evidence. Evidence, including hearsay, may be admitted only if it is of a type commonly relied upon by reasonable prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs. The hearing officer shall, upon a determination of liability, assess fines, penalties and costs in accordance with section 2-952 hereof. Persons appearing to contest the alleged violation on its merits may be represented by counsel at their own expense. The burden of proof shall be on the alleged offender to refute the prima facie case set forth in the verified notice of violation. 
(Code 1980, § 2-507; Ord. No. 99-63, 11-10-1999)  
Sec. 2-947. - Notices. 
(a)  Upon failure of the person receiving a notice of a violation of the City Code to appear at the time and date designated for a hearing, the ordinance enforcement administrator shall send, or cause to be sent, notices as provided in subsection (b) of this section, by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the person who received the notice of an ordinance violation. Service of notices sent in accordance herewith shall be complete as of the date of deposit in the United States mail. 
(b)  The notices sent pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be in the following sequence and contain, but not be limited to, the following information: 
(1)  Date and location of violation cited in the violation notice. 
(2)  Particular ordinance violated. 
(3)  Fine and any penalty that may be assessed for late payment. 
(4)  A section titled "Notice of Hearing" which shall clearly set forth that the person receiving a notice of the City Code ordinance violation may appear at an administrative hearing to contest the validity of the violation notice on the date and at the time and place as specified in the notice of hearing. 
(5)  Date, time and place of the administrative hearing at which the alleged violation may be contested on its merits. 
(6)  Statement that failure to either pay fine and any applicable penalty or failure to appear at the hearing on its merits on the date and at the time and place specified will result in a final determination of liability for the "cited" violation in the amount of the fine and penalty indicated. 
(7)  Statement that upon the occurrence of a final determination of liability for the failure, and the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, available administrative or judicial procedures for review, any unpaid fine or penalty will constitute a debt due and owing the city. 
(c)  A notice of final determination of liability shall be sent following the conclusion of administrative hearing, as is hereinafter set forth, and shall contain, but not be limited to, the following information and warnings: 
(1)  A statement that the unpaid fine and any penalty assessed is a debt due and owing the city; 
(2)  A statement of any sanction ordered or costs imposed which costs are debts due and owing the city; and 
(3)  A warning that failure to pay the fine and any penalty due and owing the city within the time specified may result in proceeding with collection procedures in the same manner as a judgment entered by any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1980, § 2-508; Ord. No. 99-63, 11-10-1999)  
Sec. 2-948. - Final determination of liability. 
A final determination of liability shall occur following the failure to pay the fine or penalty after the hearing officer's determination of liability and the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, any administrative review procedures hereinafter set forth. Where a person fails to appear at the administrative hearing to contest the alleged violation on the date and at the time and place specified in a prior served or mailed notice pursuant to section 2-947(b) hereof, the hearing officer's determination of liability shall become final either upon a denial of a timely petition to set aside that determination or upon the expiration of the period for filing a petition without a filing having been made. 
(Code 1980, § 2-509; Ord. No. 99-63, 11-10-1999)  
Sec. 2-949. - Petition to set aside determination. 
A petition to set aside a final determination of liability may be filed with the ordinance enforcement administrator within twenty-one (21) days of the date of the final determination of liability and payment of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(Code 1980, § 2-510; Ord. No. 99-63, 11-10-1999)  
Sec. 2-950. - Judicial review. 
Any final decision by a hearing officer that a City Code violation does or does not exist shall constitute a final determination for purposes of judicial review under the Illinois Administrative Review Law (735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.). 
(Code 1980, § 2-511; Ord. No. 99-63, 11-10-1999)  
Sec. 2-951. - Enforcement of judgment. 
(a)  Any fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, or part of any fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of or the failure to exhaust judicial review procedures under the Illinois Administrative Review Law (735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.) are a debt due and owing the municipality and may be collected in accordance with applicable law. 
(b)  After expiration of the period in which judicial review under the Illinois Administrative Review Law (735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.) may be sought for a final determination of a code violation, unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, the findings, decision, and order of the hearing officer may be enforced in the same manner as a judgment entered by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(c)  In any case in which a hearing officer finds that a defendant has failed to comply with a judgment ordering a defendant to correct a code violation or imposing any fine or other sanction as a result of a code violation, any expenses incurred by the city to enforce the judgment including, but not limited to, attorney's fees, court costs, and costs related to property demolition or foreclosure after they are fixed by the hearing officer, shall be a debt due and owing the municipality and may be collected in accordance with applicable law. 
(d)  A lien shall be imposed on the real estate or personal estate, or both, of the defendant in the amount of any debt due and owing the city under this section. The lien may be recorded and enforced in the same manner as a judgment lien pursuant to a judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction. No lien may be enforced under this section until it has been recorded in the manner provided by Article XII of the Code of Civil Procedure (735 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.) or by the Uniform Commercial Code (810 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.). 
(e)  A hearing officer may set aside any judgment entered by default and set a new hearing date upon a petition filed within twenty-one (21) days after the issuance of the order of default if the hearing officer determines that the petitioner's failure to appear at the hearing was for good cause or at any time if the petitioner establishes that the municipality did not provide proper service of process. 
(Code 1980, § 2-512; Ord. No. 99-63, 11-10-1999)  
Sec. 2-952. - Schedule of fines/penalties. 
For an ordinance violation of the City Code, fines and penalties shall be as established from time to time by the mayor and city council. 
(Code 1980, § 2-513; Ord. No. 99-63, 11-10-1999)  
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses and permits and miscellaneous business regulations, ch. 54. 
State Law reference— Alcoholic liquor generally, 235 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
Unless the context otherwise requires, the words and phrases used in this chapter shall be construed according to the following definitions: 
Alcohol means the product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether rectified or diluted, whatever may be the origin thereof, including synthetic ethyl alcohol, but not including denatured alcohol or wood alcohol. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 235 ILCS 5/1-3.01. 
Alcoholic liquor means all alcoholic spirits, wine and beer and every liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and capable of being consumed as a beverage by a human being. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 235 ILCS 5/1-3.05. 
Banquet hall means a facility that hosts banquets, dinner parties, receptions and other similar events on a part-time basis. 
Beer means a beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or concoction of barley, or other grain, malt and hops in water, and including, among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter and the like. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 235 ILCS 5/1-3.04. 
Club means a group of persons who have associated themselves for the promotion of some common object other than the sale or consumption of alcoholic liquor, with said organization maintained through the payment of annual dues and owning or leasing quarters for the use and accommodation of its members. 
Entertainment means the offering of any music, singing, vaudeville, dramatic act or skit, monologue, dialogue, exhibition of magic or other skill, dancing or contest of any nature, whether by personal performance or by mechanical reproduction, other than radio, television, record player and coin-operated device known as a "jukebox." 
Female means a person of either the female or male gender. 
Licensed establishment means those places of business which are issued an alcoholic liquor license from the city. 
Male means a person of either the male or female gender. 
Original package means any bottle, flask, jug, can, cask, barrel, keg, hogshead or other receptacle or container whatsoever, used, corked or capped, sealed and labeled by the manufacturer of alcoholic liquor, to contain and to convey any alcoholic liquor. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 235 ILCS 5/1-3.06. 
Retailer means a person who sells or offers for sale alcoholic liquor for use or consumption and not for resale in any form. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 235 ILCS 5/1-3.17. 
Sale means any transfer, exchange or barter in any manner, or by any means whatsoever, including the transfer of alcoholic liquors by and through the transfer or negotiation of warehouse receipts or certificates, and including all sales made by any person, whether principal, proprietor, agent, servant or employee. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 235 ILCS 5/1-3.21. 
Sell at retail or sale at retail means sales for use or consumption and not for resale in any form. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 235 ILCS 5/1-3.18. 
Specified premises means the place of business or other completely enclosed and roofed location where alcoholic liquor is stored, displayed or offered for sale, or where drinks containing alcoholic liquor are mixed, concocted, poured or served for consumption. The term "specified premises" shall not include any adjoining outside area of the licensed premises, including, but not limited to, sidewalks, streets, vacant land, private parking areas or other portions of the public way. 
Spirits means any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by distillation mixed with water or other substance in solution, and includes brandy, rum, whiskey, gin or other spirituous liquors, and such liquors when rectified, blended or otherwise mixed with alcohol or other substances. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 235 ILCS 5/1-3.02. 
To sell includes to keep or expose for sale and to keep with intent to sell. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 235 ILCS 5/1-3.22. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural contents of fruits or vegetables containing sugar, including such beverages when fortified by the addition of alcohol or spirits. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 235 ILCS 5/1-3.03. 
(Code 1980, § 3-1; Ord. of 12-3-1963, § 1; Ord. of 9-23-1965, § 1; Ord. No. 82-26, § 1, 9-23-1982; Ord. No. 03-68, § 1, 9-25-2003; Ord. No. 15-37, § 2, 9-10-2015)  
Sec. 6-2. - Purchases by those under twenty-one (21). 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to buy, accept or receive alcoholic liquor in any tavern, club, store or other place in the city, licensed for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any premises which are not under an alcoholic beverage license and which are located within the city to knowingly allow any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to remain on such premises while possessing or consuming alcoholic beverages in violation of any provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1980, § 3-31; Ord. of 12-3-1963, § 20; Ord. of 9-29-1973, § 1; Ord. No. 91-17, § 1, 6-13-1991) 
State Law reference— Possession by minors prohibited, 235 ILCS 5/6-20.  
Sec. 6-3. - Unlawful possession and consumption by persons under age. 
(a)  No person under the age of twenty-one (21) years shall consume, purchase or accept delivery of alcoholic liquor or have alcoholic liquor in his or her possession within the City of Calumet City; provided the possession, dispensing or consumption of alcoholic liquor by a person under the age of twenty-one (21) years in the performance of a religious service or ceremony or the consumption by a person under the age of twenty-one (21) years under the direct supervision and approval of the parent(s) or guardian(s) of such underage person in the privacy of the parent's or guardian's home shall not be deemed to be in violation of this section. 
(b)  No person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor shall sell, give or deliver such alcoholic liquor to another person under the age of twenty-one (21) years, except as allowed under subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-year (21) years to draw, pour, mix or sell any alcoholic liquor in any licensed retail premises within the city limits. 
(Code 1980, § 3-31.1; Ord. No. 86-24, § 4, 8-14-1986; Ord. No. 00-45, § 1, 8-24-2000) 
Editor's note— Section 4 of Ord. No. 86-24, adopted Aug. 14, 1986, deleted former § 3-31.1, relative to possession of alcoholic beverages by persons under the age of twenty-one, and enacted in lieu thereof a new § 3-31.1 to read as herein set out. The provisions of former § 3-31.1 derived from Ord. No. 82-16, § 1, adopted Aug. 26, 1982.  
Sec. 6-4. - Evidence of age of person attempting to purchase or receive alcoholic liquor. 
(a)  If a licensee or his agent or employee believes, has reason to believe or should have reason to believe that a sale or delivery of alcoholic liquor is prohibited because the prospective recipient is underage, then he shall, before making such sale or delivery, demand presentation of at least two (2) separate forms of positive identification each containing proof of age, each issued by a public officer in the performance of his official duties and one of those forms of identification must contain a picture of the holder thereof. A traffic citation shall not be accepted as identification or evidence of age. 
(b)  No person shall transfer, alter or deface as identification card issued by a federal, state, county or municipal government or subdivision or agency thereof, use the identification card of another, carry or use a false or forged identification card, or obtain an identification card by means of false identification. 
(c)  No person shall purchase, accept delivery or have possession of alcoholic liquor by the use of an altered, forged or defaced identification card or by the use of an identification card of another person. 
(d)  No person shall misrepresent his age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor in any place in the city where alcoholic liquor is sold at retail. 
(Code 1980, § 3-32; Ord. No. 86-24, § 1, 8-14-1986)  
Sec. 6-5. - Parental responsibility. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to knowingly suffer or permit any minor child of which he or she may be the parent or guardian to violate any provision of this chapter. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to permit his residence to be used by a child or ward who is under twenty-one (21) years of age or by an invitee of any child or ward if the invitee is under twenty-one (21) years of age in a manner which constitutes a violation of this chapter. 
(c)  A parent or guardian shall be deemed to have permitted his residence to be used in violation of this chapter if he knowingly authorized such use or enables such use to occur by failing to control access to either the residence or alcoholic beverages maintained thereon. 
(d)  Every parent or guardian whose residence is used by a child or ward who is under twenty-one (21) years of age or an invitee of a child or ward if the invitee is under twenty-one (21) years of age for the consumption of any alcoholic beverage in a manner which constitutes a violation of this chapter shall be presumed to have permitted the conduct which constitutes the violation unless the contrary is established by a preponderance of the evidence. 
(Code 1980, § 3-35; Ord. No. 86-24, § 3, 8-14-1986; Ord. No. 91-18, § 1, 6-13-1991)  
Sec. 6-6. - Conduct of females. 
It shall be unlawful for any female to: 
(1)  Loiter in any licensed establishment for the purpose of soliciting, begging, inducing or requesting any male patrons, customers or visitors to purchase any alcoholic or nonalcoholic beverages for herself or any other person; or 
(2)  Solicit, beg, induce or request any male patrons, customers or visitors in any licensed establishment to purchase any alcoholic or nonalcoholic beverages for herself or any other person. 
Any female may engage in the above activities if the male patron, customer or visitor is related to her by blood or marriage. 
(Code 1980, § 3-37; Ord. of 12-3-1963, § 8; Ord. of 9-23-1965, § 1)  
Sec. 6-7. - Other prohibited activities. 
It shall be unlawful for any female or male person to: 
(1)  Employ any female for the purpose of having her engage in any activities in a licensed establishment prohibited by section 6-132 of this Code; or 
(2)  Solicit, beg, induce or request any male patron, customer or visitor of a licensed establishment to purchase or give any alcoholic or nonalcoholic beverage to any female, female agent, employee, entertainer, hostess, waitress or person engaged in any contractual basis working in such licensed establishment; or 
(3)  Knowingly serve any alcoholic or nonalcoholic beverage in a licensed establishment to any female agent, employee, entertainer, hostess, waitress or person employed on any contractual basis working in such licensed establishment which was solicited from and purchased by any male patron, customer or visitor in such licensed establishment not related to said female by blood or marriage; or 
(4)  Knowingly serve in a licensed establishment any alcoholic or nonalcoholic beverage to a female which was solicited, begged, induced or requested by said female from, and purchased by, a male patron, customer or visitor of such licensed establishment not related to said female by blood or marriage. 
(Code 1980, § 3-39; Ord. of 12-3-1963, § 8; Ord. of 9-23-1965, § 1)  
Secs. 6-8—6-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Boards and commissions, § 2-799 et seq. 
 
Sec. 6-31. - Generally. 
The mayor shall be the local liquor control commissioner and shall be charged with the administration of this chapter. 
(Code 1980, § 3-2; Ord. of 12-3-1963, § 13; Ord. of 12-28-1972, § 1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 235 ILCS 5/4-1.  
Sec. 6-32. - Assistants. 
The mayor may appoint persons to assist him in the exercise of the powers and the performance of his duties as local liquor control commissioner. 
(Code 1980, § 3-3; Ord. of 12-3-1963, § 13) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 235 ILCS 5/4-1.  
Sec. 6-33. - Examination and subpoena powers. 
The local liquor control commissioner shall have the right to examine, or cause to be examined, under oath, any applicant for a local license or for a renewal thereof, or any licensee upon whom notice of revocation or suspension has been served in the manner hereinafter provided, and to examine or cause to be examined, the books and records of any such applicant or licensee; to hear testimony and take proof for his information in the performance of his duties, and for such purpose to issue subpoenas which shall be effective in any part of this state. For the purpose of obtaining any of the information desired by the local liquor control commissioner under this section, he may authorize his agent to act on his behalf. 
(Code 1980, § 3-4; Ord. of 12-3-1963, § 13) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 235 ILCS 5/4-5.  
Sec. 6-34. - Reports. 
The local liquor control commissioner shall furnish a monthly report to the city council advising them of the results of any liquor hearings conducted since the last report and the transfers or expirations of any alcoholic liquor licenses issued. 
(Code 1980, § 3-5; Ord. of 12-27-1973, § 4)  
Sec. 6-35. - Other powers. 
(a)  The local liquor control commissioner shall also have the following powers, functions and duties with respect to licenses, other than licenses to manufacturers, importing distributors, distributors, foreign importers, nonresident dealers, nonbeverage users, brokers, railroads, airplanes and boats: 
(1)  To grant and or suspend for not more than thirty (30) days or revoke for cause all local alcoholic liquor licenses issued to persons for premises within the city; 
(2)  To enter or to authorize any law enforcing officer to enter at any time upon any premises licensed under this chapter to determine whether any of the provisions of the Liquor Control Act of 1934 (235 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.), this chapter or any rules or regulations adopted by him or by the state liquor control commission have been or are being violated, and at such time to examine said premises of said licensee in connection therewith; 
(3)  To notify the secretary of state where a club incorporated under the General Not for Profit Corporation Act of 1986 (805 ILCS 105/101.01 et seq.) or a foreign corporation functioning as a club in this state under a certificate of authority issued under that act has violated Liquor Control Act of 1934 (235 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.) or this chapter by selling or offering for sale at retail alcoholic liquors without a retailer's license; 
(4)  To receive complaint from any citizen within his jurisdiction that any of the provisions of the Liquor Control Act of 1934 (235 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.), this chapter or any rules or regulations adopted by him or by the state liquor control commission, have been or are being violated and to act upon such complaints in the manner hereinafter provided; 
(5)  To receive local license fees and pay the same forthwith to the city treasurer. 
(b)  The local liquor commissioner also has the duty to notify the secretary of state of any convictions for a violation of 235 ILCS 5/6-20 or a similar provision of a city ordinance. The local liquor control commissioners shall also have the power to levy fines in accordance with 235 ILCS 5/7-5. 
(c)  There shall be a transcript of all hearings conducted by the local liquor control commissioner. Any appeal of any decision of the local liquor control commissioner shall be submitted for hearing before the state liquor control commission on the transcript of proceedings held before the local liquor control commissioner only, and said appeal shall not be conducted as a trial de novo . 
(Code 1980, § 3-6; Ord. of 12-3-1963, § 13; Ord. No. 82-27, § 1, 9-23-1982) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 235 ILCS 5/4-4.  
Secs. 6-36—6-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 6-61. - Consumption outside of premises. 
Consumption of alcoholic beverages shall not be permitted in the adjoining outside area of any business or establishment licensed to sell or serve drinks containing alcoholic liquor, unless specifically permitted by the Calumet City Municipal Code or through a special-use permit issued by the city council. Any violation of the provisions of this section may result in the suspension or revocation of a liquor license at the discretion of the liquor commissioner. 
(Ord. No. 03-68, §§ 2, 3, 9-25-2003)  
Secs. 6-62—6-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES AND PERMITS 
 
Sec. 6-81. - Retail license required. 
It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor without having a retail liquor dealer's license, or in violation of the terms of such license. 
(Code 1980, § 3-7; Ord. of 12-3-1963, § 2) 
State Law reference— Power of city to require license, 235 ILCS 5/4-1; state licensing, 235 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.  
Sec. 6-82. - License classifications. 
The licenses required by this chapter shall be classified as follows and shall authorize the indicated activities: 
(1)  Class "B," which shall authorize the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor to be consumed on the specified premises, but shall not authorize the furnishing of entertainment on said premises. 
(2)  Class "C," which shall authorize the sale at retail of packaged alcoholic liquor on the specified premises, but shall not permit consumption thereon or adjacent thereto, and shall not authorize any entertainment on the premises. 
(3)  Class "C-B," which shall authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor to be consumed on the specified premises, and the sale at retail of package liquors for consumption off the premises, but shall not authorize the furnishing of entertainment on said premises. 
(4)  Class "D," which shall authorize the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor to be consumed within the established location of a club by the members thereof, and shall authorize entertainment on the specified premises. 
(5)  Class "E," which shall authorize the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor to be consumed on the specified premises, and shall authorize the furnishing of entertainment on the specified premises. 
(6)  Class "R," which shall authorize the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor on the specified premises only by service of said alcoholic liquor by a waiter or waitress to persons seated at a table with food only, but shall not authorize any entertainment on the specified premises. 
(7)  Class "R-E," which shall authorize the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor on the specified premises only by service of said alcoholic liquor by a waiter or waitress to persons seated at a table with food only, and shall authorize the furnishing of entertainment on the specified premises. 
(8)  Class "W," which shall authorize the sale at retail of wine on the specified premises, but shall not permit consumption thereon or adjacent thereto, and shall not authorize any entertainment on the specified premises. 
(9)  Class "W-R-E," which shall authorize the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor to be consumed on the specified premises, and shall authorize the furnishing of entertainment on the specified premises, but only in conjunction with a restaurant business (with the sale of food items constituting more than fifty (50) percent of the total receipts thereof). The annual fee for such license shall be three thousand nine hundred dollars ($3,900.00), payable in two (2) installments of one thousand nine hundred fifty dollars ($1,950.00) each or January second and July first of each year. Notwithstanding any other provisions of any other applicable ordinances of the city, the Class "W-R-E" license shall not be transferred outside the property commonly known as River Oaks. 
(10)  Class "B-E," which shall authorize the furnishing of entertainment on the specified premises and may only be issued to a Class "B" licensee for said Class "B" licensee premises. 
(11)  Class "B-A," which shall authorize the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor to be consumed on the specified premises, and shall authorize the furnishing of bowling on the specified premises. 
(12)  Class "R-B-W" which shall authorize the sale at retail of beer and wine to be consumed on the specified premises only by service by a waiter or waitress to persons seated at a table with food only, but shall not authorize the furnishing of entertainment on said premises. 
(13)  Class "B-H", which shall authorize the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor in a banquet hall for consumption on the premises only. Video gaming, as defined under the Illinois Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq., shall not be allowed in a Class B-H licensed premises. A Class B-H license is non-transferable for any reason. This prohibition against transfer includes any transfer of any ownership interest in the business to another person, or in the ownership of the entity to whom the license is initially issued. It also prohibits transferring the license when this ownership of the entity to whom the license was issued is changed. In the event of any such transfer, the license shall terminate immediately. 
The holder of the B-H license must also provide security for all events held on the premises. The security must be provided by off-duty Calumet City police officers who shall be paid for this work as secondary employment. 
(Code 1980, § 3-8; Ord. of 12-3-1963, § 4; Ord. of 12-15-1969, § 1; Ord. of 12-13-1973, § 1; Ord. No. 83-14, § 1, 5-26-1983; Ord. No. 86-31, § 1, 11-13-1986; Ord. No. 87-15, § 1, 7-9-1987; Ord. No. 94-3, § 1, 1-27-1994; Ord. No. 02-58, § I, 11-14-2002; Ord. No. 05-49, § 1, 7-28-2005; Ord. No. 08-11, § 1, 2-28-2008; Ord. No. 10-60, § 2, 11-10-2010; Ord. No. 15-37, § 3, 9-10-2015)  
Sec. 6-83. - Limitation of number of licenses. 
(a)  The total number of licenses for the indicated classification to be issued under this chapter shall not exceed the indicated number: 
Class      Number 
B ..... 13 
B-A ..... 1 
B-E (B-E licenses are non-transferable) ..... 1 
B-H ..... 0 
C ..... 8 
C-B ..... 1 
D ..... 4 
E ..... 5 
R ..... 6 
R-B-W ..... 3 
R-E ..... 0 
W ..... 0 
W-R-E ..... 0 
(b)  No new licenses shall be issued to increase the total number of such licenses, excepting by a majority vote of the city council; however, such limitation shall not affect the right of any present licensee to a renewal of such present license. Any licensee who forfeits his license through revocation, expiration or cessation for any other cause shall not be reissued such license at any time. 
(c)  The total number of Class "W-R-E" licenses to be issued under this chapter shall not exceed zero. Said number may not be increased except by affirmative vote of two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the members of the city council. 
(d)  The holder of a valid Class "B" liquor license may apply to the mayor as local liquor control commissioner to be issued a Class "B-E" license which shall authorize the furnishing of entertainment on the specified premises. The mayor may cause an investigation and may conduct a hearing if he deems necessary regarding the effect and impact on the surrounding and nearby property owners and land occupants prior to approving the issuance of said "B-E" license, provided, however, that no Class "B-E" license shall be issued unless prior thereto there has been an affirmative vote of not less than four (4) aldermen of the city council approving said transfer. 
(e)  The holder of a Class "B-E" license shall only furnish entertainment of the same type as permitted at the time of issuance of said license unless approval is received from the mayor as local liquor control commissioner. A Class "B-E" license is not transferable. 
(Code 1980, § 3-9; Ord. of 12-3-1963, § 6; Ord. of 9-2-1966, § 1; Ord. of 12-15-1969, § 3; Ord. of 10-14-1971, § 1; Ord. of 12-27-1973, § 3; Ord. No. 81-6, § 1, 3-12-1981; Ord. No. 83-14, § 3, 5-26-1983; Ord. No. 84-39, § 1, 12-13-1984; Ord. No. 85-38, § 1, 10-24-1985; Ord. No. 88-3, § 1, 2-25-1988; Ord. No. 94-3, § 1, 1-27-1994; Ord. No. 96-61, § 1, 9-26-1996; Ord. No. 99-51, § 1, 8-12-1999; Ord. No. 00-43, § 1, 7-27-2000; Ord. No. 02-58, § II, 11-14-2002; Ord. No. 02-63, § I, 12-12-2002; Ord. No. 03-62, §§ 1—4, 10-14-2003; Ord. No. 07-6, § 1, 1-25-2007; Ord. No. 07-23, § 1, 4-12-2007; Ord. No. 07-113, § 1, 10-11-2007; Ord. No. 08-10, § 1, 2-28-2008; Ord. No. 08-29, § 1, 5-8-2008; Ord. No. 08-46, § 1, 7-10-2008; Ord. No. 08-83, § 1, 12-4-2008; Ord. No. 09-26, § 1, 6-11-2009; Ord. No. 09-36, § 1, 8-13-2009; Ord. No. 10-4, § 1, 1-28-2010; Ord. No. 10-17, § 1, 3-11-10; Ord. No. 10-60, § 3, 11-10-2010; Ord. No. 10-66, § 2, 12-21-2010; Ord. No. 11-8, § 1, 2-24-11; Ord. No. 11-53, § 1, 9-22-2011; Ord. No. 13-22, § 1, 5-13-2013; Ord. No. 13-25, § 1, 6-27-2013; Ord. No. 31-34, § 1, 7-25-2013; Ord. No. 13-42, § 1, 8-22-2013; Ord. No. 13-53, § 1, 9-26-2013; Ord. No. 13-57, § 1, 10-24-2013; Ord. No. 14-11, § 1, 3-13-2014; Ord. No. 14-30, § 1, 6-12-2014; Ord. No. 14-56, § 1, 11-20-2014; Ord. No. 15-37, § 5, 9-10-2015; Ord. No. 15-42, § 1, 10-22-2015; Ord. No. 16-27, § 2, 7-28-2016; Ord. No. 17-37, § 1, 9-28-2017; Ord. No. 18-44, § 1, 8-9-2018; Ord. No. 18-54, § 1, 9-27-2018; Ord. No. 18-61, § 1, 10-11-2018; Ord. No. 19-03, § 1, 1-10-2019)  
Sec. 6-84. - License application. 
(a)  An application for a license required by this chapter shall be made to the local liquor control commissioner in writing, signed by the applicant if an individual, or by a duly authorized agent thereof if a club or corporation, verified by oath or affidavit, and shall contain the following information and statements: 
(1)  The name, age and address of the applicant in the case of an individual; in the case of a copartnership, the persons entitled to share in the profits thereof, and in the case of a corporation, for profit, or a club, the date of incorporation, the objects for which it was organized, the names and addresses of the officers and directors, and if a majority in interest of the stock of such corporation is owned by one person or his nominees, the name and address of such persons; 
(2)  The citizenship of the applicant, his place of birth and if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of his naturalization; 
(3)  The character of business of the applicant; and in the case of a corporation, the objects for which it was formed; 
(4)  The length of time that such applicant has been in business of that character, or in the case of a corporation, the date on which its charter was issued; 
(5)  The amount of goods, wares and merchandise on hand at the time application is made; 
(6)  The location and description of the premises or place of business which is to be operated under such license; 
(7)  A statement whether the applicant has made application for a similar license on premises other than described in this application, and the disposition of such application; 
(8)  A statement whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony or is otherwise disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing contained in this chapter or any state law or other ordinance; 
(9)  Whether a previous license by any state or subdivision thereof or by the federal government has been revoked and the reasons therefor; 
(10)  The date of incorporation if an Illinois corporation, or the date of becoming qualified under the Illinois Business Corporation Act of 1983 (805 ILCS 5/1.01 et seq.) to transact business in the state if a foreign corporation; 
(11)  A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of the state or of the United States, or any ordinances, in the conduct of his place of business; 
(12)  A statement that he has not received or borrowed money or anything else of value, and that he will not receive or borrow money or anything else of value (other than merchandising credit in the ordinary course of business for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days, as herein expressly permitted under 235 ILCS 5/6-5, directly or indirectly from any manufacturer, importing distributor or distributor representative of any such manufacturer, importing distributor or distributor, nor be a party in any way, directly or indirectly, to any violation by a manufacturer, distributor or importing distributor of section 123 of said chapter. 
(b)  In addition to the foregoing information, such application shall contain such other and further information as the state commission and the local commission may, by rule or regulation not inconsistent with law, prescribe. 
(c)  If said application is made in behalf of a partnership, firm, association, club or corporation, then the same shall be signed and sworn to by at least two (2) members of such partnership or the president and secretary of such corporation. 
(Code 1980, § 3-10; Ord. of 12-3-1963, § 3) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 235 ILCS 5/7-1.  
Sec. 6-85. - License expiration date. 
Unless revoked pursuant to this chapter, every license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall expire on the last day of December of each year. 
(Code 1980, § 3-11; Ord. of 12-3-1963, § 11)  
Sec. 6-86. - License fees. 
(a)  An applicant for a license required by this chapter who qualifies for the same under the provisions of this chapter and state law shall be issued the class of license applied for upon payment of the appropriate license fee as set forth in subsection (b) of this section to the city collector. 
(b)  The annual license fees for the indicated licenses shall be as follows: 
Class 	Fee 
 
B ..... $1,500.00 
B-A ..... 3,900.00 
B-E, in addition to the B license fee (Class B-E licenses are non-transferable) ..... 2,400.00 
C ..... 3,600.00 
C-B ..... 5,100.00 
D ..... 720.00 
E ..... 3,900.00 
R ..... 3,900.00 
R-E ..... 3,900.00 
W ..... 1,500.00 
W-R-E ..... 3,900.00 
R-B-W ..... 1,500.00 
B-H (Class B-H licenses are non-transferable) ..... 3,900.00 
(c)  Said fees may be payable in two (2) equal installments, with one (1) of said installments being paid on January second of each year and the other being paid on July first of each year. 
(d)  Any initial license applied for and issued after July first of any year shall require one-half (½) of the annual fee for the particular class of license. 
(e)  The first payment required on such a license fee shall be paid at the time the application for the license is made. When paid, the city collector shall issue the payor a receipt. In the event the license applied for is denied, said fee shall be returned to the applicant; if the license is granted, then the fee shall be deposited in the general corporate fund, or in such other fund as shall have been designated by proper action of the city council. 
(f)  In addition to all other fees, initial applicants shall submit a certified check, cashier's check or money order in the amount of one hundred twenty dollars ($120.00) payable to the City of Calumet City for the processing of the liquor applicant fingerprint cards by the Illinois and Federal Bureaus of Identification. Said fee shall be submitted at the time of the filing of the application. 
(Code 1980, § 3-12; Ord. of 12-3-1963, §§ 4, 9; Ord. of 12-15-1969, § 1; Ord. of 12-13-1973, § 1; Ord. of 12-27-1973, § 3; Ord. No. 82-28, § 1, 9-23-1982; Ord. No. 87-10, § 1, 5-28-1987; Ord. No. 87-26, § 1, 12-21-1987; Ord. No. 90-6, § 1, 2-8-1990; Ord. No. 90-41, § 1, 9-27-1990; Ord. No. 94-3, § 1, 1-27-1994; Ord. No. 98-52, § 1, 8-20-1998; Ord. No. 05-49, §§ 2, 3, 7-28-2005; Ord. No. 08-11, § 2, 2-28-2008; Ord. No. 10-56, § 1, 10-28-2010; Ord. No. 10-67, § 2, 12-21-2010; Ord. No. 15-37, § 4, 9-10-2015)  
Sec. 6-87. - Persons ineligible for license. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) of this section, no alcoholic liquor license shall be issued to: 
(1)  A person who is not a resident of the city, except in case of railroad or boat licenses. 
(2)  A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community in which he resides. 
(3)  A person who is not a citizen of the United States. 
(4)  A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal or state law, unless the local liquor control commissioner determines that such person has been sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant the public trust after considering matters set forth in such person's application and the commissioner's investigation. The burden of proof of sufficient rehabilitation shall be on the applicant. 
(5)  A person who has been convicted of being the keeper or is keeping a house of ill fame. 
(6)  A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality. 
(7)  A person whose license issued under this chapter or the Liquor Control Act of 1934 (235 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.) has been revoked for cause. 
(8)  A person who at the time of application for renewal of any license issued hereunder would not be eligible for such license upon a first application. 
(9)  A copartnership, if any general partnership thereof, or any limited partnership thereof, owning more than five (5) percent of the aggregate limited partner interest in such copartnership would not be eligible to receive a license for any reason, including residence within the city. 
(10)  A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than five (5) percent of the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than citizenship and residence within the city. 
(11)  A corporation unless it is incorporated in Illinois, or unless it is a foreign corporation which is qualified under the Business Corporation Act of 1983 (805 ILCS 5/1.01 et seq.) to transact business in Illinois. 
(12)  A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent unless the manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required by the licensee. 
(13)  A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor, subsequent to the passage of the Liquor Control Act of 1934 (235 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.) or has forfeited his bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such violation. 
(14)  A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a license is sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which the license is to be issued. 
(15)  Any law enforcing public official, including members of local liquor control commissions, any mayor, alderman, or member of the city council or commission, any president of the village board of trustees, any member of a village board of trustees, or any president or member of a county board; and no such official shall be interested directly in the manufacture, sale, or distribution of alcoholic liquor, except that a license may be granted to such official in relation to premises that are not located within the territory subject to the jurisdiction of that official if the issuance of such license is approved by the state liquor control commission and before the board or council to which the license holder is elected. 
(16)  A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be operated by the licensee. 
(17)  A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as proscribed by any of subsections (a)(3) through (a)(11) of section 28-1 of, or as proscribed by section 28-1.1 or 28-3 of, the Criminal Code of 1961 (720 ILCS 5/28-1(a)(3)—(a)(11), 720 ILCS 5/28-1.1, 720 ILCS 5/28-3), or as proscribed by a statute replaced by any of the aforesaid statutory provisions. 
(18)  A person or entity to whom a federal wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government, unless the person or entity is eligible to be issued a license under the Raffles Act (230 ILCS 15/0.01 et seq.) or the Illinois Pull Tabs and Jar Games Act (230 ILCS 20/1 et seq.). 
(b)  A criminal conviction of a corporation is not grounds for the denial, suspension, or revocation of a license applied for or held by the corporation if the criminal conviction was not the result of a violation of any federal or state law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor, the offense that led to the conviction did not result in any financial gain to the corporation and the corporation has terminated its relationship with each director, officer, employee, or controlling shareholder whose actions directly contributed to the conviction of the corporation. The local liquor control commissioner shall determine if all provisions of this subsection have been met before any action on the corporation's license is initiated. 
(Code 1980, § 3-13) 
State Law reference— Grounds to deny license, 235 ILCS 5/4-1; similar provisions, 235 ILCS 5/6-2.  
Sec. 6-88. - Retail sales near churches, schools, etc. 
No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor within one hundred (100) feet of any church, school, hospital, home for aged or indigent persons or for veterans, their wives or children or any military or naval station; provided, that this prohibition shall not apply to hotels offering restaurant service, regularly organized clubs, or to restaurants, food shops or other places where sale of alcoholic liquors is not the principal business carried on, if such place of business so exempted shall have been established for such purposes prior to January 31, 1934; nor to the renewal of a license for the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor on premises within one hundred (100) feet of any church where such church has been established within such one hundred (100) feet since the issuance of the original license. No alcoholic liquor other than beer shall be sold for consumption on the premises within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet from any building used for regular classroom or laboratory instruction on the main campus of any state university owned or maintained, in whole or in part, by the state; provided, this prohibition shall not apply to a place of business which sells beer but does not sell any other alcoholic liquor and was established and operated prior to September 4, 1973, or to premises owned or controlled by any state university and used as a faculty center or an airport. 
(Code 1980, § 3-14; Code 1980, § 3-14; Ord. of 12-3-1963, § 16) 
State Law reference— Denial of local license, 235 ILCS 5/4-1; similar provisions, 235 ILCS 5/6-11.  
Sec. 6-89. - Stores selling school supplies, lunches, etc. 
No license shall be issued to any person for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor at any store or other place of business where the majority of customers are minors of school age or where the principal business transacted consists of school books, school supplies, food, lunches or drinks for such minors. 
(Code 1980, § 3-15) 
State Law reference— Denial of local license, 235 ILCS 5/4-1; similar provisions, 235 ILCS 5/6-12.  
Sec. 6-90. - License issuance; form; records. 
(a)  Upon the approval of the local liquor control commissioner of application for a license required by this chapter, and the payment of the required license fee, the city clerk shall issue to the person applying therefor a license to retail intoxicating liquors, indicating the classification under which such license is issued, for the term for which such license was granted, which license shall be signed by the local liquor control commissioner and countersigned by the city clerk. 
(b)  The local liquor control commissioner shall keep or cause to be kept a complete record of all such licenses issued by him, and shall furnish the city clerk, city treasurer and chief of police each with a copy thereof. 
(Code 1980, § 3-16; Ord. of 12-3-1963, § 10)  
Sec. 6-91. - License renewal. 
Any person having a license required by this chapter shall have the right to renew such license at the expiration thereof, provided that he is then qualified to receive such a license and the premises for which such renewal license is sought conform to all applicable ordinances for such purpose; and, provided further, that such renewal privilege shall not be construed as a vested right which shall prevent a revocation of the license for cause. An application for a renewal of a license under this chapter shall be made in the same manner and form as is provided for original applications for licenses. 
(Code 1980, § 3-17; Ord. of 12-3-1963, § 11)  
Sec. 6-92. - Personal nature of license; attachment, garnishment or execution; decedent's estates; refund. 
A license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be purely a personal privilege, and shall not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to attachment, garnishment or execution, nor shall it be alienable or transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or hypothecated. Such license shall not descend by the laws of testate or intestate devolution, but it shall cease upon the death of the licensee, provided that executors or administrators of the estate of any deceased licensee, and the trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when such estate consists in part of alcoholic liquor, may continue the business of the sale of alcoholic liquor under order of the appropriate court, and may exercise the privileges of the deceased or insolvent or bankrupt licensee after the death of such decedent, or such insolvency or bankruptcy until the expiration of such license but not longer than six (6) months after the death, bankruptcy or insolvency of such licensee. A refund shall be made of that portion of the license fees paid for any period in which the licensee shall be prevented from operating under such license in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1980, § 3-18; Ord. of 12-3-1963, § 11) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 235 ILCS 5/6-1.  
Sec. 6-93. - Transfer of licenses; fee, etc. 
Effective January 1, 2008, the holder of a liquor license in any category shall not be permitted to transfer the license to another applicant or proposed owner of the establishment. The license shall be revoked and automatically terminated upon the original licensee not doing business as originally contemplated in the application for license originally filed by the applicant. The applicant shall not have any right or privilege to sell or otherwise transfer the license. 
(Code 1980, § 3-19; Ord. of 12-3-1963, § 11; Ord. No. 81-6, §§ 2, 3, 3-12-1981; Ord. No. 07-6, § 2, 1-25-2007; Ord. No. 07-42, § 3, 5-3-2007) 
Editor's note— Section 4 of Ord. No. 07-42, adopted May 3, 2007, provided for the repeal of § 6-93 as of Dec. 31, 2007. At such time, said section will be deleted and reserved.  
Sec. 6-94. - Change of location. 
A retailer's alcoholic liquor license shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor only the premises described in the application and license and it shall be unlawful to sell alcoholic liquor at retail at any other place. If the establishment closes, and remains closed for sixty (60) continuous days, it shall be considered abandoned and the liquor license attached to that location shall be automatically revoked. This will not apply if an appropriate building permit has been issued to the premises in order to make repairs or renovations to the property and after receiving permission from the liquor control commissioner, and as otherwise extended by said commissioner, upon request by the license holder. 
(Code 1980, § 3-20; Ord. of 12-3-1963, § 15; Ord. No. 07-72, § 1, 6-14-2007)  
Sec. 6-95. - Temporary permits. 
The local liquor control commissioner shall have the power to issue temporary permits to any society, fraternity, picnic, bazaar, fair or similar public or private assembly, for the sale of alcoholic beverages where food is sold, served or dispensed. Such temporary permits shall be issued only to organizations not for pecuniary profit and shall be valid only for one (1) day, provided that the commissioner may issue such temporary permits for a period of not more than ten (10) days. No organization shall be issued such permit for more than ten (10) days cumulatively within any one (1) calendar year. The fee for such a temporary permit shall be five dollars ($5.00) per day. 
(Code 1980, § 3-21; Ord. of 12-3-1963, § 12)  
Sec. 6-96. - Display of license. 
Every retail alcoholic liquor licensee shall cause his license issued pursuant to this chapter to be framed and hung in plain view in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises. 
(Code 1980, § 3-22; Ord. of 12-3-1963, § 22)  
Sec. 6-97. - Transfer of certain classes of licenses from premises outside River Oaks West or River Oaks East to within premises of same or to other city premises. 
(a)  Hereafter, no Class "B," "C-B," "C," "D," "R" or "W" license shall be transferred from any premises outside the River Oaks West or River Oaks East Complex to any premises within the River Oaks West or River Oaks East Complex; unless prior thereto there has been an affirmative vote of the city council approving said transfer. That hereafter no license shall be transferred out of River Oaks West or River Oaks East to any other premises within the city, unless prior thereto there has been an affirmative vote of the city council approving said transfer. 
(b)  In the event a license is transferred from any premises outside the River Oaks West or River Oaks East complex to premises within the River Oaks West or River Oaks East complex, said license shall have the same rights and privileges of the license classification transferred into the River Oaks West or River Oaks East complex; provided, however, that said license shall be designated River Oaks West license classification or River Oaks East license classification. That in the event said transfer occurs, that thereafter simultaneously with said transfer the Class "B," "C-B," "C," "D," "R" or "W" license total number thereof shall be automatically reduced by the transfer into the River Oaks West or River Oaks East complex. 
(c)  Hereafter, no Class "E" or "R-E" license shall be transferred from any premises outside the River Oaks West or River Oaks East complex into the River Oaks West or River Oaks East complex. 
(Code 1980, § 3-43; Ord. No. 81-26, § 1, 8-13-1981; Ord. No. 85-35, §§ 1, 2, 10-10-1985)  
Sec. 6-98. - License revocation or suspension. 
The local liquor control commissioner shall have the authority to suspend for not more than thirty (30) days or revoke same for any violation of any provision of this chapter, or for any misrepresentation of any material facts set forth in the application for a license issued pursuant to it, or for any violation of any state or federal law pertaining to the sale of alcoholic liquor. 
(Code 1980, § 3-42; Ord. of 12-3-1963, § 21) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 235 ILCS 5/4-4.  
Secs. 6-99—6-120. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - OPERATIONAL RESTRICTIONS AND REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 6-121. - Closing hours. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any holder of a Class "E" license to sell or offer for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor, or to furnish any entertainment on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Friday after the hour of 2:00 a.m., and before the hour of 7:00 a.m. It shall be unlawful for the holder of a Class "E" license to sell or offer for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor on Sunday after the hour of 2:00 a.m., and before the hour of 12:00 noon. It shall be unlawful for the holder of a Class "E" license to sell or offer for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor on Thursday and Saturday after the hour of 12:00 a.m. and before the hour of 7:00 a.m. 
Note— Effective January 1, 2008, all establishments holding a liquor license other than an "E" license shall be closed at 12:00 a.m. every day of the week, per Ord. No. 07-42, § 1, adopted May 3, 2007. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the holders of a Class "B," Class "C," Class "C-B," Class "D," Class "R," Class "R-E" or Class "W" alcoholic liquor license to sell or offer for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor on weekdays after the hour of 2:00 a.m., and before the hour of 7:00 a.m. It shall be unlawful for the holders of a Class "B," Class "C," Class "C-B," Class "D," Class "R," Class "R-E" or Class "W" alcoholic liquor license to sell or offer for sale at retail, any alcoholic liquor on Sunday after the hour of 2:00 a.m., and before the hour of 12:00 noon. 
Note: Effective May 1, 2017, all establishments holding a Class "B" license will be permitted to remain open and sell or offer for sale at retail alcoholic liquor until the hour of 2:00 a.m. on Saturday and 2:00 a.m. on Sunday only. All other restrictions on the hours of operation as more fully set forth in Ordinance No. 07-42, other than those as amended by this section, shall remain in full force and effect. 
If two (2) or more incidents requiring a police response to any establishment holding a Class "B" license occur in any sixty-day period, the establishment will no longer be permitted to remain open after midnight. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to have premises licensed under this chapter open for business or to admit the public to such premises during the hours within which the sale of alcoholic liquor is prohibited. No other person other than authorized employees of the licensee shall be permitted to remain on the premises after the designated hour; provided, however, that in the case of restaurants, clubs, drug, food or department stores and delicatessens, such establishments may be kept open during such hours, but no alcoholic liquor may be sold, given to, or consumed by the public during such hours. 
(d)  Any person other than those above authorized found on the licensed premises herein shall raise a presumption of a violation of this section and the presumption that said premises are open for business. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for the holder of a Class "W-R-E" license to sell or offer for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor, or to furnish any entertainment on weekdays after the hour of 2:00 a.m., and before the hour of 7:00 a.m. It shall be unlawful for the holder of a Class "W-R-E" license to sell or offer for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor on Sunday after the hour of 2:00 a.m., and before the hour of 12:00 noon. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for the holder of a Class "B-E" license to sell or offer for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor, or to furnish any entertainment on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday after the hour of 2:00 a.m. and before the hour of 7:00 a.m. It shall be unlawful for the holder of a Class "B-E" license to sell or offer for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor on Sunday after the hour of 2:00 a.m. and before the hour of 12:00 noon. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for the holder of a Class "B-A" license to sell or offer for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor, on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday after the hour of 2:00 a.m. and before the hour of 7:00 a.m. It shall be unlawful for the holder of a Class "B-A" license to sell or offer for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor on Sunday after the hour of 2:00 a.m. and before 12:00 noon. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful for the holder of a Class "B-H" license to offer for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday after the hour of 2:00 a.m. and before the hour of 7:00 a.m. It shall be unlawful for the holder of a Class "B-H" license to offer for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor on Sunday after the hour of 2:00 a.m. and before 11:00 a.m. 
(Code 1980, § 3-23; Ord. of 12-3-1963, § 5; Ord. of 10-19-1966, § 1; Ord. of 12-15-1969, § 2; Ord. of 10-26-1976, § 1; Ord. of 12-13-1973, § 2; Ord. No. 83-14, § 2, 5-26-1983; Ord. No. 86-31, § 2, 11-13-1986; Ord. No. 87-15, § 2, 7-9-1987; Ord. No. 94-3, § 1, 1-27-1994; Ord. No. 07-42, § 1, 5-3-2007; Ord. No. 08-11, § 3, 2-28-2008; Ord. No. 15-37, § 6, 9-10-2015; Ord. No. 17-13, § 2, 4-27-2017)  
Sec. 6-122. - Use of words saloon and bar in advertisements. 
No person licensed to sell at retail alcoholic liquor shall use the word saloon or bar in any sign or advertisement. 
(Code 1980, § 3-24; Ord. of 12-3-1963, § 23)  
Sec. 6-123. - Sanitation of premises generally. 
All premises used for the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor, including all wash and toilet rooms thereon, shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(Code 1980, § 3-25; Ord. of 12-3-1963, § 18)  
Sec. 6-124. - Sanitation of employees. 
No licensee under this chapter shall employ any person who is afflicted with or who is a carrier of any contagious, infectious or venereal disease. It shall be unlawful for any person who is afflicted with or is a carrier of any such disease to work in or about the licensed premises or to engage in any way in the handling, preparation or sale of alcoholic liquor. 
(Code 1980, § 3-26; Ord. of 12-3-1963, § 18)  
Sec. 6-125. - View of interior. 
On premises where the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption thereon is licensed pursuant to this chapter, other than a restaurant, hotel or club, no screen, blind, curtain, partition, article or thing shall be permitted in the windows or upon the doors of such licensed premises, nor inside such premises, which shall prevent a clear view into the interior of such licensed premises from the street, road or sidewalk at all times, and no booth, screen, partition or other obstruction, nor any arrangement of lights or lighting shall be permitted in or about the interior of such licensed premises which shall prevent a full view of the entire interior of such premises from the street, road or sidewalk. All rooms where liquor is sold for consumption upon the premises shall be continuously lighted during business hours by natural light or artificial white light so that all parts of the interior of the premises shall be clearly visible. In case the view of any such licensed premises required by the foregoing provisions shall be willfully obscured or in any manner obstructed, then such license shall be subject to revocation. 
(Code 1980, § 3-27; Ord. of 12-3-1963, § 17)  
Sec. 6-126. - Parking facilities. 
After December 27, 1973, any licensee which shall be issued a license pursuant to this chapter for new construction sites or buildings or a change of location, shall provide off-street parking adjacent to the licensed premises consisting of one (1) fifteen (15) foot by twenty (20) foot parking space for each ten (10) feet of property frontage, which shall be paved and provide adequate drainage of said area. 
(Code 1980, § 3-28; Ord. of 12-3-1963, § 17; Ord. of 12-27-1973, § 6)  
Sec. 6-127. - Sales to minors; habitual drunkards, etc. 
No licensee under this chapter nor any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee shall sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years, or to any intoxicated person or to any person known by him to be an habitual drunkard or spendthrift, or a person who is insane, mentally ill, mentally deficient, or in need of mental treatment. 
(Code 1980, § 3-29; Ord. of 12-3-1963, § 20; Ord. of 9-29-1973, § 1) 
State Law reference— Sales to minors, etc., 235 ILCS 5/6-16.  
Sec. 6-128. - Allowing those under twenty-one (21) on premises. 
It shall be unlawful for any holder of a retail liquor dealer's license, or his or her agent or employee, to suffer or permit any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to be or remain in any room or compartment adjoining or adjacent to or situated in the room or place in which such licensed premises is located; provided that this section shall not apply to any person under twenty-one (21) years of age, who is accompanied by his or her parent or legal guardian, nor to any licensed premises which derives its principal business form the sale of service or commodities other than alcoholic liquor. It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any premises located within the city to knowingly allow any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to remain on such premises while in the possession of alcoholic liquor or while consuming alcoholic liquors in violation of section 6-3 of this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 3-30; Ord. of 12-3-1963, § 20; Ord. of 9-29-1973, § 1; Ord. No. 86-24, § 5, 8-14-1986)  
Sec. 6-129. - Loitering, etc., by persons under twenty-one (21). 
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to enter, remain on, loiter or be present in any tavern, club, store or other place in which such licensed premises is located, or in any room or compartment adjoining or adjacent to or situated in the room or place of such licensed premises; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years who is accompanied by his or her parent or legal guardian, nor to any licensed premises which derives its principal business from the sale of service or commodities other than alcoholic liquor. 
(Code 1980, § 3-33; Ord. of 12-3-1963, § 20; Ord. of 9-29-1973, § 1; Ord. No. 86-24, § 2, 8-14-1986)  
Sec. 6-130. - Notice for those under twenty-one (21). 
Every licensed tavern, club, store or other place in the city where alcoholic beverages are sold, given or delivered, shall display at all times in a prominent place a printed card, sign or placard which shall be issued by the city clerk and which shall read substantially as follows: 
WARNING TO MINORS 
You are subject to a fine up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) and/or imprisonment for up to six (6) months or treatment as a juvenile offender under the ordinances of the City of Calumet City, if you purchase alcoholic liquor, and/or misrepresent your age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor. 
(Code 1980, § 3-34; Ord. of 12-3-1963, § 20; Ord. of 9-29-1973, § 1)  
Sec. 6-131. - Female impersonators. 
(a)  No licensee under this chapter shall permit or allow entrance or admission to the place of business of such licensed premises of any male person costumed, clothed, garbed or apparelled in any manner not appropriate to his sex or otherwise impersonating a member of the female sex, or exhibit or permit such person to exhibit himself so costumed, clothed, garbed or apparelled or otherwise impersonating a member of the female sex, in any form of entertainment, play, dialogue, theatrical production, pantomime, stage or floor show. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any male person to exhibit or display himself in the licensed premises of any licensee, costumed, clothed, garbed or apparelled in any manner not appropriate to his sex or otherwise to impersonate a member of the female sex, or to participate in any form of entertainment, play, dialogue, theatrical production, pantomime, stage or floor show in the place of business of a licensee, while so costumed, clothed, garbed or apparelled or otherwise impersonating a member of the female sex. 
(Code 1980, § 3-36; Ord. of 12-3-1963, § 24)  
Sec. 6-132. - Conduct of female employees. 
It shall be unlawful for any female agent, employee, entertainer, hostess, waitress or person employed on any contractual basis working in an establishment licensed pursuant to this chapter to: 
(1)  Solicit, beg, induce or request any male patron, customer or visitor in such licensed establishment to purchase any alcoholic or nonalcoholic beverage for herself or any other person; 
(2)  Accept from any male patron, customer or visitor in such licensed establishment any alcoholic or nonalcoholic beverage solicited for herself or any other person; or 
(3)  Fraternize, associate or mingle with any male patron, customer or visitor in such licensed establishment. 
The aforesaid activities shall not be prohibited in connection with any contact any of the aforesaid females may have with any male patrons, customers or visitors to whom she is related by blood or marriage, nor shall any of the aforesaid prohibited activities be deemed to prevent any of the aforesaid females from accepting and serving the order of a male patron or customer for any alcoholic or nonalcoholic beverage in the regular course of her employment or work. 
(Code 1980, § 3-38; Ord. of 12-3-1963, § 8; Ord. of 9-23-1965, § 1)  
Sec. 6-133. - Responsibility of licensee with reference to license conditions, chapter or lewd, vulgar, obscene, etc., activities or conduct generally. 
(a)  No person having obtained a license as required by this chapter shall violate or suffer or allow to be violated any of the conditions and restrictions contained in such license, or any of the provisions of this chapter, nor shall suffer or permit the licensed premises or an exhibition or amusement therein, to become disorderly or violate any of the provisions of this section. 
(b)  The holder of any license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall receive and hold the same upon the express condition that the licensee of the specified licensed premises or any part or portion thereof, where the show, performance or exhibition is held, and the character of the show, performance or exhibition conducted, or the manner of advertising and representing the same, shall not violate any of the following conditions and provisions: 
(1)  No show, performance, exhibition or motion picture, exhibited, presented or conducted by reason of any license issued, or to be issued, under this chapter shall be lewd, obscene or indecent or allowed to be acted or presented in a manner to constitute the same lewd, obscene and indecent, either upon or off the stage or screen or in or about the licensed premises, or allow or permit the conduct of any performer, manager, employee, or the audience to commit actions that shall be lewd, obscene or indecent. Without limiting the foregoing, the following acts or performances are hereby specifically prohibited: 
a.  The removal by a female performer in the presence of the audience of her clothing, so as to make nude or give the illusion of nudeness of the lower abdomen, genital organs, buttocks or breasts; 
b.  The exposure by a female performer in the presence of the audience, or the giving of the illusion of nudeness in the presence of the audience of the lower abdomen, genital organs, buttocks or breasts; 
c.  The exposure by a male performer in the presence of the audience of the genital organs or buttocks; 
d.  The use by a performer of profane, lewd, lascivious, indecent or disgusting language; 
e.  The performance of any dance, episode, or musical entertainment which depicts sexual subjects, acts or objects offensive to public morals and decency; 
f.  The performance of any dance, act, word or words, episode or musical entertainment, the purpose of which is to direct the attention of the spectator to the breasts, buttocks or genital organs of the performer. 
(2)  The holder of any license issued under this chapter shall not use or exhibit or permit and allow to be exhibited obscene, lewd or indecent pictures in or about the licensed premises or any part of same, nor in the street or on the sidewalks in front of said licensed premises, nor in any part of the city, nor use or exhibit or allow to be exhibited any such obscene, lewd, or indecent pictures to advertise or otherwise induce the public to attend the performance to be shown or exhibited. 
(3)  The holder of any such license heretofore or hereafter issued under this chapter shall not permit the showing of any performance, exhibition, motion picture or other presentation had in whole or in part which is lewd, obscene and indecent. 
(4)  The holder of any license issued under this chapter shall not advertise or otherwise publicize a show, performance, exhibition or other showing by means of pictures, billboards, statements or other mediums either in newspapers, magazines, theater, show place or in any part of the city which are lewd, obscene and indecent, and which misrepresent the actual show, exhibition, performance or showing and being so made for the purpose of luring the public into the licensed premises. 
(5)  No holder of any license heretofore or hereafter issued under the provisions of this chapter shall cause, permit, or allow his manager, agent, servant, female performer, performers, employees, patron or customer to solicit for prostitution, or to commit any lewd, obscene or indecent act with any other performer, performers, manager, agent, servant, employee, customer or patron of the licensed premises. 
(6)  No holder of any license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall keep or maintain a house of ill fame or place for the practice of prostitution or lewdness, or the encouragement of idleness, gaming, excessive drinking, fornication or other misbehavior, or a common, ill-governed and disorderly place of business. 
(7)  No holder of any license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall employ, engage or permit the employment or engagement of any male or female person, or allow, cause or permit any male or female person to frequent, to be and remain upon the licensed premises, for the practice of fornication or prostitution or lewdness. 
(Code 1980, § 3-40; Ord. of 12-3-1963, § 7)  
Sec. 6-134. - Responsibility of licensee with reference to other activities. 
It shall be unlawful for any person licensed pursuant to this chapter to: 
(1)  Employ any female agent, employee, entertainer, hostess, waitress or person on any contractual basis for the purpose of having her engage in any activities prohibited in section 6-132 of this Code; 
(2)  Suffer or permit any female agent, employee, entertainer, hostess, waitress or person on any contractual basis for the purpose of having her engage in any activities prohibited in said section 6-132; 
(3)  Suffer or permit any female agent, employee, entertainer, hostess, waitress or person on any contractual basis to be served, in the licensed establishment, any alcoholic or nonalcoholic beverage which was solicited from and purchased by a male patron, customer or visitor of the licensed establishment not related to said female by blood or marriage; 
(4)  Suffer or permit any females to engage in any activities prohibited in section 6-6 of this Code; 
(5)  Suffer or permit any alcoholic or nonalcoholic beverage to be served to a female which was solicited, begged, induced or requested by a female from, and purchased by, a male patron, customer or visitor of such licensed establishment not related to said female by blood or marriage; 
(6)  Suffer or permit any agent or person employed on any contractual basis working in the licensed establishment to engage or employ any female for the purpose of having her engage in any activities prohibited in section 6-132 of this Code; or 
(7)  Suffer or permit any agent or person employed on any contractual basis working in the licensed establishment to solicit, beg, induce or request any male patron, customer or visitor in such licensed establishment to purchase or give any alcoholic or nonalcoholic beverage to any female, female agent, employee, entertainer, hostess, waitress or person employed on any contractual basis present or working in the licensed establishment. 
(Code 1980, § 3-41; Ord. of 9-23-1965, § 1)  
Chapter 10 - ANIMALS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 05-30, adopted May 26, 2005 repealed ch. 10 in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former ch. 10. pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the 1980 Code, Ord. of Mar. 27, 1975, Ord. of June 26, 1975, Ord. No. 88-13, adopted June 23, 1988, Ord. No. 88-21, adopted Sept. 8, 1988, Ord. No. 94-1, adopted Jan. 13, 1994, Ord. No. 96-72, adopted Nov. 14, 1996 and Ord. No. 03-60, adopted Oct. 9, 2003. 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 26; health and sanitation, ch. 38; kennels and pet shops, § 54-1421 et seq. 
State Law reference— Humane Care for Animals Act, 510 ILCS 70/1 et seq.; Impounding and Disposition of Stray Animals Act, 410 ILCS 40/1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 10-1. - Definitions. 
When used in this chapter, the following words, terms, and phrases, and their derivations shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  Animal means any live creature, both domestic and wild, except humans. "Animal" includes fowl, fish and reptiles. 
(b)  Animal hospital means any establishment maintained and operated by a licensed and registered veterinarian for surgery, diagnosis, and treatment of animal diseases and injuries. 
(c)  Animal nuisance means any nuisance arising out of the keeping, maintaining or owning of, or failure to exercise sufficient control of, an animal. 
(d)  Animal shelter means the facility operated by the city for the temporary care, confinement, detention and other disposition of animals. The term shall also include any private facility authorized by the mayor or his designee to impound, confine, detain, care for or destroy any animal. 
(e)  At heel means a dog is directly behind or next to a person and obedient to that person's command. 
(f)  At-large means that an animal is off the premises of the owner, and not on a leash or otherwise under the immediate control of a person physically capable of restraining the animal. 
(g)  Cruelty means any act or omission whereby unjustifiable physical pain, suffering or death of an animal is caused or permitted, including failure to provide proper drink, air, space, shelter or protection from the elements, a sanitary and safe living environment, veterinary care or nutritious food in siphoned quantity. In the case of activities where physical pain is necessarily caused, such as medical and scientific research, food processing, customary and normal veterinary and agricultural husbandry practices, pest elimination, and animal training and hunting, "cruelty" shall mean a failure to employ the most humane method reasonably available. 
(h)  Disposition means adoption, quarantine, voluntary or involuntary custodianship or placement, or euthanasia humanely administered to an animal. "Disposition" includes placement to the general public, or removal of an animal from any pet shop to any other location. 
(i)  Domestic animal includes dogs, cats, domesticated sheep, horses, cattle, goats, swine, fowl, ducks, geese, turkeys, confined domestic hares and rabbits, gerbils, hamsters, ferrets, pheasants, and other birds and animals raised and/or maintained in confinement. 
(j)  Exotic animal means any live monkey, alligator, crocodile, cayman, raccoon, skunk, fox, bear, sea mammal, poisonous snake, member of the feline species other than domestic cat ( felis domesticus ), member of the canine species other than domestic dog ( canis familiaris ) or any other animal that would require a standard of care and control greater than that required for customary household pets sold by commercial pet shops or domestic farm animals. 
(k)  Guard or attack dog means a dog trained to attack on command or to protect persons or property, and who will cease to attack upon command. 
(l)  Impoundment means the taking into custody of an animal by any police officer, animal control officers, or any authorized representative thereof. 
(m)  Kennel means any premises wherein any person engages in the business of boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee, or selling domesticated and exotic animals. 
(n)  Muzzle means a device constructed of strong, soft material or of metal, designed to fasten over the mouth of an animal to prevent the animal from biting any person or other animal. 
(o)  Owner means any person having temporary or permanent custody of, sheltering or having charge of, harboring, exercising control over, or having property rights to, any animal covered by this chapter. An animal shall be deemed to be harbored if it is fed or sheltered for twenty-four (24) hours or more. 
(p)  Public nuisance animal means any animal that unreasonably annoys humans, endangers the life or health of persons or other animals, or substantially interferes with the rights of citizens, other than their owners, to enjoyment of life or property. The term "public nuisance animal" shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Any animal that is repeatedly found running at-large; 
(2)  Any dog or cat in any section of a park or public recreation area unless the dog or cat is controlled by a leash or similar physical restraint; 
(3)  Any animal that damages, soils, defiles or defecates on any property other than that of its owner; 
(4)  Any animal that makes disturbing noises, including but not limited to, continued and repeated howling, barking, whining, or other utterances causing unreasonable annoyance, disturbance, or discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept or harbored; 
(5)  Any animal that causes fouling of the air by noxious or offensive odors and thereby creates unreasonable annoyance or discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept or harbored; 
(6)  Any animal in heat that is not confined so as to prevent attraction or contact with other animals; 
(7)  Any animal, whether or not on the property of its owner, that without provocation, molests, attacks, or otherwise interferes with the freedom of movement of persons in a public right-of-way; 
(8)  Any animal that chases motor vehicles in a public right-of-way; 
(9)  Any animal that attacks domestic animals; 
(10)  Any animal that causes unsanitary conditions in enclosures or surroundings where the animal is kept or harbored; or 
(11)  Any animal that is offensive or dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare by virtue of the number of animals maintained at a single residence or the inadequacy of the facilities. 
(q)  Sanitary means a condition of good order and cleanliness to minimize the possibility of disease transmission. 
(r)  Under restraint means that an animal is secured by a leash, lead under the control of a person physically capable of restraining the animal and obedient to that person's commands, or securely enclosed within the real property limits of the owner's premises. 
(s)  Vicious or dangerous animal means any animal that when unprovoked inflicts bites, attacks or aggressively approaches a human being or other animal either on public or private property; any animal with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack without provocation, to cause injury, or to otherwise endanger the safety of human beings or domestic animals; any animal that has a trait or characteristic and a generally known reputation for viciousness, dangerousness or unprovoked attacks upon human beings or other animals, unless handled in a particular manner with special equipment; or any animal used primarily or in part for the purpose of dog fighting, or is a dog trained for dog fighting. 
(t)  Wild animal means any live monkey, nonhuman primate, raccoon, skunk, fox, leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx or any other warm-blooded animal that can normally be found in the wild state. The term "wild animal" does not include: domestic dogs (excluding hybrids with wolves, coyotes or jackals), domestic cats (excluding hybrids with ocelots or margays), farm animals, rodents, any hybrid animal that is part wild, and captive-bred species of common cage birds. 
(Ord. No. 05-30, § 1, 5-26-2005)  
Sec. 10-2. - Nuisances. 
(a)  Unlawful to keep. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any animal on any property located within the corporate limits of the city when the keeping of such animal constitutes a public nuisance or menace to public health or safety. 
(b)  Noisy dogs and cats; nuisance acts. No person shall harbor or keep any dog or cat which constitutes a nuisance. It is a nuisance for any dog or cat to bark, cry, or meow so as to disturb the peace; to molest or annoy any person away from the property or private property not owned or occupied by the person owning or keeping such dog or cat. 
(Ord. No. 05-30, § 1, 5-26-2005)  
Sec. 10-3. - Keeping of exotic and domestic animals. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone to own, harbor, or permit at-large any exotic animal or any domestic animal other than a dog, cat, domesticated hare or rabbit, hamster, gerbil, ferret, or bird without the written permission of the city council. Such permission shall be given only if it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the council that the animal will not constitute a threat to public health or safety. 
(Ord. No. 05-30, § 1, 5-26-2005)  
Sec. 10-4. - Keeping of numerous animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep more than three (3) dogs, cats or combination thereof, excluding fish, within the city; except that a litter of pups, kittens or other young animals may be kept for a period of time not exceeding four (4) months from birth. This subsection shall not apply to any establishment where animals are kept for breeding, sale, sporting purposes, or boarding. 
(Ord. No. 05-30, § 1, 5-26-2005)  
Sec. 10-5. - Caring for animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of any animal to refuse or fail to provide such animal with sufficient wholesome and nutritious food, potable water, veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering, humane care and treatment, or to unnecessarily expose any such animal in hot, stormy, cold or inclement weather. 
(b)  No owner or custodian of any animal shall willfully abandon such animal on any street, road, highway or public place, or on private property when not in the care of another person. 
(c)  No animals should be kept in garages unless provided with: 
(1)  A daily supply of food and water; and 
(2)  An adequate ventilation (heating/cooling) system. 
(Ord. No. 05-30, § 1, 5-26-2005)  
Sec. 10-6. - Sanitation. 
(a)  No owner or custodian of any animal shall cause or allow such animal to soil, defile or defecate on any public property or upon any street, sidewalk, public way, play area or common grounds owned jointly by the members of a homeowners or condominium association, or upon private property other than that of the owner, unless such owner or custodian immediately removes and disposes of all feces deposited by such animal by the following method: 
(1)  Collection of feces by appropriate implement and placement in a paper or plastic bag or other container; and 
(2)  Removal of such bag or container to the property of the animal owner or custodian and disposition thereafter in a manner as otherwise may be permitted by law. 
(b)  No person owning, harboring or keeping an animal within the city shall permit any waste matter from the animal to collect and remain on the property of the owner or custodian, or on the property of others so as to cause or create an unhealthy, unsanitary, dangerous or offensive living condition on the owner's or custodian's property, or to abutting property of others. 
(c)  No person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of any animal shall cause unsanitary dangerous or offensive conditions by virtue of the size or number of animals maintained at a single location or due to the inadequacy of the facilities. 
(Ord. No. 05-30, § 1, 5-26-2005)  
Sec. 10-7. - Cruelty to animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously strike, beat, abuse, or intentionally run down with a vehicle any animal, or otherwise engage in any act to cause or inflict unnecessary pain, injury, suffering or death to such animal; except that reasonable force may be used to drive away vicious or trespassing animals. 
(b)  No person, except a licensed veterinarian for humanitarian purposes, shall administer poison to any animal, or knowingly leave any poisonous substance of any kind or ground glass in any place with the intent to injure any animal. The provisions of this section are not applicable to licensed exterminators using poisons as part of a pest control program or the use of commercial insecticides and rodent baits used to control insects and wild rodents. 
(Ord. No. 05-30, § 1, 5-26-2005)  
Sec. 10-8. - Licensing of dogs and cats. 
(a)  License required. No person shall own, keep or harbor any dog or cat over the age of four (4) months within the city unless such dog or cat is licensed as provided in this chapter. 
(b)  Application. Application for such license shall be made by the owner on a form to be provided by the city clerk within ten (10) days after acquiring any dog or cat over four (4) months of age or within ten (10) days after a dog or cat becomes four (4) months of age; provided that any owner moving to the city for the purpose of establishing residence or becoming a resident as a result of any annexation, and otherwise required to obtain a license, shall have until ten (10) days after moving or annexation to obtain such a license. 
(c)  Renewal. The renewal of animal license shall be made by the owner on or before February first of each year. Failure to renew such license by the February first deadline shall result in a five-dollar ($5.00) late fee. 
(d)  Proof of rabies vaccination required. All owners applying for a license must show to the satisfaction of the licensing authority that the animal for which the license is being obtained has been inoculated against rabies. 
(e)  Payment of license fee. A license fee shall be paid at the time of making application. The license fee for both dogs and cats shall be ten dollars ($10.00). 
(f)  Exemption from license fee. License fees shall not be required for Seeing Eye dogs, government police dogs or dogs belonging to a nonresident of the city and kept within the boundaries of the city for not longer than thirty (30) days; provided that all dogs of nonresidents shall at the time of entry into the city be properly vaccinated against rabies, and while kept within the city, meet all other requirements of this chapter. Any owner claiming any of these exemptions has the burden of proving to the satisfaction of the licensing authority that the dog or cat in question is entitled to such exemption. 
(g)  Proof of insurance required. The owner or keeper of any dog within the corporate limits of the City of Calumet City shall maintain liability insurance in the amount of at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) covering the twelve-month period during which licensing is sought. 
(g)  Proof of insurance required. The owner or keeper of any dog within the corporate limits of the City of Calumet City shall maintain liability insurance in the amount of at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) covering the twelve-month period during which licensing is sought. 
(Ord. No. 05-30, § 1, 5-26-2005; Ord. No. 07-91, § 1, 9-13-2007)  
Sec. 10-9. - License tags; identification. 
(a)  Upon payment and acceptance of the license fee, the licensing authority shall issue a durable license tag stamped with the year of issuance and an identification number for the animal for which the license has been obtained. Any license issued for the keeping of a dog or cat shall take effect on the date of issuance and shall be valid for a period of one (1) year. Every dog or cat for which the owner is required to obtain a license must wear a valid license tag at all times when the animal is off the premises of its owner. 
(b)  No person may use a license for any animal other than the animal for which the license was issued. It shall also be unlawful for any person other than the owner or his agent, a police officer or animal control officer, to remove from the neck of any dog or cat the license tag or collar issued pursuant to this section or alter such tag in any manner. 
(Ord. No. 05-30, § 1, 5-26-2005)  
Sec. 10-10. - Restraint and confinement—Generally. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal to fail to keep such animal under restraint or to permit such animal to run at large upon the streets and public ways of the city. All dogs shall be contained to their owner's property in either an escape-proof securely fenced yard with a fence at least six (6) feet in height, or enclosure, or on a securely fastened steel cable run. 
(b)  Any dog, while on a street, sidewalk, public way or in any park, public square, or other public space, or upon any private property without the consent of the owner, shall be secured by a leash no longer than eight (8) feet in length and of sufficient tensile strength to restrain the particular dog, or shall be at heel and/or securely muzzled. 
(c)  No owner or custodian of any animal shall fail to exercise proper care and control of such animal to prevent the same from becoming a public nuisance. 
(d)  No owner or custodian of any animal shall keep an animal on a leash unless a person is in physical control of the leash. Such leash can be attached to private property for a maximum of four (4) hours within a twenty-four-hour period. All dogs shall be contained to their owner's property in either an escape-proof securely fenced yard with a fence at least six (6) feet in height, or enclosure. Such leash, within the fenced yard or enclosure, shall not be attached to any unanchored object or any gasoline-propelled vehicle. 
(e)  Every female dog or cat in heat shall be confined in a building or other enclosure in such manner that such female dog or cat cannot come into contact with another animal except for planned breeding. 
(f)  Every precaution must be made to protect the public from dogs that are not behind fenced enclosures. The assumption of liability is upon the dog owner. 
(g)  No child under the age of sixteen (16) years shall be allowed to lead a dog in public areas. This does not include Junior Showmanship competition in the show ring at a dog show. Any parent whose child under the age of sixteen (16) years is found in public unattended with a dog on, or off lead shall be charged with reckless endangerment. 
(h)  No child under the age of ten (10) years shall be left unattended with any dog. 
(i)  The owner shall provide his/her dog with shelter appropriate to the climate, and a clean healthful environment in which to live. 
(j)  The owner shall provide shade from the sun, and cover from the rain/snow. 
(k)  The owner shall provide his/her dog with food, and plentiful clean drinking water daily. 
(l)  The owner shall schedule annual immunization inoculations for his/her dog for the prevention of communicable diseases. Owners of dogs found at-large must produce immunization documentation to authorities upon demand. 
(m)  Violations of subsections (f), (g), (h), (i), shall be considered cruelty to animals the owner shall be charged fines, and or jail time commensurate with the harm done to the animal. The court may remove the animal from the custody of the owner. 
(n)  The names of irresponsible dog owners and addresses shall be made public, and posted on the Internet, and in local newspapers. 
(Ord. No. 05-30, § 1, 5-26-2005; Ord. No. 07-93, §§ 1, 2, 9-13-2007)  
Sec. 10-11. - Restraint of guard dogs. 
(a)  Every owner of a guard or attack dog shall keep such dog confined in a confinement structure. A "confinement structure" means a securely locked pen, kennel, structure, or fence capable of containing a guard or attack dog and shall be designed, constructed and maintained to prevent the animal's escape and prevent the entry of young children or other persons not in control of said animal. Such pen, kennel, structure, or fence must have secure sides, and any gaps or spaces present in the structure must not allow the dog to escape or place its head through such gap or space. All structures used to confine a guard or attack dog must be securely locked when such an animal is within the structure. Any fence used to contain a guard or attack dog must have a minimum height of six (6) feet. All structures erected to house a guard or attack dog must comply with all zoning and building regulations of the city. All structures must be adequately lighted, ventilated and kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to dogs owned or controlled by government law enforcement agencies. 
(Ord. No. 05-30, § 1, 5-26-2005)  
Sec. 10-12. - Impoundment. 
(a)  In addition to any other remedies provided in this chapter, a police officer or any city employee designated to perform the duties of animal control may seize, impound and humanely confine to the Calumet City Animal Shelter or animal hospital any of the following animals: 
(1)  Any dog or cat without a valid license tag; 
(2)  Any animal at-large; 
(3)  Any animal constituting a public nuisance or considered a danger to the public; 
(4)  Any animal that is in violation of any quarantine or confinement order of a health officer; 
(5)  Any unattended animal that is ill, injured or otherwise in need of care; 
(6)  Any animal that is reasonably believed to have been abused or neglected; 
(7)  Any animal that is reasonably suspected of having rabies; 
(8)  Any animal that is charged with being potentially dangerous or vicious where a police officer or city employee designated to perform the duties of animal control determines that there is a threat to public health and safety; 
(9)  Any animal that a court of competent jurisdiction has ordered impounded or destroyed; or 
(10)  Any animal that is considered unattended or abandoned, including but not limited to situations where the owner is deceased, has been arrested or evicted from his regular place of residence. 
(b)  Any police officer or city employee designated to perform the duties of animal control may also, or in lieu of impoundment, issue to the owner a notice of violation. Such notice shall impose upon the owner a penalty pursuant to this chapter. 
(c)  If a police officer or city employee designated to perform the duties of animal control picks up a dog or cat without a current rabies tag, the city shall not release the animal until the owner presents proof of the animal's rabies vaccination or provides proof of a prepaid rabies vaccination from a licensed veterinarian. 
(d)  An impoundment fee shall be assessed at thirty dollars ($30.00) for the first day and ten dollars ($10.00) for each day thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 05-30, § 1, 5-26-2005; Ord. No. 12-36, § 2, 8-9-2012)  
Sec. 10-13. - Property owners may impound. 
Any person finding an animal at-large in Calumet City upon his/her property or within the city limits may remove same to the Calumet City Animal Control Department. The property owner must notify the animal control department and the police department as soon as possible with a description of the animal, the name of the owner, if known, and/or the tag numbers, if known. The property owner may hold the animal until the department can dispatch an animal control officer to take possession of said animal. 
(Ord. No. 05-30, § 1, 5-26-2005)  
Sec. 10-14. - Disposition of large animals. 
Any police officer or city employee designated to perform the duties of animal control who removes a large animal such as a horse, cow, mule or any other animal not acceptable by any animal hospital or shelter shall be authorized to call a trucking firm or company which shall convey the animal to a farm or other appropriate facility that has an agreement with the city to accept such animals. The disposition of any animal removed to a facility other than an animal hospital or shelter shall be handled in the same manner as though the animal were confined in an animal hospital or shelter. 
(Ord. No. 05-30, § 1, 5-26-2005)  
Sec. 10-15. - Notice to owner and redemption. 
(a)  If the name of the owner or custodian of an animal found at-large is known or can be obtained with reasonable dispatch, the officer shall notify the owner by telephone or by written notice, or in person of whom the owner must contact to reclaim the animal. 
(b)  Any owner reclaiming an impounded or injured animal shall pay all fees owed to the animal hospital and/or city for care and/or impoundment. 
(c)  Any animal not reclaimed by its owner within five (5) days shall become the property of the city and shall be placed for adoption in a suitable home or disposed of by the animal control officer. If such animal is placed for adoption, the recipient shall agree to hold the city harmless for any damages resulting from the placement of the animal. 
(Ord. No. 05-30, § 1, 5-26-2005)  
Sec. 10-16. - Dogs at-large. 
Any owner who allows his/her dog to run at-large shall be fined one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first violation, the second violation two hundred dollars ($200.00), the third violation four hundred dollars ($400.00) after which the dog shall be confiscated by the animal control authorities and, after evaluation of temperament by qualified personnel either placed into a responsible home, or humanely euthanized as verified by documentation. 
(Ord. No. 05-30, § 1, 5-26-2005)  
Sec. 10-17. - Strict liability. 
(a)  A dog owner will be held strictly liable for any harm, injury, fatality, or trespass done by his/her dog when off of the owners property at-large, and out of the owners immediate control. This liability shall include remuneration, fines, and or jail time depending upon the severity of the damage done by the owner's dog. 
(b)  A dog owner shall be charged with negligent homicide whose dog kills a person when off the owner's property, the dog shall be confiscated by the authorities and humanely euthanized, except in the case that the dog is protecting it's owner's life. 
(c)  A dog owner shall be charged with reckless endangerment whose dog injures a person, or causes an accident while at-large off the owners property, or out of the immediate control of the owner. The dog shall be removed from the owners custody, and be evaluated on temperament by qualified personnel, and either be placed in a responsible home or humanely euthanized. 
(d)  A dog owner shall be charged with aggravated nuisance, and animal cruelty if he/she is found facing off dogs in any public area, and fined five hundred dollars ($500.00). The dog owner shall be placed on strict probation for the period of one (1) year during which time if any violations occur the dog owner shall be fined seven hundred and fifty dollars ($750.00), and he/she shall lose custody of the dog. The dog shall be evaluated by qualified personnel, and either be placed in a responsible home, or be humanely euthanized. 
(e)  A dog owner shall be charged with aggravated nuisance should his/her dog menace a person when at-large. The owner shall be fined five hundred dollars ($500.00) and placed on probation for six (6) months, during which time if any violations occur he/she shall lose custody of the dog. The dog shall be evaluated by qualified personnel, and either be placed in a responsible home, or humanely euthanized. 
(f)  A dog owner shall pay remuneration, and fines when his/her dog kills, or injures an animal, or animals belonging to another person when at-large off the owners property. The dog owner shall be placed on strict probation for the period of one (1) year, during which time should any further violations occur, the dog shall be removed from the custody of the owner. The dog shall be evaluated by qualified personnel, and either placed into a responsible home, or humanely euthanized. 
(g)  Any dog owner by whose violations has caused his/her dog to be removed from his/her custody shall not be allowed to own another dog for a period of ten (10) years. 
(h)  No dog owner will be held liable if the dog bites, injures, or kills an intruder, a burglar, a trespasser, or anyone who threatens the owner, or his/her safety while on, or off of the owner's property while the dog is under control of the owner. 
(i)  Any person who is bitten while teasing, or tormenting a dog that is contained to the owner's property shall have no legal recourse for damages. 
(j)  Any parent whose child is bitten, or mauled due to the parent's inattendance to his/her child shall be charged with reckless endangerment of a child. 
(Ord. No. 05-30, § 1, 5-26-2005)  
Sec. 10-18. - Dog abandonment. 
Any person who abandons a dog by either dumping it alongside any thoroughfare, or by moving away and leaving the dog shall be subject to a one thousand dollar fine ($1,000.00), and jail time, or community service not to exceed six (6) months. 
(Ord. No. 05-30, § 1, 5-26-2005)  
Sec. 10-19. - Accepting animals for adoption. 
Any Calumet City resident may bring their dog or cat, with proof of ownership, to the animal control department. The entry fee, payable at City Hall, shall be set at twenty dollars ($20.00) per animal. The animal will then be sent to animal welfare where a licensed veterinarian will determine the adoptability, spay or neuter the animal, and administer rabies vaccinations as required by law. 
(Ord. No. 05-30, § 1, 5-26-2005)  
Sec. 10-20. - Use of live traps. 
The animal control department possesses "live traps," available for a one-week loan to any resident of the city. Such loans are renewable for an additional week with the approval of the animal control officer. Residents must comply with the regulations for use or the trap will be removed. 
(Ord. No. 05-30, § 1, 5-26-2005)  
Sec. 10-21. - Killing dangerous animals. 
The members of the police department are authorized to kill any dangerous animal when it is necessary for the protection of any person or property. 
(Ord. No. 05-30, § 1, 5-26-2005)  
Sec. 10-52. - Biter animals. 
(a)  Official procedure for bite cases shall be as follows: 
(1)  When the animal control officer receives information that a person has been bitten by an animal, the animal owner shall be instructed to have the animal examined by his veterinarian within twenty-four (24) hours. 
(2)  If the animal bite occurred off the animal owner's property or when the animal was left without proper control, a citation shall be written against the animal owner. 
(3)  When the animal control officer has filled out the county animal bite report in full, he shall send his report within twenty-four (24) hours to the local public health department or to the county department of animal control. 
(4)  All animals that bite must be impounded for ten (10) days, following the first examination. 
(5)  Impoundment at home or at a facility under the observation of a licensed veterinarian shall be dependent upon a current rabies vaccination and the ability of the animal owner to confine the biting animal. 
(6)  When an owner of a biting animal has no personal veterinarian, or refuses to obtain the services of a veterinarian, the animal control officer shall have the animal impounded for ten (10) days. 
(7)  All animals impounded shall have a record. The record shall include the animal owner's name, address and telephone number, if available; species or breed, color, sex, and license or tag number if available; and the time and date impounded. 
(8)  The veterinarian examining the biting animal shall fill out and then send within twenty-four (24) hours the county rabies observation notice to the county department of animal control. 
(9)  Following the examination of the biting animal at the end of the ten-day confinement period the veterinarian shall complete the county rabies release report and he shall send this report within twenty-four (24) hours to the county department of animal control. 
(b)  The animal owner is responsible for all costs relating to the examination and impoundment of the biting animal. 
(c)  Any person having knowledge of a biting animal that has not been properly examined and who does not report this fact to the animal control officer is in violation of this chapter. 
(d)  It is unlawful for the owner of a biting animal to euthanize, sell, give away, or otherwise dispose of such animal until it is released by the Cook County Animal Control Administrator or his authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 05-30, § 1, 5-26-2005)  
Sec. 10-23. - Livestock. 
(a)  No person, corporation, partnership or any entity, shall own, keep, or allow to be at-large any cattle, horse, swine, sheep, goats, or fowl within the city. Fowl shall include, but are not limited to live chickens, turkeys, geese, ducks, and pigeons. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to own or keep any animal, fowl, or pigeon which by causing frequent or loud noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of persons in the vicinity. 
(c)  Slaughtering of animals for food, including fowl, cattle, horse, swine, sheep or goats shall not be permitted or conducted in any place in the city. 
(d)  No person shall keep, own or otherwise possess or slaughter any fowl, cattle, horse, swine, sheep or goats or the young of any such species intending to use such animal for food purposes or any other purpose. 
(Ord. No. 05-30, § 1, 5-26-2005)  
Sec. 10-24. - Issuance of citations. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, all violations of this chapter shall result in the animal control officer issuing to such alleged violation a citation: 
(1)  Advising such person that he has violated this chapter specifically; 
(2)  Requesting him to make payment in the amount applicable to the alleged violation as set forth in section 10-9 of this chapter, as payment of the violation; and 
(3)  Informing him that upon failure to so pay, the alleged violation shall be subject to the applicable provisions of the administrative adjudication procedures outlined in this Code. 
(b)  Pursuant to such citation, the person so accused of the violation may settle and compromise the violation claim in respect of such chapter violation by paying to the municipality the applicable amount as set forth in section 10-9 of this chapter, within a period to be specified in such citation, not more than seven (7) days of the time alleged offense was committed. Such payment shall be made in accordance with the instructions contained in the aforesaid citation, at the office of the city clerk who shall issue a receipt for the money so received and promptly remit the amount to the city treasurer to be credited to the proper municipal fund. 
(c)  In the event that the person to whom such citation is issued fails to settle and pay the violation claim within the prescribed time, then the animal control officer is authorized to cause a notice to appear to be served upon the alleged violator and is authorized to prosecute the same pursuant to the applicable provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 05-30, § 1, 5-26-2005)  
Sec. 10-25. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person who violates or that resists the enforcement of any of the provision of this chapter, or that refuses or neglects to obey any rule, order, or sanitary regulation made by the department of inspectional services, the department of animal control, or any other department with the authority to enforce the provisions under the authority of this chapter shall be deemed to have committed a municipal infraction or misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and not more than seven hundred and fifty dollars ($750.00) dollars for each violation or offense. If a violation continues, each day's violation shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. 
(Ord. No. 05-30, § 1, 5-26-2005)  
Chapter 14 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Community development, ch. 18; environment, ch. 26; fire prevention and protection, ch. 30; floods, ch. 34; health and sanitation, ch. 38; signs, ch. 70; solid waste, ch. 74; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78; utilities, ch. 94; subdivisions, app. A; zoning, app. B. 
State Law reference— Power of city to regulate strength and manner of building construction, 65 ILCS 5/11-30-4. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 14-1. - Point-of-sale inspection requirement; certificate of compliance procedures. 
(a)  Department created; definition; general requirement. 
(1)  A department of inspectional services is hereby created pursuant to this section. The department of inspectional services ("department") shall be headed by a director of inspectional services ("director," which shall also include the director's designees) who shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council. All inspectional services concerning point-of-sale matters within the city, including building and housing, shall be under the jurisdiction of the department. The building commissioner, electrical inspector, plumbing inspector, housing director and all department inspectors and staff shall be responsible for reporting to the director relative to all matters relating to this section and the director shall have full authority to direct, train and provide appropriate personnel subject to city council approval as to expenditures and/or requirements as provided herein. 
(2)  For the purpose of this section, the term "point-of-sale inspection" means an inspection of real property by the department conducted in connection with a taxable transfer of real estate to determine whether the condition of said property conforms to the specific regulations identified in this section. 
(3)  A point-of-sale inspection shall be required relative to any transfer of any interest in property which is subject to this section, except as exempted herein. 
(b)  Notice of transfer of real property required. Whenever an owner of real property in the city proposes to engage in a transfer of real property in the city which is subject to taxation under chapter 82, article X of the Calumet City Municipal Code (real estate transfer tax), such owner shall provide the department a notice of transfer for said property, on a form therefor provided by the department. 
(c)  Compliance inspection; pertinent code requirements. The notice of transfer form shall also constitute the director's request to inspect such property ("compliance inspection") to determine whether such property is in compliance with the following specific requirements, which the corporate authorities of the city find are related to the public health, safety and welfare: 
(1)  Compliance with property maintenance code. All structure shall be in compliance with article X, sections 14-691 and 14-692 of this chapter 14, "property maintenance code." 
(2)  Inspection to determine possible illegal conversions. All structures shall be inspected to determine whether they have been illegally converted. For purposes of this subsection, "illegally converted" means that the property was converted to another or additional use beyond that for which the property was originally permitted, and which [i] is in violation of the property's zoning limitations and [ii] is not a legal nonconforming use under section V of the City Zoning Ordinance. 
(d)  Proposed compliance inspection. When the owner files the notice of transfer, the department will schedule a proposed compliance inspection to be conducted within twenty-eight (28) calendar days of the notice. The notice of transfer form shall include the following: 
(1)  Date and time of the proposed compliance inspection; 
(2)  A statement that the owner or occupant has the right to withhold consent to the compliance inspection and require the city to obtain a warrant to conduct the inspection; 
(3)  For occupied rental dwellings, the city must also request and obtain the consent of the tenant prior to conducting any inspection; and 
(4)  A space for the owner and/or tenant to indicate that the owner and/or tenant either consent to the compliance inspection, or refuse consent. 
(e)  Refusal to consent; warrant procedures. If the owner or occupant does not consent to the proposed inspection, the director may appear before any judge in the Circuit Court of Cook County and seek an administrative search warrant to allow an inspection. Any such application shall be made within ten (10) calendar days after the owner's nonconsent. The application for the warrant shall specify the basis upon which the warrant is being sought and shall include a statement that the inspection will be limited to a determination whether there are violations of the code provisions identified in this section, and whether there have been any illegal conversions. The court may consider any of the following factors along with such other matters as it deems pertinent in its decision as to whether a warrant shall issue: 
(1)  Eyewitness account of violation; 
(2)  Citizen complaints; 
(3)  Tenant complaints; 
(4)  Plain view violations; 
(5)  Violations apparent from city records; 
(6)  Property deterioration; 
(7)  Age of property; 
(8)  Nature of alleged violation; 
(9)  Condition of similar properties in the area; 
(10)  Documented violations on similar properties in the area; 
(11)  Passage of time since last inspection; 
(12)  Previous violations on the property. 
(f)  Uninspected property; transfer stamps. In the event the owner or occupant refuses to consent to an inspection, and the director does not seek a warrant (or if court refuses an application for the warrant), the department shall notify the city clerk that "uninspected property" transfer stamps may issue. In connection with the issuance of transfer stamps, the city clerk shall advise the purchaser of such property that it is "uninspected property." 
(g)  Inspection procedures; appeal. 
(1)  In the event consent is given or a warrant issued, the department shall conduct the compliance inspection as provided in subsections (c) and (d). Within three business days after the compliance inspection the department shall issue a written notice of violations and repairs, if any, necessary to bring the property into compliance with this section. In the event the inspection reveals a structure which has been illegally converted, the department shall issue a notice of deconversion, specifying the measures which must be taken in order to bring the illegally converted structure into compliance with applicable zoning regulations. 
(2)  In the event the owner disputes the determination of violations and repairs, the owner may file a request for administrative review on a form provided by the city. An independent administrative hearing officer appointed by the city shall convene an administrative hearing within five (5) business days from the date of appeal. Upon completion of the administrative hearing, the hearing officer will issue a final determination of violation and repairs. 
(3)  In the event an owner disagrees with an administrative issuance of a notice of deconversion, said owner may appeal to the zoning board of appeals in accordance with section 12.5 of the city's zoning ordinance. 
(h)  Followup repairs; reinspection. A party issued a notice of repairs as provided for in subsection (g) shall proceed to make such repairs. Upon completion of said repairs and notice thereof to the department, the department will conduct a reinspection within three (3) business days thereafter. Upon completion of the followup repairs, and the completion of any deconversion measures required by the department, the department shall issue a certificate of compliance. 
(i)  Payment of current water bills; predeprivation hearing. The seller must pay the current water bill (as defined in subsection 82-327(b) of the Municipal Code) and other fees owed by the seller to Calumet City prior to the issuance of transfer stamps. In the event the owner disputes any such obligation (or any portion thereof), the office of city clerk shall promptly provide the owner with a predeprivation due process hearing consistent with the principles enunciated in Memphis Light, Gas & Water Division v Craft, 436 U.S. 1 (1978). The city clerk's office shall provide the hearing within three (3) business days of a request. If the owner disputes the city's determination as to liability, the owner may pay said bill under protest, and may pursue any remedies available to said seller to recover the claimed overcharge. 
(j)  Conditional certificate of compliance; procedures. An owner who has not completed the repairs identified through the inspection may nevertheless transfer ownership of property if: 
(1)  The owner or agent has deposited with the city an amount of money determined by the director or his designee to be sufficient to bring the structure into compliance with all city building and zoning ordinances and any applicable housing, fire or property maintenance codes or regulations; and 
(2)  The buyer, conveyee, transferee, assignee or successor in title, ownership or interest (hereinafter "buyer") has entered into an agreement with the city whereby the buyer agrees to bring the structure into compliance within the time period determined by the director or his designee, to bring the structure into compliance with all applicable code requirements within a period not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) calendar days after the closing of the transaction ("closing"). 
(3)  If the buyer enters into such an agreement, a conditional certificate of compliance will issue in order to allow the closing to be completed. The conditional certificate of compliance shall be issued by the department and shall terminate on the one hundred eighty-first day after closing and no extensions shall be granted. A buyer who elects to accept the premises, subject to the inspection with existing violations, and who agrees, in order to close, to be responsible as provided herein, shall execute a sworn affidavit satisfactory to the director, which will clearly indicate that the buyer is fully aware of the existing violations as well as the possibility of violations that may have existed but were undiscovered due to lack of access and agrees to accept the requirement and obligation to bring the structure into compliance within one hundred eighty (180) days of the closing. The city shall issue a certificate of compliance upon completion of the repairs necessary to bring the dwelling or structure into compliance. 
(4)  In the event the buyer fails to complete the required repairs, and have the repairs verified on reinspection, the director is hereby authorized to pursue enforcement proceedings through the Calumet City administrative adjudication process, or, at his discretion, through the Circuit Court of Cook County. The buyer hereby agrees to submit to the jurisdiction and venue of the Calumet City Administrative Adjudication Process and the Circuit Court of Cook County and to waive service of summons subject only to the notice requirement as required by law in order to enable the city to expeditiously obtain an order of compliance with this section. 
(5)  If reasonable proof that the repairs have been completed is not received by the director or his designee within the required period for the repairs to be completed, the city may also issue a citation for violation of this chapter and/or the escrow repair agreement, and may also pursue any applicable administrative or judicial remedies to bring the structure and property into compliance with applicable codes and regulations. 
(6)  The fine for violations of this chapter shall be not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day for each day the violations remain uncorrected. 
(k)  Licensed and bonded contractors. All contractors performing repairs identified in the point-of-sale inspection, or issuing certifications shall be licensed by the city and bonded and shall make available, upon request, copies of their license(s), verification of their liability insurance, errors and omissions insurance policies, and surety bond. 
(l)  Validity of certificate of compliance. A certificate of compliance issued to the seller shall be valid for one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of issuance. 
(m)  No warranty. In issuing a certificate of compliance or a conditional certificate of compliance, the city and its agents do not make any warranty, representation or statement nor does it intend to insure or guarantee to either buyer or seller of the property subject to the point-of-sale inspection or any of their designees, agents, representatives, heirs or assigns or any other interested party, including mortgage companies, insurance companies, banks or any other party which may have any interest relative to the property subject to the point-of-sale inspection, nor does the city affirm that there are no additional unnoted violations relative to any other provisions of any of the Municipal Code of the City of Calumet City, or relevant statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations of the County of Cook, the State of Illinois or the United States of America. 
(n)  Inspection fee schedule. 
(1)  The fee for a point-of-sale inspection shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for all single-family residential inspections. The failure of an owner/seller or his designee to appear at the time of inspection shall result in a fifty-dollar penalty. 
(2)  The fee for a point of sale inspection shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) plus an additional twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each residential unit in excess of one (1) unit. 
(3)  A fee of twenty cents ($0.20) per square foot shall be charged for each commercial/industrial unit inspected with a minimum fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per commercial/industrial unit. 
(4)  Each fee set for the above covers the cost of one (1) follow-up inspection to verify compliance. In the event that additional inspections are required because full compliance did not exist at the time of the reinspection, then an additional reinspection fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) per unit shall be assessed. 
(5)  If an owner, agent or tenant has failed to appear for a scheduled inspection, an additional inspection fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) per unit shall be assessed. 
(Ord. No. 06-68, § 1, 8-24-2006; Ord. No. 07-124, § 2, 12-13-2007; Ord. No. 08-06, § 1, 1-31-2008; Ord. No. 11-44, § 2, 7-28-2011) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 06-68, adopted Aug. 24, 2006, amended § 14-1 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 14-1 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from § 6-308 of the 1980 Code; Ord. No. 96-28, adopted May, 9, 1996; Ord. No. 04-50, adopted Aug. 10, 2004; and Ord. No. 06-48, adopted June 22, 2006.  
Sec. 14-2. - Rebates for overhead sewers. 
(a)  The city will rebate up to fifty (50) percent of the cost with a maximum of four thousand dollars ($4,000.00) to the homeowner for all completed overhead sewer repairs or installations that have been preapproved by the city. The city will additionally rebate up to fifty (50) percent of the cost with a maximum of four thousand dollars ($4,000.00) to the homeowner for all completed installation, repair or replacement of sewer traps, valves, and waterproofing. 
(b)  The applicant must submit a request for funding reimbursement to the city on forms prescribed by the city for preapproval. Two (2) estimates and the recommendation of a contractor who is licensed with the city are required. After the work is completed, the property will be inspected to verify compliance with Code requirements. The homeowner must provide paid receipts and their property index number (PIN). 
(Ord. No. 03-61, §§ 1, 2, 10-9-2003; Ord. No. 04-09, § 1, 3-11-2004; Ord. No. 05-12, § 1, 2-10-2005; Ord. No. 13-50, § 2, 9-26-2013)  
Sec. 14-3 - Requirement for roof covering of unheated accessory structures. 
An ice barrier that consists of at least two (2) layers of underlayment cemented together or a self-adhering polymer modified bitumen sheet, shall be used in lieu of normal roof underlayment on any unheated accessory structure and shall extend three (3) feet from the unheated accessory structure's eaves' edge. 
(Ord. No. 12-52, § I, 11-8-2012)  
Secs. 14-4—14-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 14-21. - Estimated cost defined. 
The term "estimated cost" as used in this article shall mean the reasonable value of all services, labor, materials and use of scaffolding and other appliances or devices entering into and necessary to the prosecution and completion of the work ready for occupancy; provided, however, that the cost of excavation or grading and of painting, decorating or other work that is merely for embellishment or not necessary for the safe and lawful use of the building or structure, is not deemed a part of such estimated cost. 
(Code 1980, § 6-19; Ord. of 5-8-1958, § 15)  
Sec. 14-22. - Adoption of the International Building Code. 
A certain document, one (1) copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as the "2015 International Building Code," be and is hereby adopted as the building code of the city for the control of building and structures as herein provided; and each and all the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the 2015 International Building Code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 14-23. 
(Code 1970, § 14.102; Code 1980, § 6-1(a); Ord. No. 77-39, § 1, 9-27-1977; Ord. No. 77-40, § 1, 9-27-1977; Ord. No. 88-7, § 1, 5-26-1988; Ord. No. 89-25, § 1, 7-13-1989; Ord. No. 91-58, § 1, 12-23-1991; Ord. No. 94-43, § 1, 7-28-1994; Ord. No. 97-3, § 1, 1-9-1997; Ord. No. 00-57, § 1, 10-12-2000; Ord. No. 05-69, § 1, 10-13-2005; Ord. No. 07-40, § 1, 4-26-2007; Ord. No. 16-12, § 2, 4-28-2016) 
State Law reference— Power of city to adopt code by reference, 65 ILCS 5/1-3-2; 50 ILCS 220/2.  
Sec. 14-23. - Modifications and amendments to building code. 
The following sections are hereby revised: 
Section 101.1: Insert "City of Calumet City." 
Section 103.1: The department of building safety shall also be known as the department of inspectional services and all references in city codes or ordinances to the department of building safety and department of inspectional services shall be interchangeable. 
Section 103.2: The official shall be known as the director of inspectional services and shall be appointed by the mayor of the jurisdiction. 
Section 103.3: In accordance with the prescribed procedures of this jurisdiction and with the concurrence of the appointing authority, the director of inspectional services shall have the authority to appoint a deputy director of inspectional services, related technical officers, inspectors, plan examiners and other employees. Such employees shall have powers as delegated by the director of inspectional services. For the maintenance of existing properties, see the International Property Maintenance Code. 
Section 105.7: Add "and shall be displayed as to be viewed from the public right-of-way for the property." 
Add Section 105.8: "It shall be unlawful to conduct construction activities between 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in any place within a five hundred (500) foot radius of any residence, except those operations specifically approved by the department of inspectional services to remove an emergency or hazardous condition." 
Section 108.2.1 Permit fees. Delete. 
Section 110.4 Temporary occupancy: Delete said section and replace it with the following language: Upon the request of the holder of a permit, a temporary certificate of occupancy shall be issued before the completion of the entire work covered by the permit, provided that such portion or portions shall be occupied safely prior to full completion of the structure without endangering life or public welfare. The contractor or owner will be required to post a cash bond with the City of Calumet City in an amount equal to that of the incomplete work period. The contractor must also submit written documentation that the purchaser/owner is aware of the temporary nature of the occupancy permit and the status of the remaining work. This bond is in addition to the contractor registration bond. Any occupancy permitted to continue during the work shall be discontinued within thirty (30) days after completion of the work unless a certificate of occupancy is issued by the director of inspectional services. 
Section 112: Delete said section and replace it with the following: 
Decisions or determinations made by the director of inspectional services relative to the application and interpretation of this Code may be appealed by written application to the Chief of the Fire Department of the City of Calumet City who shall act on said appeal within five (5) business days of receipt. The decision of the fire chief may then in turn be appealed, in writing, to the public safety committee within five (5) business days and the committee's decision may subsequently be appealed to the full city council, in writing, within five (5) business days from the receipt of the decision of the committee. The decision of the city council shall be final and shall be subject to judicial review under the provisions of the Administrative Review Law (635 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.). 
Section 113.4: Delete the words "shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law" and replace them with "shall be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per violation. Each day the violation or violations continue shall be considered a separate offense." 
Add Section 302.4 residential use group: Residential use group structures shall have a minimum of two (2) hour fire-rated separation walls and floor/ceiling assemblies between dwelling units unless protected by an automatic sprinkler system compliant with NFPA 13 or 13(r) as allowed. This shall not negate any additional requirements required by this Code. 
Section 402.10 Kiosks. 3. Delete and replace with the following: The minimum horizontal separation between kiosks or grouping thereof and other structures within the mall shall be 10 feet (excluding support columns and planter boxes). 
Add Section 602.1.2: All buildings altered fifty (50) percent of replacement value, or extended in height or areas, shall be of Type I or II construction unless fully protected by an automatic fire sprinkler system. Any bearing walls, floor construction, partition walls, or other supporting walls added shall be of noncombustible materials in buildings where not protected by an automatic sprinkler system. 
Section 1612.3 F: Insert "City of Calumet City" for name of jurisdiction and insert "November 6, 2000" for date of issuance. 
Section 3409.2: Insert 1965. 
(Code 1980, § 6-2; Ord. No. 89-7, § 1, 2-9-1989; Ord. No. 91-2, § 1, 2-14-1991; Ord. No. 91-58, § 2, 12-23-1991; Ord. No. 94-54, § 1, 8-25-1994; Ord. No. 96-50, § 1, 7-25-1996; Ord. No. 97-3, § 3, 1-9-1997; Ord. No. 00-57, § 2, 10-12-2000; Ord. No. 06-23, § 1, 4-27-2006; Ord. No. 07-70, § 1, 6-14-2007; Ord. No. 16-12, § 3, 4-28-2016)  
Sec. 14-24. - Conflicting provisions. 
Except as specifically provided in this article, no provisions of the zoning ordinance or of any zoning law or statute pertaining to the location, use or construction of buildings shall be nullified by the provisions of this article. Where there is a conflict with existing ordinances, the most rigid requirements shall control the construction, equipment or location of the building or structure. 
(Code 1980, § 6-3; Ord. of 3-11-1971, § 2)  
Sec. 14-25. - Duty of building permittee to clean construction site each day. 
(a)  Any person, firm or corporation who shall be issued a building permit for any construction having an estimated cost of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more in the city shall be responsible that the construction site is free of debris, litter or any construction material refuse at the end of each workday. Said person, firm or corporation shall provide proper containers of a sufficient number on the construction site and shall have trash collection by a duly licensed scavenger operator. 
(b)  The building commissioner shall notify any person who is in violation of this section in writing, by certified mail, addressed to the person who applied for the building permit, at the address of said person, notifying him that the provisions of this section have been violated, specifying the date and manner of violation. 
(c)  The building commissioner or his duly authorized representative shall enforce the provisions of this section. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. When deemed necessary, the building commissioner will take such action as may be necessary to effect a stop work order on specified construction site until there is compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1980, § 6-17; Ord. of 4-27-1974, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 79-7, § 2, 3-22-1979)  
Sec. 14-26. - Lock requirements for commercial buildings. 
As a minimum security precaution, the following shall be required in motels, hotels and commercial buildings: Locks on entrance doors to individual motel and hotel rooms and apartment units and individual commercial suites shall have dead bolts with one (1) inch minimum throw and hardened steel inserts in addition to latch bolt with one-half (½) inch minimum throw. The locks shall be so constructed that both dead bolt and latch bolt can be retracted by a single action of the inside door knob, or so constructed that the dead bolt can be separately retracted by a thumb lock style mechanism on the inside door. Lock set and striker plate shall be installed in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations. Alternate devices to equally resist illegal entry may be substituted subject to prior approval of the building commissioner. 
(Code 1980, § 6-21; Ord. No. 86-11, § 1, 4-24-1986)  
Sec. 14-27. - Outdoor cooking. 
All barbeques, smokers, or other cooking devices, whether permanent or temporary, shall only be allowed to be used, constructed, erected, and/or placed in the setback or backyard of the property on which they are located. 
(Ord. No. 07-92, § 1, 9-13-2007)  
Sec. 14-28. - Board up standards. 
Boarded up windows, doors, holes or other areas shall be painted or colored, in a manner that is consistent with the building colors, upon application to the building. The coating applied shall render the boarding used to cover windows, doors or other areas as inconspicuous as possible. A building inspection shall be performed by the department of inspectional services and building permit obtained prior to the boarding up of any vacant structure. The building permit can be waived for an emergency board up approved by the department of inspectional services. Boarding up work, once commenced following issuance of a permit, shall be completed without delay or interruption. 
(Ord. No. 10-64, § 2, 12-9-2010)  
Secs. 14-29—14-40. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
 
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 14-41. - Inspections. 
(a)  There shall be at least three (3) inspections by the building commissioner on each building for which a building permit has been issued. The building commissioner shall issue a certificate for each inspection as the inspection is made. The fee for the first three (3) inspections shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00) each for a total of forty-five dollars ($45.00). Each additional inspection shall be ten dollars ($10.00). 
(b)  Upon request of any person for an inspection of any premises by the building commissioner of the city to determine whether there are any ordinance violations for the Federal Housing Administration or the Veteran's Administration, the applicant shall pay an inspection fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00), which fee shall be payable to the city at the time application is made on forms to be provided by the building commissioner. 
(Code 1980, § 6-18; Ord. of 5-5-1958, § 12; Ord. of 11-9-1972, § 1; Ord. No. 83-3, § 2, 2-24-1983)  
Sec. 14-42. - Unsafe garages or sheds. 
(a)  Whenever the building commissioner, fire chief or health commissioner shall determine that any garage or shed within the city is a dangerous building, and that for the good and welfare of the citizens of the community said dangerous building should be removed, and that the owner of the property is unable to remove the dangerous building, then the city, or its duly authorized agents, with the prior written consent of the legal title owner of record of the premises, may demolish and remove the dangerous building at no cost to the owner. 
(b)  All city departments shall cooperate with the building commissioner, fire chief and health commissioner in order to carry out the purposes of this section. 
(Code 1980, § 6-20; Ord. No. 76-37, § 1, 10-14-1976)  
Secs. 14-43—14-60. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Permits 
 
Sec. 14-61. - Permit generally. 
(a)  No person shall proceed with excavation for the erection, construction, alteration, addition, repair or removal of any building or structure without a building permit issued by the building commissioner. No such permit shall be issued until the fees prescribed in this article have been paid, and the building commission has approved the plans and specifications accompanying the application. 
(b)  Any person who fails to obtain the appropriate permits required for the erection, construction, alteration, addition, repair or removal of any building or structure or other activity requiring a permit relative to a property location within city shall be subject to a five-hundred-dollar ($500.00) fine after notice by the building inspector of a violation of this section. Each day said violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. In addition, the person violating this section may be required to return the property to its pre-construction condition. Should the person violating this section be a city-licensed building contractor, said license may be revoked by the city for violation of the provisions of this article. 
(c)  A "person" is defined as a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization and any other group acting as a unit, as well as individuals, authorized agents and contractors. It shall also include an executor, administrator, trustee, receiver or other representative appointed according to law. Whenever the word "person" is used in any section of this Code prescribing a penalty or fine, as to partnerships or associations, the word shall include the partners or members thereof, and as to corporations, shall include the officers, agents or members thereof who are responsible for any violation of such section. 
(Code 1980, § 6-4; Ord. of 5-8-1958, § 6; Ord. No. 95-1958, § 1, 10-26-1995)  
Sec. 14-62. - Permit fees generally. 
The fees and permits shall be as follows: 
(1)  Building permit and inspection fees: 
Base fee for miscellaneous permits (windows/doors/decks/etc.), $50.00 plus $25.00 each inspection if needed. 
Roof/re-roofing, $50.00 plus $25.00 for posthole inspection. 
Fence, $50.00 plus $25.00 for posthole inspection. 
Swimming pools, $50.00 plus $25.00 for each inspection. 
(2)  Repair/rehab—Residential and commercial inspection fees: 
Project cost: 
$0.00—$200,000.00: 1.5 percent of total project cost. 
$200,000.00 or more: 1.5 percent of for first $200,000.00, plus .5 percent for the remainder of project cost. 
(3)  Electric permit and inspection fees: 
Basic fee for miscellaneous permits (alarms, GFIs, smoke/carbon monoxide detectors, etc.): $50.00 plus $25.00 for each inspection, if needed. 
100 amp electrical upgrade: $75.00 plus $25.00 each inspection fee. 
200—500 amp electric update: $100.00 plus $25.00 each inspection fee. 
Fire protection—Sprinkler system: $75.00 plus $25.00 each inspection. 
Signs: 
$6.00 per square foot (luminated) plus $25.00 each inspection. 
$3.00 per square foot (illuminated) plus each inspection. 
(4)  Plumbing permit and inspection fees: 
Water heater replacement: $50.00 plus $25.00 each inspection fee. 
Lawn sprinkler system: $50.00. 
Clean out installation: $50.00 plus $25.00 each inspection fee. 
Sump pump pit installation: $50.00 plus $25.00 each inspection fee. 
Underground or above-ground tank installation: $50.00 plus $25.00 each inspection fee. 
(5)  HVAC permit and inspection fees: 
Furnace: $50.00 plus $25.00 each inspection fee. 
A/C: $10.00 per ton plus $25.00 each inspection fee. 
Boiler: $50.00 plus $25.00 each inspection fee. 
Commercial furnace and A/C: One percent of the total job cost plus $25.00 each inspection. 
(6)  Construction inspections: 
New building—Residential, includes foundation, rough, finish, plumbing, electrical, HVAC: $450.00. 
New building—Commercial: $25.00 charged per frequency. 
Reinspections (commercial and residential): $25.00. 
(Code 1980, § 6-5; Ord. of 3-25-1971, § 1; Ord. No. 83-3, § 1, 2-24-1983; Ord. No. 97-1, § 1, 1-9-1997; Ord. No. 18-39, § 2, 7-26-2018)  
Sec. 14-63. - When fees may be waived. 
The city council may waive the permit fees herein provided for the reconstruction when the property of the applicant was damaged or destroyed by an act of God, such as tornado, storm, flood and the like, whenever the city council deems it necessary and advisable. 
(Code 1980, § 6-5.1; Ord. No. 79-20, § 1, 5-24-1979)  
Sec. 14-64. - Special fee for certain permits. 
Any person applying for a building permit for any new building or structure, other than a garage or remodeling, shall, in addition to all other fees, pay the sum of three dollars ($3.00) per linear foot of the alley adjoining the premises relative to the building permit. 
(Code 1980, § 6-6; Ord. of 12-13-1973, § 1; Ord. No. 89-4, § 1, 1-26-1989)  
Sec. 14-65. - Payee of fees. 
Except as otherwise provided, all permit fees required by the provisions of this article shall be payable to the city. 
(Code 1980, § 6-7; Ord. of 3-25-1971, § 1)  
Sec. 14-66. - Compliance with zoning as prerequisite to permit issuance. 
No building permit shall be issued for any structure, property or premises which does not, or will not, comply with any of the provisions of the zoning ordinance. 
(Code 1980, § 6-8)  
Sec. 14-67. - Grade as permit prerequisite. 
Any building permit required to construct any building or structure shall establish a grade of said building or structure of one-fourth (¼) inch per foot of setback from the curb to the building or structure. 
(Code 1980, § 6-9; Ord. of 5-8-1958, § 6; Ord. of 6-28-1973, § 1)  
Sec. 14-68. - Parking lots required for certain multiple dwellings. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "multiple dwelling" shall mean any building designed for or occupied by more than two (2) families. 
(b)  No building permit for any multiple dwellings to be designed, erected or converted shall be issued unless the owners thereof shall, at their own expenses, provide off-street parking at the rate of two (2) parking spaces per unit for the occupants of each residential unit therein. The parking spaces for each vehicle shall contain not less than two hundred (200) square feet with dimensions of not less than ten (10) by twenty (20) feet, and the parking area containing the aforementioned spaces must be improved by surfacing same with either concrete or blacktop of sufficient thickness to withstand ordinary usage, provided further that said spaces have adequate area for ingress and egress to each space. 
(c)  No parking space required hereunder shall be placed immediately to the rear of any other space. 
(d)  Any space on any parcel of real estate required as setback area or side line area of any ordinances of the city shall not be utilized for an off-street parking space or area. 
(Code 1980, § 6-10; Ord. of 4-9-1964; Ord. of 12-23-1965, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 7-6-1972, § 1; Ord. of 2-22-1973, § 1; Ord. No. 76-42, § 1, 11-11-1976)  
Sec. 14-69. - Certain facilities to be above ground. 
No building permit shall be issued to any person for any building which provides for kitchen, bathroom and bedroom facilities below ground level. 
(Code 1980, § 6-11; Ord. of 9-14-1972, § 1)  
Sec. 14-70. - Final permit approval procedure. 
After review by the building commissioner, the building permit application shall be forwarded to the city council, along with such other information or documents as may be requested by the city council from time to time for their review. No building permit shall be issued until the city council has authorized the issuance of said permit. 
(Code 1980, § 6-12; Ord. No. 77-53, § 1, 12-22-1977)  
Sec. 14-71. - Fee as prerequisite to approval of permit amendment. 
No amendment to a building permit shall be approved until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the estimated cost of the building or structure, shall have been paid. 
(Code 1980, § 6-13; Ord. of 5-8-1958, § 6)  
Sec. 14-72. - Permit expiration. 
Any building permit issued pursuant to this article shall become null and void upon the occurrence of either of the following: 
(1)  No building operations are begun within six (6) months from the date of issuance of said permit; or 
(2)  The building for which the permit is issued is completed within one (1) year from the date of permit issuance. 
Upon the occurrence of either of said events, building operation must cease and new application for building permit applied for and processed in accordance with the applicable ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 6-14; Ord. of 5-8-1958, § 8; Ord. No. 76-21, § 1, 7-8-1976; Ord. No. 83-8, § 1, 3-10-1983; Ord. No. 11-3, § 2, 1-27-2011)  
Sec. 14-73. - Disposition of plans and specifications. 
Of the two (2) sets of plans and specifications presented for a building permit, one (1) shall be kept in the office of the building commissioner. Both sets of plans and specifications shall be appropriately marked by the building commissioner showing the date on which said plans and specifications were received by him. 
(Code 1980, § 6-15; Ord. of 5-8-1958, § 8; Ord. No. 76-21, § 1, 7-8-1976)  
Sec. 14-74. - Water permit and fees. 
In addition to all other fees, the applicant for a building permit shall apply for a permit for water during construction and pay for water to be used. 
(Code 1980, § 6-16; Ord. of 3-25-1971, § 1)  
Secs. 14-75—14-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ONE-FAMILY AND TWO-FAMILY DWELLING CODE 
 
Sec. 14-101. - Adopted. 
A certain document, one (1) copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as "2006 International Residential Code" be and is hereby adopted by the city for the regulation of construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, removal and demolition of detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three (3) stories in height with a separate means of egress and their accessory structures; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the 2006 International Residential Code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part thereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 14-102. 
(Code 1980, § 6-426; Ord. No. 97-9, § 1, 2-13-1997; Ord. No. 00-58, § 1, 10-12-2000; Ord. No. 05-70, § 1, 10-13-2005; Ord. No. 07-37, § 1, 4-26-2007)  
Sec. 14-102. - Amended. 
The 2006 International Residential Code is amended and revised in the following respects: 
Section R101.1. Insert "City of Calumet City" 
Section R103.1. Delete and replace with the following: "The department of building safety shall also be known as the department of inspectional services and all references in city codes or ordinances to the department of building safety and the department of inspectional services shall be interchangeable. 
Section R103.2. Delete and replace with the following: "The official in charge shall be known as the director of inspectional services and shall be appointed by the fire chief of the jurisdiction." 
Section R105.7. Add: "and shall be displayed as to be viewed from the public right of way for the property." 
Section R108.2. Delete. 
Add Section R110.4.1. Temporary occupancy. Temporary occupancy of a structure may occur prior to final inspection approval provided that the contractor or owner will be required to post a cash bond with the city clerk in an amount equal to that of the incomplete work. The contractor must also submit written documentation that the purchaser/owner is aware of the temporary nature of the occupancy permit and the status of the remaining work. This bond is in addition to any contractor registration bond which may be required. 
Section R112.1. Delete and replace with the following: 
Decisions or determinations made by the director of inspectional services relative to the application and interpretation of this Code may be appealed by written application to the Chief of the Fire Department of the City of Calumet City who shall act on said appeal within five (5) business days of receipt. The decision of the fire chief may then in turn be appealed, in writing, to the public safety committee within five (5) business days and the committee's decision may subsequently be appealed to the full city council, in writing, within five (5) business days from the receipt of the decision of the committee. The decision of the city council shall be final and shall be subject to judicial review under the provisions of the Administrative Review Law (735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.). 
Sections R112.2 through R112.4. Delete. 
Add Section R328. Walks and driveways. All public walks shall be formed using two (2) inch by six (6) inch form boards. They shall be four (4) feet in width, five (5) inch thick concrete on four (4) inch minimum CA-10 or CA-6 gravel fill, six (6) inch thickness at driveway areas and apron with welded wire fabric, five (5) feet on center construction joints, one-half (½) inch thick minimum expansion joints thirty (30) feet on center slope one-fourth (¼) inch per foot towards curb. Location shall be in previous location if replaced or approved location by inspectional services department and city engineer. Accessibility ramps shall be required at corner lot intersections. 
Section 806.1. Delete and replace with the following: Ventilation required. Ventilation shall be required for all attic spaces. Determination of minimum area shall not be less than that prescribed in Section 806.2. There shall be a minimum of one (1) vent every ten (10) feet in eaves and not standard roof vent for each three (3) eave vents. Ridge vents or gable vents may be installed in lieu of roof vents but all dwellings shall seek to maintain an upward flow to keep the attic free from moisture and high temperatures. 
Add Section 3603.7. All garages whether detached or attached shall be required to have a minimum of one (1) wall switch for one (1) ceiling light, a wall receptacle protected by ground fault circuit interrupters, and an outlet shall be provided on the ceiling for the use of a garage door opener. 
Appendix E, Manufactured housing used as dwellings and Appendix G, Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article. 
(Code 1980, § 6-427; Ord. No. 97-9, § 2, 2-13-1997; Ord. No. 00-58, § 3, 10-12-2000; Ord. No. 05-70, § 1, 10-13-2005; Ord. No. 07-37, § 1, 4-26-2007)  
Secs. 14-103—14-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - ELECTRICAL CODE[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 94. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 14-131. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article the following words shall have the following meanings ascribed to them unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Electrical contractor means any person engaged in the business of installing or altering by contract electrical equipment for the utilization of electricity for light, heat or power. But the term shall not include the installing or altering of radio apparatus or equipment for wireless reception of sounds and signals, or apparatus, conductors, or other equipment installed for or by public utilities, including common carriers, which are under the jurisdiction of the Illinois Commerce Commission, for use in their operation as public utilities. Nor shall the term include the employees employed by an electrical contractor to do or supervise his work. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 65 ILCS 5/11-33-1. 
Electrical equipment means conductors and other equipment installed for the utilization of electricity for light, heat or power, but not radio apparatus or equipment for wireless reception of sounds and signals, or apparatus, conductors or other equipment installed for or by public utilities, including common carriers, which are under the jurisdiction of the state commerce commission, for use in their operation as public utilities. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 65 ILCS 5/11-37-1. 
Licensed holder means the name of the individual who has passed the required examination and who has been issued a license pursuant to this article. 
Low voltage electrical contractor means any person engaged in the business of installing or altering, by contract, alarms or signals which require the installation of wiring of fifty (50) volts or less. The term shall not include employees employed by a low voltage electrical contractor to do or supervise his work. 
(Code 1980, § 6-77; Ord. of 2-14-1963, § 2; Ord. No. 92-48, § 1, 11-12-1992)  
Sec. 14-132. - Registered contractor required to do work; exception. 
All electrical work coming under the scope of this article shall be performed or installed only by a qualified electrical contractor who is registered pursuant to this article; provided, however, that any owner of any property, upon the showing to the chief electrical inspector or his assistant, sketches of the electrical work he contemplates doing on his own property, shall be issued a permit for that work upon payment of the fee required, and provided further that firms, partnerships and/or corporations shall be permitted to do their own work on their own premises provided the work is done under the supervision and inspection of a professional engineer registered in the state and provided the rest of this article is complied with. 
(Code 1980, § 6-82; Ord. of 2-14-1963, §§ 2—4)  
Sec. 14-133. - Public utilities. 
A public service utility shall not install its customer's light or power service outlet, their distribution center or their switches or their meter boxes in or on their property, but it may install and connect its services, meters and metering equipment on the customer's premises; however, in no event, shall the service be energized until approval is given by the electrical inspection department. 
(Code 1980, § 6-83; Ord. of 2-14-1963, § 2)  
Secs. 14-134—14-160. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
 
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Secs. 14-161—14-180. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Electrical Commission[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Boards and commissions, § 2-799 et seq. 
 
Sec. 14-181. - Established. 
There is hereby established an electrical commission. 
(Code 1980, § 6-91; Ord. of 2-14-1963, § 2) 
State Law reference— Electrical commission required, 65 ILCS 5/11-37-2.  
Sec. 14-182. - Composition. 
The electrical commission shall be composed of the following persons: 
(1)  The chief electrical inspector. 
(2)  An electrical contractor. 
(3)  A representative of the electricity supply company. 
(4)  A representative of the inspection bureau maintained by the fire underwriters. 
(5)  A journeyman electrician. 
(6)  A registered professional engineer. 
(Code 1980, § 6-92; Ord. of 2-14-1963, § 2) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 65 ILCS 5/11-37-2.  
Sec. 14-183. - Appointment of members. 
The members of the electrical commission shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 6-93; Ord. of 2-14-1963, § 2) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 65 ILCS 5/11-37-2.  
Sec. 14-184. - Ex officio chairman. 
The chief electrical inspector shall serve as ex officio chairman of the electrical commission. 
(Code 1980, § 6-94; Ord. of 2-14-1963, § 2) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 65 ILCS 5/11-37-2.  
Sec. 14-185. - Functions generally. 
The electrical commission shall recommend: 
(1)  Safe and practical standards and specifications for the installation and alteration of the electrical work designed to meet the necessities and conditions of the city. 
(2)  Reasonable rules and regulations governing the issuance of permits by the electrical inspection department. 
(3)  Reasonable fees to be paid for inspection by the electrical inspection department. 
The standards and specifications, rules and regulations governing the issuance of permits and fees so recommended shall become effective upon the passage of an ordinance adopting the same by the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 6-95; Ord. of 2-14-1963, § 2) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 65 ILCS 5/11-37-3.  
Sec. 14-186. - Organizational meeting; notice thereof. 
Upon the appointment of the electrical commission its secretary shall notify in writing all members of the commission of a special meeting to formulate its actions in the future. 
(Code 1980, § 6-96; Ord. of 2-14-1963, § 2)  
Sec. 14-187. - Quorum; official actions. 
Four (4) members of the electrical commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of any business. A majority vote of the members present shall be sufficient to take official action on any matters. 
(Code 1980, § 6-97; Ord. of 2-14-1963, § 2)  
Sec. 14-188. - Records. 
The secretary of the electrical commission shall keep a full and correct record of the official proceedings of the electrical commission and an up-to-date record specifying names and addresses of all electricians licensed with the city. 
(Code 1980, § 6-98; Ord. of 2-14-1963, § 2)  
Sec. 14-189. - Appeals. 
The secretary of the electrical commission shall call a meeting of the electrical commission for hearing appeals; and at any time the commission meets to hear an appeal from an appellant, the appellant shall pay a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) to the city clerk, who shall deposit same in the corporate fund. 
(Code 1980, § 6-99; Ord. of 2-14-1963, § 2)  
Secs. 14-190—14-210. - Reserved.  
Subdivision III. - Electrical Inspection Department[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Departments, § 2-566 et seq. 
 
Sec. 14-211. - Established. 
There is hereby established an electrical inspection department. 
(Code 1980, § 6-106; Ord. of 2-14-1963, § 2) 
State Law reference— Power of city to establish an electrical inspection department, 65 ILCS 5/11-37-2.  
Sec. 14-212. - Composition. 
The electrical inspection department shall consist of the chief electrical inspector and such assistants as may be necessary to enforce this article. Both the inspector and his assistants shall be appointed by the mayor. The chief electrical inspector shall be a practical electrician well-versed in all types of electrical construction work with not less than five (5) years of electrical experience and he shall have continuously resided in the city for at least five (5) years prior to his appointment. 
(Code 1980, § 6-107; Ord. of 2-14-1963, § 2)  
Sec. 14-213. - Bond of members. 
The chief electrical inspector and his assistants shall be required to give surety bonds in the sum as shall be determined by the city council, the cost of such bonds to be paid by the city. 
(Code 1980, § 6-108; Ord. of 2-14-1963, § 2)  
Sec. 14-214. - Enforcement duties generally. 
The electrical inspection department shall enforce this article. 
(Code 1980, § 6-109; Ord. of 2-14-1963, § 2)  
Sec. 14-215. - Supervision of work. 
The electrical inspection department shall have immediate supervision of all electrical work according to the rules established by the electrical commission and by ordinance. 
(Code 1980, § 6-110; Ord. of 2-14-1963, § 2)  
Sec. 14-216. - Records of contractors. 
The electrical inspection department shall maintain an official record of all persons lawfully entitled to carry on or engage in the business of electrical work in the city. 
(Code 1980, § 6-111; Ord. of 2-14-1963, § 2)  
Sec. 14-217. - Issuance of permits. 
The electrical inspection department shall issue permits for installation and alteration of electrical work where application for such permit shall be made in accordance with the rules and regulations applicable thereto. 
(Code 1980, § 6-112; Ord. of 2-14-1963, § 2)  
Sec. 14-218. - Inspections. 
The electrical inspection department shall inspect all electrical installations authorized by any permit to assure compliance with provisions of this article or amendments thereto, approving or condemning said work in whole or in part as conditions require. 
(Code 1980, § 6-113; Ord. of 2-14-1963, § 2)  
Sec. 14-219. - Plans and drawings. 
The electrical inspection department shall require the owner, lessee or their representatives to submit specifications, drawings, descriptions and/or diagrams necessary to show clearly the character, kind and extent of electrical work covered for said installations. If found to be in conformity with the requirements of this article and all other laws or ordinances the electrical inspector shall endorse it in writing or stamp plans and specifications "approved." 
(Code 1980, § 6-114; Ord. of 2-14-1963, § 2)  
Sec. 14-220. - Service charge. 
The electrical inspection department shall charge for their service in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1980, § 6-115; Ord. of 2-14-1963, § 2)  
Sec. 14-221. - Entry powers. 
The chief electrical inspector or the electrical inspectors shall have the power to enter any building or premises in order to examine, inspect, or test the electrical work in such building or premises. 
(Code 1980, § 6-116; Ord. of 2-14-1963, § 2)  
Sec. 14-222. - Monthly reports by inspector. 
The chief electrical inspector shall file a report with the city clerk and with the city council each month, setting forth all electrical inspection fees received, the type of work inspected, the name of the person requesting the inspection, the address where inspection was performed and the date of inspection. 
(Code 1980, § 6-117; Ord. of 12-30-1971, § 1)  
Sec. 14-223. - Police assistance. 
Whenever, in the opinion of the chief electrical inspector, it shall be the necessary to call upon the police department for the aid and assistance in carrying out or enforcing any of the provisions of this article, he shall have the authority to do so, and it shall be the duty of the department when called upon by said inspector to act according to the instructions of and to perform such duties as may be required by such inspector in order to enforce or put into effect the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1980, § 6-118; Ord. of 2-14-1963, § 2)  
Secs. 14-224—14-240. - Reserved.  
Subdivision IV. - Permits and Inspections 
 
Sec. 14-241. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any provisions of this division shall be punished as provided by state law. 
(Code 1980, § 6-134) 
State Law reference— Penalty for violation of electrical ordinance, 65 ILCS 5/11-37-4.  
Sec. 14-242. - Permit application. 
(a)  Any person desiring an electrical permit shall, where the construction or alteration work is to be done in a single-family dwelling occupancy, apply to the electrical inspection department, giving such information as may be reasonably necessary to determine whether the permit should be issued, including a plan which shall include a wiring layout showing: 
(1)  The number and location of outlets. 
(2)  The size of wire and conduit to be used. 
(3)  The number of circuits and their ampere rating. 
(4)  The location of service entrance equipment. 
(5)  The location of major appliances. 
(6)  The size of existing old service. 
(7)  If an electrically heated home, the location and wattage of all heating equipment shown and circuits listed for same. 
(b)  Where construction or alteration work is to be done in other than single-family dwelling occupancies, the applicant shall submit with the application for permit, a complete wiring plan for approval. This plan shall indicate size of service conductors, the type and location of all outlets, the size of all meters and power-consuming equipment; that is, all current-consuming devices which shall make up the total connected load. It shall also include information concerning conduit runs and the size of conductors for branch circuits and feeders to be installed. The location of all panel boards and cabinets and the number and ampere rating of the circuits shall be indicated. 
(Code 1980, § 6-127; Ord. of 2-14-1963, § 17)  
Sec. 14-243. - Compliance as prerequisite to permit issuance. 
All wiring, equipment for which an electrical permit is required and the installation thereof shall conform to all the specifications, rules and regulations contained in this article, and no permit shall be issued unless plans showing conformity with all provisions of this article have been submitted and approved. 
(Code 1980, § 6-128; Ord. of 2-14-1963, § 3)  
Sec. 14-244. - Permit transfer fee. 
If the general contractor or owner changes to another electrical contractor other than the one to whom the electrical permit was originally issued, a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be paid for the transfer of the permit. 
(Code 1980, § 6-130; Ord. of 2-14-1963, § 18; Ord. No. 76-47, § 1, 12-9-1976)  
Sec. 14-245. - Suspension of permits to contractor. 
The failure on the part of any registered electrical contractor to correct any defect, error or deficiency in any work installed under the authority of a permit issued to him by the department of electrical inspection, within ten (10) calendar days after written notification thereof by the department, or within such further reasonable time as may be, upon request, prescribed by the chief electrical inspector shall, without further notice, stop the issuance of permits to such registered electrical contractor until such corrections have been made, inspected and approved. 
(Code 1980, § 6-131; Ord. of 2-14-1963, § 22)  
Sec. 14-246. - Fee for reinspection or additional inspections. 
Whenever reinspections are required because of inaccurate or incorrect information on the plan or face of the application for an electrical permit or because of violations of this article or because of faulty construction, a charge of five dollars ($5.00) per hour shall be made by the electrical inspection department for the time consumed in making such reinspection; provided, however, that the minimum fee for such reinspection shall be five dollars ($5.00). 
(Code 1980, § 6-132; Ord. of 2-14-1963, § 18)  
Sec. 14-247. - Inspections and approval. 
(a)  No electrical work of any kind within the scope of this article, including conduit and raceways, shall be concealed or enclosed until it has been inspected by the electrical inspection department. It shall be the responsibility of the person doing the electrical installment work to notify the electrical inspection department, which shall make a roughing-in, trim and final inspection to assure compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  No electrical service shall be supplied to any building or premises until the electrical work in such building or premises has been inspected and approved by the electrical inspection department. 
(c)  No electrical wiring, installation or equipment shall be used until after the final inspection and approval of the chief electrical inspector. 
(Code 1980, § 6-133; Ord. of 2-14-1963, §§ 2, 3, 18)  
Secs. 14-248—14-270. - Reserved.  
Subdivision V. - Dangerous Installations 
 
Sec. 14-271. - Correction required. 
When any electrical equipment is found by the chief electrical inspector to be dangerous to persons or property because it is defective or improperly installed, the person responsible for the electrical equipment shall be notified by him in writing and shall make any changes or repairs required by the chief electrical inspector to place such equipment in a safe condition. 
(Code 1980, § 6-141; Ord. of 2-14-1963, § 20)  
Sec. 14-272. - Disconnection when corrections not made. 
If the corrections required by section 14-271 of this Code are not completed within ten (10) calendar days after the person responsible receives the notice to correct same, or any longer that may be specified by the chief electrical inspector in said notice, the chief electrical inspector shall have the authority to disconnect or order the discontinuance of electrical service to said electrical equipment. 
(Code 1980, § 6-142; Ord. of 2-14-1963, § 20)  
Sec. 14-273. - Emergency disconnections. 
In case of an emergency, where necessary for safety to persons or property, or where electrical equipment may interfere with the functions of the fire department, the chief of the fire department or the chief electrical inspector shall have the authority to disconnect or cause the discontinuance of any electrical equipment or installation. 
(Code 1980, § 6-143; Ord. of 2-14-1963, § 20)  
Sec. 14-274. - Condemnation. 
The chief electrical inspector shall have the power to condemn any electrical installation which is unsafe or hazardous to life or property, and in such case shall serve notice upon the person owning, using or installing same requiring him to place the same in a safe and secure condition. Any interested person aggrieved by the action of the chief electrical inspector under this section may by written request have the determination of the chief electrical inspector reviewed by the electrical commission, which commission may either reverse or concur in the action of the inspector. 
(Code 1980, § 6-144; Ord. of 2-14-1963, § 21)  
Secs. 14-275—14-290. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - TECHNICAL STANDARDS  
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 14-291. - Residential Electrical Maintenance Code for One- and Two-Family and Multifamily Dwellings, 1994 Edition—Adopted. 
There is hereby adopted NFPA 73—Residential Electrical Maintenance Code for One- and Two-Family and Multifamily Dwellings, 1994 Edition, one (1) copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, for providing requirements for evaluating installed electrical systems within and associated with existing dwellings to identify safety, fire and shock hazards which are evident upon visual inspection of existing residential dwellings; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the Residential Electrical Maintenance Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 14-292. 
(Code 1980, § 6-84; Ord. No. 97-8, § 1, 2-13-1997)  
Sec. 14-292. - Same—Amended. 
The following sections [of] the Residential Electrical Maintenance Code One- and Two-Family and Multifamily Dwellings are hereby revised as follows: 
Section 1-2.1. Add after the word dwellings: 
"and multifamily dwellings". 
Section 2-2.1. Add: 
"The connected load shall be determined as per the latest adopted edition of the National Electrical Code. All residences shall have a minimum of one hundred (100) amp service and all apartments shall have a minimum sixty (60) amp service." 
Section 2-11.6. Delete and replace with: 
"Grounded receptacles shall be present in all kitchens, garages, unfinished basements, laundry rooms and bathrooms. Where allowed by the National Electrical Code, ground fault protection may be used in lieu of grounding." 
Section 3-1. Add: 
"All receptacles in rental dwellings, those buildings undergoing service upgrades or those requiring a point of sale inspection shall meet the latest edition of the National Electrical Code as approved by the City of Calumet City for ground fault protection." 
(Code 1980, § 6-85; Ord. No. 97-8, § 2, 2-13-1997)  
Secs. 14-293—14-310. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-48, § 2, adopted Oct. 11, 2012, repealed §§ 14-293, 14-294 in their entirety and pertained to ICC Electrical Code—administrative procedures and same—amended, respectively, and derived from the Code of 1980, §§ 6-86, 6-87; Ord. No. 00-61, §§ 1, 2, adopted Oct. 12, 2000.  
Subdivision II. - Chicago Electrical Code[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-48, §§ 2, 3, amended subdiv. II in its entirety to read as set out herein. Former subdiv. II, §§ 14-311—14-314, pertained to National Electrical Code. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
 
Sec. 14-311. - Chicago Electrical Code—Adopted. 
There is hereby adopted as the electrical code of the City of Calumet City, Cook County, Illinois that certain document, one (1) copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, known as the "2011 Chicago Electrical Code" for the regulation of the design, construction, installation, alteration, repairs, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of electrical systems and equipment; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of 2011 Chicago Electrical Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed herein. 
(Ord. No. 12-48, § 3, 10-11-2012)  
Sec. 14-312. - Construction of certain terms used in Chicago Electrical Code. 
(a)  Whenever the word "municipality" or the word "city" is used in the Chicago Electrical Code, it shall be construed to mean the City of Calumet City, Illinois. 
(b)  Whenever the term "corporation counsel" or "city attorney" is used in the code, it shall be construed to mean the city attorney of this city. 
(Ord. No. 12-48, § 3, 10-11-2012)  
Secs. 14-313—14-330. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - ELECTRICAL CONTRACTORS  
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 14-331. - Restrictions on contractors. 
All persons registered under this division shall be required to do their work in a proper manner. No registrant shall allow his name to be used by any other person, directly or indirectly, either to obtain permits or to do any electrical work under his registration. For violations of these requirements a person's registration may be revoked. 
(Code 1980, § 6-157; Ord. of 2-14-1963, § 2)  
Secs. 14-332—14-350. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Registration 
 
Sec. 14-351. - Registration required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of electrical contractor without being registered as an electrical contractor in the manner hereinafter set forth; provided, however, that if such person is already registered for the current year in another city or village within the state in conformity with the state law, such electrical contractor shall not be required to register or pay a registration fee in the city. Such person already registered in another city or village shall post with the department of inspectional services a surety bond in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or as otherwise specified as set forth in section 14-352. 
(Code 1980, § 6-151; Ord. of 2-14-1963, § 2; Ord. No. 97-56, § 2, 10-9-1997) 
State Law reference— Registration of electrical contractors, 65 ILCS 5/11-33-1.  
Sec. 14-352. - Registration procedure generally. 
Any person desiring to register as an electrical contractor shall apply to the department of inspectional services. Upon the filing of such application in proper form, and the payment of the required registration fee and passing any required examination, proof of insurance and the posting with the department of inspectional services a surety bond in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or as otherwise specified, the director of inspectional services or his agent shall register the applicant as an electrical contractor, and shall issue to the applicant a certificate of registration which will authorize the applicant to engage in such business for the year in which it is issued. The surety bond shall indemnify and hold harmless the city against loss, costs, damage, judgement or liability of any kind whatsoever which the city may suffer or which may accrue against or be charged to the city or any of its officials arising out of or resulting from the conduct or operation of such business or the doings or failure to do any act in the connection herewith. 
(Code 1980, § 6-152; Ord. of 2-14-1963, § 2; Ord. No. 97-56, § 3, 10-9-1997)  
Sec. 14-353. - Registration fee. 
The fee for registration as an electrical contractor shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per annum, which sum shall be nonrefundable and shall be paid by the applicant to the city collector in advance upon filing the application. 
(Code 1980, § 6-153; Ord. of 2-14-1963, § 2; Ord. No. 88-16, § 2, 7-14-1988; Ord. No. 11-46, § 1, 8-11-2011)  
Sec. 14-354. - Qualification and examination of registrants. 
(a)  An applicant for registration as an electrical contractor shall not be less than twenty-one (21) years of age, and shall have had at least two (2) years' experience in the installation, alteration, repair and maintenance of electrical wires, equipment and apparatus, or experience equivalent thereto. An applicant shall furnish the names and addresses of former employers, period of time employed and in what capacity, proof of which service shall be furnished in a manner satisfactory to the chief electrical inspector. 
(b)  Every applicant shall be required to take a written examination and answer correctly seventy (70) percent of the questions to show that he has sufficient knowledge and technical training to perform the work or to supervise the installation, alteration, repair and maintenance of electric wires and apparatus authorized by permits issued by the department of electrical inspection. Applicants shall also be required, to the satisfaction of the chief electrical inspector, to show satisfactory job performance. 
(Code 1980, § 6-154; Ord. of 2-14-1963, § 2)  
Sec. 14-355. - Registration card and certificate. 
The chief electrical inspector shall issue to every person who has complied with the provisions of this division relative to registration of electrical contractors a registration certificate and identification card. 
(Code 1980, § 6-155; Ord. of 2-14-1963, § 2)  
Sec. 14-356. - Expiration and transferability of registration certificate. 
An electrical contractor's certificate of registration shall expire on the last day of December of the year in which it was issued. A certificate of registration shall not be transferable. 
(Code 1980, § 6-156; Ord. of 2-14-1963, § 2)  
Secs. 14-357—14-380. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE 
 
Sec. 14-381. - Adoption of the BOCA Basic Energy Conservation Code. 
There is hereby adopted by the city, for the purposes of establishing rules and regulations for the construction, erection, alteration, removal, demolition, equipment, use and occupancy, location and maintenance of buildings and structures, and to promote energy conservation, that certain code known as the BOCA Basic Energy Conservation Code 1990, drafted by the Building Officials Conference of America, and the whole thereof, save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended, of which not less than three (3) copies in printed pamphlet form have been and now are filed for use and examination by the public, in the office of the city clerk, at least thirty (30) days prior to the adoption of this section, and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein; and the provisions thereof shall be controlling in the construction of all buildings and other structures in the city. 
(Code 1970, § 14.102; Code 1980, § 6-1(b); Ord. No. 77-39, § 1, 9-27-1977; Ord. No. 77-40, § 1, 9-27-1977; Ord. No. 88-7, § 1, 5-26-1988; Ord. No. 89-25, § 1, 7-13-1989; Ord. No. 91-58, § 1, 12-23-1991; Ord. No. 94-43, § 1, 7-28-1994; Ord. No. 97-3, § 1, 1-9-1997; Ord. No. 00-57, § 1, 10-12-2000) 
State Law reference— Power of city to adopt code by reference, 65 ILCS 5/1-3-2; 50 ILCS 220/2.  
Secs. 14-382—14-410. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - FUEL GAS CODE 
 
Sec. 14-411. - Fuel gas code adopted. 
A certain document, one (1) copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as "2006 International Fuel Gas Code" be and is hereby adopted by the city for the regulation of the installation of fuel gas piping systems, fuel gas utilization equipment and related accessories in order to provide minimum standards to safeguard life or limb, health, property and public welfare; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the 2006 International Fuel Gas Code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part thereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 14-412. 
(Code 1980, § 6-441; Ord. No. 00-63, § 1, 10-12-2000; Ord. No. 05-66, § 1, 10-13-2005; Ord. No. 07-39, § 1, 4-26-2007)  
Sec. 14-412. - Amendments. 
The following sections of the 2006 International Fuel Gas Code are hereby revised as follows: 
Section 101.1. Insert "City of Calumet City" 
Section 103.1. Delete and replace with the following: The department of inspection shall also be known as the department of inspectional services and both references shall be interchangeable and the official in charge shall be known as the director of inspectional services. 
Section 106.5.2. Delete. 
Section 109.1. Delete and replace with the following: 
Decisions or determinations made by the director of inspectional services relative to the application and interpretation of this Code may be appealed by written application to the Chief of the Fire Department of the City of Calumet City who shall act on said appeal within five (5) business days of receipt. The decision of the fire chief may then in turn be appealed, in writing, to the public safety committee within five (5) business days and the committee's decision may subsequently be appealed to the full city council, in writing, within five (5) business days from the receipt of the decision of the committee. The decision of the city council shall be final and shall be subject to judicial review under the provisions of the Administrative Review Law (735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.). 
Sections 109.2 through 109.7. Delete. 
(Code 1980, § 6-442; Ord. No. 00-63, § 2, 10-12-2000; Ord. No. 05-66, § 1, 10-13-2005; Ord. No. 07-39, § 1, 4-26-2007)  
Secs. 14-413—14-430. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - MECHANICAL CODE 
 
Sec. 14-431. - International Mechanical Code—Adopted. 
A certain document, one (1) copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as "2006 International Mechanical Code" be and is hereby adopted by the city for the regulation of the design, installation, maintenance, alteration and inspection of mechanical systems that are permanently installed and utilized to provide control of environmental conditions and related processes within buildings and also regulate those mechanical systems, system components, equipment and appliances specifically address therein; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the 2006 International Mechanical Code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part thereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 14-401 of this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 6-400; Ord. No. 97-11, §§ 1, 2, 2-13-1997; Ord. No. 00-64, § 1, 10-12-2000; Ord. No. 05-68, § 1, 10-13-2005; Ord. No. 07-41, § 1, 4-26-2007)  
Sec. 14-432. - Same—Amended. 
The following sections of the 2006 International Mechanical Code are hereby revised as follows: 
Section 101.1. Insert "City of Calumet City." 
Section 103.1. Delete and replace with the following: The department of mechanical inspection shall also be known as the department of inspectional services and all references in city codes or ordinances to the department of mechanical inspection and the department of inspectional services shall be interchangeable. 
Section 106.5.3(2). Insert: 75%. 
Section 106.5.3(3). Insert: 75%. 
Section 109.1. Delete and replace with the following: 
Decisions or determinations made by the director of inspectional services relative to the application and interpretation of this Code may be appealed by written application to the Chief of the Fire Department of the City of Calumet City who shall act on said appeal within five (5) business days of receipt. The decision of the fire chief may then in turn be appealed, in writing, to the public safety committee within five (5) business days and the committee's decision may subsequently be appealed to the full city council, in writing, within five (5) business days from the receipt of the decision of the committee. The decision of the city council shall be final and shall be subject to judicial review under the provisions of the Administrative Review Law (735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.). 
Sections 109.1.1 through 109.7. Delete. 
(Code 1980, § 6-401; Ord. No. 97-11, § 3, 2-13-1997; Ord. No. 00-64, § 3, 10-12-2000; Ord. No. 05-68, § 1, 10-13-2005; Ord. No. 07-41, § 1, 4-26-2007)  
Secs. 14-433—14-460. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - PLUMBING CODE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 14-461. - Registration, Permits, Bond. 
(a)  An applicant for a plumbing permit shall first register with the department of inspectional services, showing proof of a plumber's license issued by the state department of public health and proof of insurance, and then may apply for a permit for such job of plumbing or drainage, describing explicitly the kind of work to be installed or performed with complete description of the premises where the work is to be done. 
(b)  This permit, when properly filled out, shall be at once filed with the department of inspectional services, authorizing the person to do all work for which the permit is granted on the condition that the same shall be in accordance with the provisions, rules and regulations of this Code. 
(c)  Every person desiring a plumbing permit shall pay to the city a fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(d)  An applicant for a plumbing permit, prior to the issuance of the permit, shall post a surety bond in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or as otherwise specified with the department of inspectional services to indemnify and hold harmless the city against loss, costs, damage, judgement or liability of any kind whatsoever which the city may suffer or which may accrue against or be charged to the city or any of its officials arising out of or resulting from the conduct or operation of such business or the doings or failure to do any act in the connection herewith. 
(Code 1980, § 6-175; Ord. of 7-31-1947, § 10; Ord. of 1-14-1965, § 1; Ord. No. 83-3, § 3, 2-24-1983; Ord. No. 89-4, § 2, 1-26-1989; Ord. No. 97-56, §§ 4—6, 10-9-1997; Ord. No. 11-49, § 2, 8-11-2011)  
Secs. 14-462—14-480. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
 
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 14-481. - Reports. 
(a)  The city clerk shall file a monthly report with the city council indicating thereon the total plumbing fees received for the monthly period. 
(b)  The plumbing inspector shall file a monthly report with the city council, with a copy to the city clerk, showing the following: 
(1)  The number of inspections performed within the month. 
(2)  The person or persons for whom the inspection was performed. 
(3)  The total inspection fee charged. 
(4)  The address of the premises upon which the inspection was performed. 
(Code 1980, § 6-174; Ord. of 12-30-1971, § 1)  
Secs. 14-482—14-500. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Plumbing Inspector 
 
Sec. 14-501. - Position established. 
There is hereby established the position of plumbing inspector. 
(Code 1980, § 6-169; Ord. of 7-31-1947, § 1)  
Sec. 14-502. - Appointment and term of office. 
The plumbing inspector shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the city council and shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and until his successor is duly appointed and qualified. 
(Code 1980, § 6-170; Ord. of 7-31-1947, § 1)  
Sec. 14-503. - Oath. 
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the plumbing inspector shall be required to take and subscribe to an oath of office that he will faithfully perform the duties of said office and file same with the city clerk. 
(Code 1980, § 6-171; Ord. of 7-31-1947, § 1)  
Sec. 14-504. - Bond. 
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the plumbing inspector shall file a surety bond payable to the city, which shall be approved by the city council and conditioned upon the faithful performance of his duties, in the office of the city clerk. Such bond shall be executed with any recognized and responsible surety company authorized to do business in the state as surety thereon. 
(Code 1980, § 6-172; Ord. of 7-31-1947, § 1)  
Sec. 14-505. - Entry powers. 
The plumbing inspector shall have the right to enter any business or residential building or industrial plant or factory for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article at any reasonable hour of the day. 
(Code 1980, § 6-173; Ord. of 7-31-1947, § 1)  
Secs. 14-506—14-520. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - TECHNICAL STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 14-521. - Illinois Plumbing Code—Adopted. 
A certain document, one (1) copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as "2004 Illinois Plumbing Code," be and is hereby adopted by the city for the regulation of the erection, installment, alteration, repairs, relocation, replacement, addition to, uses or maintenance of plumbing systems within the corporate limits; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of the 2004 Illinois Plumbing Code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set forth herein in their entirety, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 14-522. 
(Code 1980, § 6-176; Ord. No. 88-7, § 2, 5-26-1988; Ord. No. 91-58, § 3, 12-23-1991; Ord. No. 94-43, § 2, 7-28-1994; Ord. No. 97-10, § 1, 2-13-1997; Ord. No. 00-56, § 1, 10-12-2000; Ord. No. 05-67, § 1, 10-13-2005; Ord. No. 09-17, § 2, 5-14-2009)  
Sec. 14-522. - Same—Amended. 
(1)  The 2004 Illinois Plumbing Code is hereby amended by the following revisions: 
Section 890.110(b): Add to Section number 3) The following additional requirements shall apply: a) all new water lines for water services shall be copper, brass, or ductile iron pipe; b) all water lines below the ground within buildings shall be a minimum "K" copper; c) all water lines within structures shall be "L" copper or galvanized; d) all below ground materials for waste and vents within buildings and within the space five (5) feet or less from the building shall be cast iron; e) all sewer shall have a minimum six (6) inch cleanout; f) waste and vent line above ground within buildings may be plastic as allowed by the 2004 Illinois Plumbing Code. 
Section 890.120: Add to paragraph entitled "Private Sewer" the sentence: Permitted only upon specific approval by the Calumet City City Council and must be installed in accordance with the 1999 Illinois Private Sewage Disposal Code and the Cook County Sewage Disposal Ordinance. 
Section 890.120: Add to paragraph entitled "Private Water Supply" the sentence: Permitted only upon specific approval by the Calumet City City Council and must be constructed in accordance with the Illinois Water Well Construction Code. 
Section 890.170: Delete section "Sewer and/or Water Required" in its entirety and substitute the following: 
"Every building erected within the corporate limits of the City of Calumet City subsequent to the date of the adoption of this Chapter with an installed plumbing system and intended for human habitation or occupancy located on premises adjacent to or abutting a public water line and public sanitary sewer line shall have a connection made to the public water and public sewer system. If public water and/or sewers are not available, a well and/or private sewage disposal system may be permitted upon specific approval of the City of Calumet City and the Cook County Health Department." 
Section 890.1940 General Administration: Add to this Section the following language: 
"It shall be the obligation of the person installing, remodeling or repairing plumbing in the City to secure approval of alternative materials or methods from the Plumbing Inspector prior to beginning work." 
Section 890.320 0-1: Compression Type Joints: Add to this section "For Underground Use Only." 
Section 890.320 0-2: Compression Type Joints: Add to this section "For Underground Use Only." 
Section 890. Appendix C. Illustration C: Compression Type Joints: Add to this section "For Underground Use Only." 
Section 890.1360: Add new Section A-3: "Any sanitary waste which is below the outside building grade shall be discharged into a gas-tight covered and vented sump from which the waste shall be lifted and discharged into the building gravity drainage system by a 2 inch ejector pump and shall be protected against back flow by a check and gate valve between the pump discharge and the building gravity drainage system. Sumps receiving sanitary waste shall be of a one piece water-tight design." 
Section 890.1190(B): Delete the second sentence of the paragraph labeled "Water Supply Control" and substitute the following sentence: "In addition thereto, an accessible ball-type shutoff valve shall be provided inside near the entrance of the water service pipe into the building as well as on the house side of the water meter with a drip valve." 
Section 890.1580(B): "Size of Individual Vents:" Delete in its entirety and substitute the following new paragraph: "Size of the Individual Vents. The diameter of an individual vent shall not be less than one and one-half (1½) inch or less than one-half (½) the diameter of the drain to which it connects. See subsection (b) above." 
Section 890.1320(c): Add the following Section 1320(c): "Plumbing fixtures not exceeding two (2) inches in diameter are permitted in outside walls of construction. Insulation to be installed between exterior sheathing and pipes." 
Section 890.1140(J): Add the following Section 890.1140(J): "Locating hot and cold water lines in exterior walls is not permitted. If it is impossible to locate them in another place, they shall be insulated with a material having an "R" Factor of not less than seven (7) and the wall cavity shall be vented with high and low return grills to allow ambient air temperatures from the habitable area to interchanges with the wall cavity." 
(2)  The 2004 Illinois Plumbing Code is hereby amended by the following additions: 
a)  Water service pipe under two (2) inches in diameter shall be type "K" copper tube with flared fittings. Water service pipe greater than two (2) inches in diameter shall be ductile iron water main and fittings and shall be buried to a depth of not less than five (5) below grade from the "B" box to the riser for water meter attachment. Water distribution piping inside buildings shall be type "K" (soft) copper when underground, and type "L" (hard drawn) copper when above ground with sweat fittings. No type "M" copper shall be allowed for potable water piping. 
b)  Water Efficient Measures: 
1.  The installation of the following water efficient plumbing fixtures (based on a pressure at the fixture of 40 to 50 psi) shall be required in all new construction and in all repair and/or replacements of fixtures or trim: 
Maximum Flow 	Fixtures 
Water closets, residential 	1.6 gal. per flush 
Water closets, tank type 	3.5 gal. per flush 
Water closets, flushometer type 	3.0 gal. per flush 
Urinals, tank type 	3.0 gal. per flush 
Urinals, flushometer type 	3.0 gal. per flush 
Shower heads 	3.0 gal. per minute 
Lavatory, sink faucets 	3.0 gal. per minute 
 
2.  If an air conditioning system is installed, all closed system air conditioning shall be required in all new construction, and in all new remodeling. 
3.  All lavatories for public use in new construction or remodeling shall be equipped with metering or self-closing faucets. 
4.  All newly constructed or remodeled car wash installations shall be equipped with a water recycling system. 
c)  The drainage system conveying storm water from roofs, paved areas and courts and subsoil from or adjacent to buildings, shall be connected to the storm sewer, if available, or other approved disposal device in accordance with Calumet City Water or Sewer Department requirements. Storm water from roofs of private dwellings or accessory structures with or without gutters or down spouts may be spilled or discharged on the ground, provided structural, public health or other nuisance hazards are not created thereby. 
d)  Sub soil drains on the same lot shall be connected to the drainage system of the building within the lot lines. 
e)  "All plumbing contractors working within the City of Calumet City must furnish the Plumbing Inspector with a copy of his or her State of Illinois Contractor's Plumbing License and an up-to-date certificate of insurance prior to the issuance of a plumbing permit. All commercial plumbing installations, repairs, alterations or replacements must be performed by a licensed plumber. The Plumbing Inspector will be responsible for the maintaining of an up-to-date file of those plumbing contractors properly licensed." 
f)  In the case of improvements on residential, commercial or industrial buildings or property, the issuance of a plumbing permit is required to make the following repairs, replacements or changes: 
1.  Conversion from galvanized water piping to copper. 
2.  Addition of a plumbing fixture. 
3.  Replacement of nonresidential water heater or boiler. 
4.  Installation or conversion to overhead sewer system or anti-flood system. 
5.  Underground law sprinkling systems. 
6.  Any plumbing changes or additions to any part of the waste, vent, water piping or sewer system. 
g)  All lawn irrigation or sprinkling systems that are supplied by a potable water source must provide protection for this water source through the use of an RPZ reduced pressure backflow preventor. The RPZ shall be tested in-line before being placed into service and annually by a cross-connector control device inspector. 
Appendix A/Table 4 - APPROVED MATERIALS FOR WATER SERVICE PIPE - Delete numbers 1, 4, 7, 8, 9, 10 and 11. 
Appendix A/Table 6 - APPROVED MATERIALS FOR WATER DISTRIBUTION PIPE - Delete numbers 2, 5, 6 and 7. 
h)  All residential dwelling units shall have a clean out located outside the structure on the sanitary sewer line. 
i)  A copper (12-gauge) tracer wire shall be installed on all non-metallic sanitary and storm sewer pipe located underground. 
j)  Water tap to building shall be inspected by the Plumbing Inspector. 
k)  All inspection to irrigation system shall be made by the Plumbing Inspector. 
l)  All storm and sanitary sewer within a building shall be of cast iron or ductile iron for below grade but PVC pipe may be used for corrosive waste only. 
(3)  The 2004 Illinois Plumbing Code is hereby amended by the following deletions: 
Section 890.1520(F): Circuit Vent. 
Section 890.1500: Installation of wet venting. 
Section 890.1520: Circuit and loop venting. 
Section 890.1590(D): Size of circuit vents. 
(Code 1980, § 6-177; Ord. No. 97-10, § 2, 2-13-1997; Ord. No. 00-56, § 2, 10-12-2000; Ord. No. 05-67, § 2, 10-13-2005; Ord. No. 09-17, § 3, 5-14-2009)  
Secs. 14-523—14-550. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - HOUSING CODE[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-231 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 14-551. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless otherwise clearly indicated: 
Basement means a portion of a building located partly underground, but having less than half its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground. 
Cellar means a portion of a building located partly or wholly underground and having half or more than half of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground. 
Dwelling unit means a room or group of rooms used or intended to be used as a housekeeping unit for living, sleeping, cooking and eating. 
Habitable room means a room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes. This term does not include bathrooms, toilet rooms, laundries, pantries, foyers, corridors, storage spaces, stairways or closets. 
Occupant means any person living, sleeping, cooking or eating in, or having actual possession of a dwelling unit. 
Owner means any person who has legal or equitable title to a dwelling unit, the agent of said person, or any person having management or control of any dwelling unit. 
Person means an individual who is an owner or occupant of a dwelling unit. 
Sleeping room means a room rented as sleeping and living quarters, but without cooking facilities, and with or without an individual bathroom. In a suite of rooms without cooking facilities, each room which provides sleeping accommodations shall be counted as one (1) sleeping room. 
(Code 1980, § 14-1; Ord. of 1-12-1967, § 2)  
Sec. 14-552. - Penalty. 
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or any provision of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to this chapter shall upon conviction be punished as provided in section 1-11 of this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 14-10; Ord. of 1-12-1967, § 10)  
Sec. 14-553. - Conflicts. 
In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a provision of any other ordinance, the provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the public health and safety shall prevail. 
(Code 1980, § 14-2; Ord. of 1-12-1967, § 12)  
Sec. 14-554. - Scope and application; compliance required. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to every dwelling unit used for human habitation which was erected, altered or converted after March 6, 1967. It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy or permit the occupancy of any dwelling unit which does not comply with the requirements of this chapter or the regulations of the building commissioner promulgated pursuant to this chapter; provided that compliance with this chapter shall not operate to exempt any dwelling unit from the requirements of the building code, the plumbing code, the zoning ordinance, or any other applicable ordinance. 
(Code 1980, § 14-3; Ord. of 1-12-1967, § 1)  
Sec. 14-555. - Relative maintenance responsibilities. 
(a)  The occupants of each occupied dwelling unit, whether rented or owned, shall be responsible: 
(1)  To keep such dwelling in a clean, sanitary and safe condition; 
(2)  To keep all plumbing and other fixtures required by this chapter in a clean and sanitary condition; 
(3)  To exterminate any insects, rodents or other pests which may be found on the premises; 
(4)  To dispose of all garbage and other refuse in the containers and in the manner required by this Code; 
(5)  To hang and remove all screens required for the dwelling unit; and 
(6)  Not to place on the premises any material which causes a fire hazard or otherwise endangers the health or safety of any occupant of such dwelling unit, nor place in storage on the premises any furniture, equipment or material which harbors insects, rodents or other pests. 
(b)  The owners of any dwelling unit which has been rented for human habitation shall be responsible for providing and keeping in good operating condition such equipment as is required in such dwelling by this chapter and maintaining in a clean, sanitary and safe condition the shared or public area of any of the building in which said dwelling units are located. 
(c)  The owner or owners of any dwelling unit or units which have been rented for human habitation who reside outside of the city shall provide, within thirty (30) days of the effective date of this chapter or within thirty (30) days of acquiring ownership of any dwelling unit or units located within the city, the name, address and telephone number of a management agent for the unit or units who reside in the city to the department of inspectional services and to the inhabitant of each dwelling unit unless such dwelling unit is inhabited by an on-site management agent. The name, address and telephone number of any on-site management agent shall also be provided to the department of inspectional services. 
(d)  All owners of dwelling units rented for human habitation shall abide by all applicable ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations and policies established by the city and shall be subject to a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each violation of any provision contained therein. Each day any violation of any provision of this section continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1980, § 14-4; Ord. of 1-12-1967, § 7; Ord. No. 01-41, § 1, 8-9-2001)  
Sec. 14-556. - Basement and cellar dwellings. 
No basement space or cellar space shall be used for a dwelling unit unless: 
(1)  The floors and walls are impervious to leakage of underground and surface runoff water and are insulated against dampness. 
(2)  The required minimum window area is located entirely above the finished elevation of the ground adjoining the building wall in which the windows are located. 
(3)  The dwelling unit meets the other requirements of this chapter. 
(Code 1980, § 14-5; Ord. of 1-12-1967, § 6)  
Secs. 14-557—14-570. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[10] 
Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
 
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 14-571. - Enforcement generally. 
The building commissioner shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1980, § 14-6; Ord. of 1-12-1967, § 8)  
Sec. 14-572. - Entry powers. 
For the purposes of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, the building commissioner is hereby authorized to enter, examine and survey at all reasonable times all dwelling units. 
(Code 1980, § 14-7; Ord. of 1-12-1967, § 8)  
Sec. 14-573. - Notice of violations; correction required. 
If any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be found to exist by the building commissioner after an inspection conducted pursuant to this chapter, the building commissioner shall serve written notice of such violation upon the owner or his agent or the occupant of the premises involved as the case may require. Such notice may be served at the time of inspection or by mail within ten (10) days after the date of such inspection. Such notice if not served personally shall be deemed properly served if a copy is sent to such occupant or to the owner as the case may require it, by U.S. mail at his last-known address. The notice shall indicate the provisions of this chapter which are being violated and may grant a period of time for compliance, which period shall not exceed fifteen (15) days. If such violations have not been eliminated within the time granted, the owner or occupant failing to comply shall be subject to the penalty provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1980, § 14-8; Ord. of 1-12-1967, § 8; Ord. No. 81-34, § 1, 10-22-1981)  
Sec. 14-574. - Rules and regulations. 
The building commissioner is hereby authorized and empowered to make such rules and regulations as he may deem necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter. Such rules and regulations may be promulgated from time to time and shall be effective upon approval by the mayor and city council. 
(Code 1980, § 14-9; Ord. of 1-12-1967, § 9)  
Secs. 14-575—14-590. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Units Unfit for Human Habitation 
 
Sec. 14-591. - Defined. 
A unit shall be deemed to be unfit for human habitation if it is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe or vermin-infested that it creates a serious hazard to the health or safety of the occupants or of the public, or if it lacks illumination, ventilation or sanitation facilities adequate to protect the health or safety of the occupants or of the public. 
(Code 1980, § 14-71; Ord. of 1-12-1967, § 11)  
Sec. 14-592. - Vacating required. 
If, after a hearing at which all persons affected may appear and show cause why the dwelling unit should not be vacated, the building commissioner should determine that any dwelling unit is unfit for human habitation, he shall order such dwelling unit to be vacated within a reasonable time. Such unit shall remain unoccupied until the building commissioner shall determine that the defect or defects upon which the order of vacation was based have been eliminated. 
(Code 1980, § 14-72; Ord. of 1-12-1967, § 11)  
Sec. 14-593. - Notice of hearing on subject. 
The building commissioner shall give ten (10) days' notice in writing to the owner and occupants of the hearing on the vacation of any dwelling unit; provided that if the building commissioner shall determine that an emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the public health and safety, he may order any dwelling unit to be immediately vacated without the notice and hearing provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1980, § 14-73; Ord. of 1-12-1967, § 11)  
Sec. 14-594. - Notice to vacate. 
All dwelling units which the building commissioner has ordered to be vacated shall be placarded by him as follows: 
ORDER TO VACATE 
This dwelling unit has been found to be unfit for human habitation by the Building Commissioner of the City of Calumet City pursuant to the ordinance of Calumet City, setting a minimum standard of occupancy, ventilation, sanitation and maintenance for all dwellings used for human habitation in the City of Calumet City, Illinois. No person shall occupy or let for occupancy this dwelling until after _______, 19___. Any person occupying or letting for occupancy this dwelling unit after the above date, shall be subject to a fine of not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or incarceration in a penal institution other than the state penitentiary for a period not to exceed six (6) months or both for each day of such occupancy. 
(Code 1980, § 14-74; Ord. of 1-12-1967, § 11)  
Sec. 14-595. - Removal of notice. 
Any person removing the placard required by this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1980, § 14-75; Ord. of 1-12-1967, § 11)  
Secs. 14-596—14-610. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - OCCUPANCY REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 14-611. - Area. 
Every dwelling unit shall contain not less than three hundred (300) square feet of floor space for the first two (2) occupants thereof, and one hundred (100) square feet of floor space for each additional occupant thereof; such floor area shall not include verandas, porches, terraces, balconies and basements; provided, however, that at least one (1) habitable room in each dwelling unit shall have no less than one hundred twenty-five (125) square feet of floor space. 
(Code 1980, § 14-22; Ord. of 1-12-1967, § 3(a))  
Sec. 14-612. - Maximum occupancy. 
The number of persons occupying a dwelling unit shall not exceed one and one-half (1½) times the number of habitable rooms contained in such dwelling unit. In the calculation of the number of persons occupying a dwelling unit, children under one (1) year of age shall not be included and children under the age of twelve (12) years shall be counted as one-half of a person. 
(Code 1980, § 14-23; Ord. of 1-12-1967, § 3(d))  
Sec. 14-613. - Area of sleeping rooms. 
(a)  Every sleeping room shall contain the following minimum floor space: 
Number of 
Occupants 
in Room 	Minimum 
Floor Space 
(square feet) 
1 ..... 	70 
2 ..... 	90 
3 ..... 	140 
 
For the fourth, and each additional occupant, the sleeping room shall contain an additional fifty (50) square feet of floor space for each such occupant. 
(b)  For the purpose of making the computations required by this section, children under the age of one (1) year shall not be considered in computing required floor space. 
(Code 1980, § 14-24; Ord. of 1-12-1967, § 3)  
Sec. 14-614. - Ceiling height in habitable rooms. 
No habitable room shall have a ceiling height of less than seven and one-half (7½) feet. 
(Code 1980, § 14-25; Ord. of 1-12-1967, § 3(c))  
Secs. 14-615—14-630. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - REQUIRED FIXTURES 
 
Sec. 14-631. - Water closet. 
Every dwelling unit shall contain within its walls and separate from all other rooms, a room equipped with a flush water closet. Such room shall contain a window which may be opened to outside air or mechanical or gravity ventilation in proper operating condition. Such water closet shall conform with the requirements of this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 14-37; Ord. of 1-12-1967, § 4(a))  
Sec. 14-632. - Plumbing generally. 
Every kitchen sink, lavatory, bathtub, shower and water closet required by this article shall be maintained in good operating condition and shall be properly connected to water and sewer systems approved by the plumbing inspector. 
(Code 1980, § 14-38; Ord. of 1-12-1967, § 4(c))  
Sec. 14-633. - Lavatory. 
Every dwelling unit shall contain a lavatory which is located in the same room as the flush water closet or as near to that room as is practicable. Such lavatory shall conform with the requirements of this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 14-39; Ord. of 1-12-1967, § 4(b))  
Sec. 14-634. - Bathtub or shower. 
Every dwelling unit shall contain within its walls a room separate from the other habitable rooms and equipped with a bathtub or shower. 
(Code 1980, § 14-40; Ord. of 1-12-1967, § 4(c))  
Sec. 14-635. - Location of certain sanitary facilities. 
The water closet, lavatory and bath or shower required by this article may be located in the same room provided that such room is separate from all habitable rooms in the dwelling unit. 
(Code 1980, § 14-41; Ord. of 1-12-1967, § 4(c))  
Sec. 14-636. - Kitchen sink. 
Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink. 
(Code 1980, § 14-42; Ord. of 1-12-1967, § 4(d))  
Sec. 14-637. - Heating facilities. 
Every dwelling unit shall have heating facilities which are properly installed, are maintained in safe and good working condition, and are capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms and water closet compartments contained therein to a minimum temperature of seventy (70) degrees Fahrenheit from September fifteenth to May fifteenth, between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., and to a minimum temperature of sixty-eight (68) degrees Fahrenheit, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.; provided, however, that gas appliances designed exclusively for cooking or water heating purposes shall not be considered as heating facilities within the meaning of this section. 
(Code 1980, § 14-43; Ord. of 1-12-1967, § 4(f))  
Sec. 14-638. - Water heater. 
Every dwelling unit shall have a water heater which shall be kept in a good and efficient operating condition at all times. 
(Code 1980, § 14-44; Ord. of 1-12-1967, § 4(h))  
Secs. 14-639—14-660. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - VENTILATION AND LIGHTING 
 
Sec. 14-661. - Windows required; total area generally. 
Every habitable room shall have a window which may be opened to the outdoors. The minimum total window area measured between the stops shall be ten (10) percent of the floor area of such room. 
(Code 1980, § 14-56; Ord. of 1-12-1967, § 5(a))  
Sec. 14-662. - Screens. 
The windows and doors and other openings to external air of every dwelling unit shall be equipped with adequate screens and appliances so attached and arranged as to prevent the ingress of flies and mosquitoes to the interior of such dwelling unit from April fifteenth to November fifteenth of each year. 
(Code 1980, § 14-57; Ord. of 1-12-1967, § 4(g))  
Sec. 14-663. - Sleeping rooms. 
Every sleeping room shall have a total area, openable to the outside air by means of windows, which is not less than three (3) percent of the floor area of such room. 
(Code 1980, § 14-58; Ord. of 1-12-1967, § 5(b))  
Sec. 14-664. - Kitchens. 
Windows shall not be required in kitchens having a floor area of less than seventy (70) square feet provided such kitchens open into a habitable room which meets the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1980, § 14-59; Ord. of 1-12-1967, § 5(c))  
Secs. 14-665—14-690. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 14-691. - Adopted. 
A certain document, one (1) copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as the "2006 International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC)" be and is hereby adopted as the property maintenance code of the city for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the 2006 International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC) are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 14-692. 
(Code 1980, § 6-221; Ord. No. 84-43, § 1, 12-13-1984; Ord. No. 88-7, § 3, 5-26-1988; Ord. No. 92-9, § 1, 2-27-1992; Ord. No. 94-43, § 3, 7-28-1994; Ord. No. 97-2, § 1, 1-9-1997; Ord. No. 00-59, § 1, 10-12-2000; Ord. No. 05-72, § 1, 10-13-2005; Ord. No. 07-38, § 1, 4-26-2007)  
Sec. 14-692. - Amendments and revisions. 
The 2006 International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC) is amended and revised in the following respects: 
Section 101.1. Insert: City of Calumet City 
Section 103.1. Delete and replace with the following: "The department of property maintenance inspection shall also be known as the department of inspectional services and all references in city codes or ordinances to the department of property maintenance inspection and department of inspectional services shall be interchangeable. 
Section 103.6. Delete. 
Section 108.2 Add: "In cases where it reasonably appears that there is immediate danger to the life or safety of any person due to the condition of a structure, and the structure has previously been placarded as unsafe as provided above, the director of inspectional services shall give written notice by certified mail to or personal service upon the owner, agent or person in control of the building that unless action is taken within ten (10) days of the date of the notice to render the structure safe and secure, the director of inspectional services shall either cause the necessary work to render the structure safe or undertake the immediate demolition thereof. For purposes of this section, the director of inspectional services shall employ the necessary labor to perform the repair or demolition deemed necessary as expeditiously as provided and shall forward the costs of said repair or demolition to the City Comptroller for the purpose of filing a lien against the property." 
Section 111.1. Delete and replace it with the following: Decisions or determinations made by the director of inspectional services relative to the application and interpretation of this Code may be appealed by written application to the Chief of the Fire Department of the City of Calumet City who shall act on said appeal within five (5) business days of receipt. The decision of the fire chief may then in turn be appealed, in writing, to the public safety committee within five (5) business days and the committee's decision may subsequently be appealed to the full city council, in writing, within five (5) business days from the receipt of the decision of the committee. The decision of the city council shall be final and shall be subject to judicial review under the provisions of the Administrative Review Law (735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.). 
Sections 111.2 through 111.8. Delete. 
Section 302.4. Change "10 inches" to "6 inches" and delete the reference to 254 mm. 
Add Section 302.10 as follows: "Dead material. All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from dead or damaged trees, bushes, shrubs, or other lifeless vegetation. This would include cut as well as in-ground vegetation." 
Add Section 303.6.1 as follows: "Graffiti. The property owner shall take all necessary steps to remove any and all graffiti, or graffiti-like markings on the exterior surface of any building or other structure within forty-eight (48) hours of being notified.' 
Add Section 303.6.2 as follows: "Exterior covering. No plastic sheeting may be installed, attached or maintained on the exterior of any structure for insulation, weatherproofing, or other purposes, except in the case of emergency weatherproofing approved by the department of inspectional services and not exceeding a forty-five (45) day period. Boarded up windows, doors, holes or other areas shall be painted or colored in a manner that is consistent with the building colors upon application to the building. The coating applied shall render the boarding used to cover windows, doors or other areas as inconspicuous as possible. A building inspection shall be performed by the department of inspectional services and building permit obtained prior to the boarding up of any vacant structure. The building permit can be waived for an emergency board up approved by the department of inspectional services. Boarding up work, once commenced following issuance of a permit, shall be completed without delay or interruption. 
Section 303.3. Add the words "and alley adjacent to" after the words "street or road" in the first sentence. 
Section 303.14. Insert "September 30 to April 30." 
Section 602.3. Insert "September 30 to April 30." 
Section 602.4. Insert "September 30 to April 30." 
Section 604.2. Delete current language and replace with the following: 
"One-family dwelling units shall have a service of no less than one hundred (100) amp. This shall include rowhouses, townhouses and the like. Dwelling units requiring an upgrade in the size of the service shall be required to comply with the provisions of NFPA 70, 2005 Edition and additionally smoke detector requirements within the 2003 International Residential Code and the 2003 International Building Code. 
Section 605.2. Delete the last sentence and replace with the following: "All receptacles shall be protected by ground fault protection as per the provisions of NFPA 70, 2005 Edition except receptacles at kitchens shall only be required to be protected within six (6) feet of the kitchen sink." 
Section 606.1. Delete and replace with the following: 
Elevators and escalators shall be maintained to sustain safely all imposed loads, to operate properly, and to be free from physical and fire hazards. Inspections shall be performed at least annually by a licensed contractor and the inspection report shall be filed with both the city clerk's office and the department of inspectional services. If the elevator or escalator is located in a commercial building, at the time of business license renewal, proof of current inspection shall be required for renewal of the business license. Certificates of inspections shall be posted within each elevator and one (1) copy shall be sent to the department of inspectional services. 
(Code 1980, § 6-222; Ord. No. 97-2, § 3, 1-9-1997; Ord. No. 98-3, § 1, 1-22-1998; Ord. No. 00-59, § 1, 10-12-2000; Ord. No. 05-72, § 1, 10-13-2005; Ord. No. 07-38, § 1, 4-26-2007; Ord. No. 10-64, § 3, 12-9-2010; Ord. No. 18-48, § 10, 8-23-2018)  
Secs. 14-693—14-710. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RENTAL DWELLING INSPECTIONS[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 06-49, adopted June 22, 2006, amended division 2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former division 2, which consisted of §§ 14-711—14-718, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the 1980 Code; Ord. No. 87-5, adopted Mar. 26, 1987; Ord. No. 87-16, adopted July 23, 1987; Ord. No. 88-2, adopted Feb. 25, 1988; Ord. No. 89-8, adopted Feb. 9, 1989; Ord. No. 89-40, adopted Nov. 9, 1989; Ord. No. 90-1, adopted Jan. 11, 1990; Ord. No. 94-16, adopted May 12, 1994; and Ord. No. 04-42, adopted June 29, 2004. 
 
Sec. 14-711. - Certificate of occupancy requirement. 
(a)  No owner, agent or person (hereinafter referred to as "responsible party") in charge of a one-family, two-family or multiple-family dwelling (hereinafter referred to as "rental dwelling"), as those terms are defined in the property maintenance code, shall allow any person to occupy the same as a tenant or lessee or for valuable consideration unless said dwelling or structure shall have been inspected and determined to be in compliance with all of the provisions of the property maintenance code as well as all health and building ordinances as evidenced by a certificate of occupancy issued by the department of inspectional services ("department"). Thereafter, all rental properties shall be inspected annually and an updated certificate of occupancy issued. 
(b)  No certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless the applicant[,] owner or operator agrees in his application to an inspection pursuant to this section. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code, when the city conducts inspections of a tenant's rental dwelling, the city must obtain the consent of such tenant to conduct the inspection. If a tenant refuses consent, the city may attempt to obtain a warrant pursuant to subsection (d) below. 
(c)  Prior to the time that the department is scheduled to conduct the inspection, the department shall deliver to the owner and occupants of the structure written notice that includes the following: 
(1)  Date and time of the inspection; 
(2)  A statement that the owner or tenant has the right to withhold his consent to the inspection and require the city to attempt to obtain a warrant to conduct the inspection; 
(d)  If the owner or occupant does not consent to the attempted inspection, the director of inspectional services ("director") or his designee shall seek in the circuit court of Cook County a warrant in accordance with the appropriate laws of the State of Illinois to allow an inspection. The application for the warrant shall specify the basis upon which the warrant is being sought and shall include a statement that the inspection will be limited to a determination whether there are violations of the city building and zoning ordinances or any applicable housing, fire or property maintenance codes or regulations. The court may consider any of the following factors along with such other matters as it deems pertinent in its decision as to whether a warrant shall issue: 
(1)  Eyewitness account of violation; 
(2)  Citizen complaints; 
(3)  Tenant complaints; 
(4)  Plain view violations; 
(5)  Violations apparent from city records; 
(6)  Property deterioration; 
(7)  Age of property; 
(8)  Nature of alleged violation; 
(9)  Similar properties in the area; 
(10)  Documented violations on similar properties in the area; 
(11)  Passage of time since last inspection; 
(12)  Previous violations on the property. 
(e)  If the annual inspection establishes that the rental dwelling complies with all the provisions of the property maintenance code as well as all other health, zoning, and building ordinances of the city, then the department of inspectional services shall issue a certificate of occupancy for said dwelling or structure. The certificate shall indicate the date of the inspection; that such dwelling or structure complies with the requirements of the property maintenance code as well as other health and building ordinances that apply to the dwelling. One (1) copy of the certificate shall be delivered to or mailed to the owner of the dwelling unit. A record of all certificates shall be kept on file by the department, and copies shall be furnished upon request to any person having a proprietary interest or tenancy interest in the dwelling affected. The director shall submit once a month to the mayor and the city council a list of addresses of those dwellings which have been inspected the previous month with an indication whether or not said dwellings have been issued certificate of occupancy permits. Every certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a period of one (1) year after its date of issuance, unless sooner revoked. 
(f)  Inspection fee schedule. 
(1)  Fifty dollars ($50.00) yearly. 
(2)  Ten dollars ($10.00) per additional unit. 
(3)  All inspection fees as herein provided shall be paid prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(4)  Each fee set for the above covers the cost of one (1) follow-up inspection to verify compliance. In the event that additional inspections are required because full compliance did not exist at the time of the reinspection, then an additional reinspection fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) plus ten dollars ($10.00) per unit shall be assessed. 
(5)  If an owner, agent or tenant has failed to appear for a scheduled inspection, an additional inspection fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) plus ten dollars ($10.00) per unit shall be assessed. 
(Ord. No. 06-49, § 1, 6-22-2006; Ord. No. 11-45, § 2, 7-28-2011)  
Sec. 14-712. - Notice of violation. 
(a)  Whenever the building official determines that any rental dwelling or the premises surrounding fails to meet the requirements set forth in this chapter or in applicable rules and regulations issued pursuant thereto, the building official in accordance with the property maintenance code and the other city health, and building codes shall issue a notice setting forth the alleged failures and advising the responsible party that such failures must be corrected. This notice shall: 
(1)  Be in writing. 
(2)  Set forth the alleged violations of this chapter or of applicable rules and regulations issued pursuant thereto. 
(3)  Describe the rental dwelling where the violations are alleged to exist or to have been committed. Such written notice shall specify an appropriate or acceptable method of correction. 
(4)  Specify a specific date for the correction of any violation alleged. 
(5)  Be served upon the responsible party of the rental dwelling by the building official, or mailed to the responsible party. If one (1) or more persons to whom such notice is addressed cannot be found after diligent effort to do so, service may be made upon such persons by posting the notice in or about the rental dwelling described in the notice. 
(b)  At the end of the period of time allowed for the correction of any violation alleged, which was stated in the inspection notice, the building official shall reinspect the rental property described in the notice. 
(c)  If, upon reinspection, the violations are determined by the building official not to have been corrected, the building official, in turn, shall issue an O.V. (ordinance violation) ticket to initiate legal proceedings to be handled in Calumet City's housing court for the immediate correction of the alleged violations or shall order the rental property vacated within thirty (30) days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 06-49, § 1, 6-22-2006)  
Sec. 14-713. - Responsibility of tenants. 
No tenant shall damage or cause to be damaged any unit or building leased nor shall any damage be caused to the general premises of any building used by the tenants. Each tenant and the families of each tenant shall maintain his rental unit free of any litter, and tenants shall not litter any of the premises or the buildings provided for use by the tenants. The tenants must maintain their responsibilities as outlined in the property maintenance code, subject to O.V. citations. 
(Ord. No. 06-49, § 1, 6-22-2006)  
Sec. 14-714. - Penalties. 
Any responsible party of a rental dwelling who has received an order or notice of an alleged violation of this article shall be subject to a penalty of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each day the alleged violation continues after expiration of the specified reasonable consideration period; provided that no such penalty shall be applicable while reconsideration, hearing or appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction is pending in the matter. 
(Ord. No. 06-49, § 1, 6-22-2006)  
Sec. 14-715. - Validity and severability. 
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Code shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, this decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this Code, which shall continue in full force and effect, and to this end, the provisions of this Code are hereby declared to be severable. 
(Ord. No. 06-49, § 1, 6-22-2006)  
Sec. 14-716. - Savings clause. 
This Code shall not affect violations of any other ordinance, code or regulation of the jurisdiction existing prior to the effective date hereof, and any such violation shall be governed and shall continue to be punishable to the full extent of the law under the provisions of those ordinances, codes or regulations in effect at the time the violation was committed. 
(Ord. No. 06-49, § 1, 6-22-2006)  
Secs. 14-717—14-750. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - FENCES 
 
Sec. 14-751. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise, the following terms shall mean as indicated below: 
Fence means a manmade structure forming a barrier which is not a part of any building or structure and is more than two (2) feet in height over existing grade. 
Lock means a mechanism for keeping a door, lid, etc., fastened and typically operated only by a key of a particular form. 
Public safety means any organization including, but not limited to: emergency management agencies, law enforcement agencies, fire departments, rescue squads, and emergency medical services (EMS). 
Public safety personnel includes police officers, peace officers, firemen, firefighters, emergency medical technicians - ambulance, emergency medical technicians - intermediate, emergency medical technicians - paramedic, ambulance drivers, and other medical assistance or first aid personnel. 
Swimming pool means a receptacle for water, or an artificial pool of water having a depth at any point of more than two (2) feet, intended for the purpose of immersion or partial immersion therein of human beings, and including all appurtenant equipment. 
(Code 1980, § 9-1; Ord. of 12-11-1969, §§ 2, 6; Ord. No. 15-38, § 2, 9-10-2015)  
Sec. 14-752. - Construction permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to build, construct or erect any fence without a fence construction permit issued by the building department. 
(Code 1980, § 9-2; Ord. of 12-11-1969, § 1)  
Sec. 14-753. - Permit application. 
Any person desiring a fence construction permit shall apply in writing to the building department upon a form furnished by said department. In addition to the information required on said application, the application shall be accompanied by a sketch showing the proposed location of the fence in relation to lot lines and existing permanent improvements, the type of construction and materials to be used, and the proposed height of the fence. 
(Code 1980, § 9-3; Ord. of 12-11-1969, § 1)  
Sec. 14-754. - Permit fee. 
Every person desiring a fence construction permit shall submit, along with the application for same, a permit fee of ten dollars ($10.00). 
(Code 1980, § 9-4; Ord. of 12-11-1969, § 1; Ord. No. 89-4, § 4, 1-26-1989)  
Sec. 14-755. - Restriction on air movement. 
No fence shall be constructed that will restrict fifty (50) percent of the surface air movement such as a solid fence would do. 
(Code 1980, § 9-5; Ord. of 12-11-1969, § 3)  
Sec. 14-756. - Location with reference to lots or easements; releases. 
No fence shall be built, constructed or erected so as to extend past the front yard building line as established by the zoning ordinance, nor shall any fence be built past the side street yard on a corner lot as established by the zoning ordinance. No fence shall be erected in any public right-of-way. No fence shall be built, constructed or erected in any easement except wherein a release is given by the city prior thereto, absolving the city from all liability and damages resulting from subsequent entry for the purpose of repair, inspection, maintenance, installation or removal of utilities. Only one (1) fence shall be permitted along any lot line. 
(Code 1980, § 9-6; Ord. of 12-11-1969, § 4; Ord. No. 12-18, § I, 5-10-2012)  
Sec. 14-757. - Manner of construction when located in easement; liability of city. 
Any fence allowed or permitted in an easement shall be so constructed that the fence and post may be readily removable. The city shall in no way be held liable for the replacement of any fence removed, or any other expense entailed by the removal or reerection of any fence in the easement. 
(Code 1980, § 9-7; Ord. of 12-11-1969, § 4)  
Sec. 14-758. - Gate required. 
(a)  A gate or opening shall be provided in all fence enclosures. 
(b)  No lock, padlock or any device as defined in section 14-751 shall be placed on any gate or fence to prohibit ingress or egress of public safety personnel as defined therein. 
(Code 1980, § 9-8; Ord. of 12-11-1969, § 4; Ord. No. 15-38, § 3, 9-10-2015)  
Sec. 14-759. - Construction materials. 
Any suitable construction materials may be used for a fence except corrugated sheet steel, chicken wire, square-welded mesh wire, electrically charged wire, or a temporary snow fence. Except as otherwise provided, no fence shall be taped with sharp-edged materials; provided, however, that this prohibition shall not be construed to prohibit picket fences. The entire length of a fence shall be constructed of the same or of harmonious material. 
(Code 1980, § 9-9; Ord. of 12-11-1969, § 4)  
Sec. 14-760. - Barbed wire. 
Barbed wire may be used in commercial, office or manufacturing zoning districts provided that a fence constructed of same shall be located a minimum of seven (7) feet from the established grade and the barbed wire shall be turned to the inside of the property upon which it is erected. No such barbed wire shall be located closer than five (5) feet from any public street, sidewalk, alley, park or public right-of-way or public place. 
(Code 1980, § 9-10; Ord. of 12-11-1969, § 4)  
Sec. 14-761. - Height measurement. 
Except as otherwise provided, all height dimensions for a fence shall be measured from the established grade to the topmost section of the fence. 
(Code 1980, § 9-11; Ord. of 12-11-1969, § 4; Ord. of 7-6-1972, § 1; Ord. of 6-28-1973, § 1)  
Sec. 14-762. - Retention basins. 
All retention basins within the city shall be protected by a fence with a height of not less nor more than six (6) feet. This fence shall require a permit from the building department. The term "retention basin" is hereby defined as a receptacle for water or an artificial pool of water having a depth at any point of more than two (2) feet. 
(Code 1980, § 9-12; Ord. of 11-25-1975, § 1)  
Sec. 14-763. - Variances. 
The city council may approve a variance from the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1980, § 9-13; Ord. No. 77-6, § 1, 3-10-1977)  
Sec. 14-764. - Maximum height in residential use districts. 
The maximum fence height in a residential use district shall be six (6) feet between buildings and shall be six (6) feet in height in the rear yard behind the building. 
(Code 1980, § 9-23; Ord. of 12-11-1969, § 4; Ord. of 7-6-1972, § 1; Ord. of 6-28-1973, § 1)  
Sec. 14-765. - Maximum height in manufacturing use districts. 
(a)  The maximum height of any fence located in a manufacturing use district shall be eight (8) feet. 
(b)  The maximum height of a fence located in a commercial or office use district shall be seven (7) feet. 
(Code 1980, § 9-35; Ord. of 12-11-1969, § 5)  
Sec. 14-766. - Generally. 
All permanently constructed swimming pools shall be protected by a fenced enclosure as required for residential use, with a height of five (5) feet and shall be equipped with a self-closing gate and a latch five (5) feet over grade. This shall require an additional permit from the building department and the construction of said pool shall conform with the building code. All temporary, portable, sectional construction, aboveground or nonpermanent pools shall be protected by a fence enclosure as required for residential use with a height of not less than five (5) feet nor more than six (6) feet and shall be equipped with a self-latching gate. 
(Code 1980, § 9-47; Ord. of 7-6-1972, § 2; Ord. No. 93-33, § 1, 10-28-1993)  
Secs. 14-767—14-790. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - SWIMMING POOLS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 14-791. - Private residential pool defined. 
As used in this article, the term "private residential swimming pool" shall mean a receptacle for water, or an artificial pool of water having depth at any point of more than two (2) feet, intended for the purpose of immersion or partial immersion therein of human beings, and including all appurtenant equipment, constructed, installed and maintained in or above the ground outside of a building used for a single-family dwelling unit; provided further, that such private residential swimming pool is maintained by an individual primarily for the sole use of his household and guests and not for the purpose of profit or in connection with any business operated for profit. 
(Code 1980, § 6-187)  
Sec. 14-792. - Location restrictions. 
(a)  No portion of a private residential swimming pool shall be located at a distance less than eight (8) feet from any side or rear property line, or building line. Pumps, filters and pool water disinfection equipment installation shall be located at a distance not less than eight (8) feet from any side property line. Pools and appurtenant equipment shall not be permitted in the side yard between dwellings. 
(b)  No outdoor swimming pool intended for the use of members and their guests of a nonprofit club or organization, or limited to house residents of a multiple-dwelling unit, a block, subdivision, neighborhood, community or other specified areas of a residence, shall be permitted in a single-family residence district. 
(c)  A person may request a variance to locate a portion of a private residence swimming pool at a distance less than three (3) feet from any side or rear property or building line; provided that said person shall submit an application in writing to the city council setting forth the circumstances which, in the applicant's opinion, would justify a variance. A special variance may be granted when the city council deems necessary, and the applicant shall assume full responsibility in the operation and use of the pool so as not to be a nuisance or detriment to the adjoining property owner. 
(d)  All pools, whether permanent or temporary, shall only be allowed to be constructed, erected, and/or placed in the setback or backyard of the property on which they are located. 
(Code 1980, § 6-190; Ord. of 7-25-1974, § 1; Ord. No. 07-90, § 1, 9-13-2007)  
Sec. 14-793. - Operation and maintenance generally. 
(a)  All private residential swimming pools shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, and all equipment shall be maintained in satisfactory operating condition during the periods the pool is in use. 
(b)  No private residential swimming pool shall be used, kept, maintained or operated in the city if such use, keeping, maintaining or operating shall be the occasion of any nuisance or shall be dangerous to life or detrimental to health. 
(Code 1980, § 6-203)  
Sec. 14-794. - Administration and enforcement. 
(a)  Purpose. This article provides the minimum requirements and standards for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(b)  Scope. The provisions of the article shall apply to the erection, installation, alteration, addition, repair, relocation, replacement, maintenance or use of any private or public pool system, including swimming pools, wading pools, spas, hot tubs, nonpermanent pools, hydrotherapy spas, soaking tubs and Jacuzzis. 
(c)  Existing installations. 
(1)  Any pool system lawfully installed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section may have its existing use, maintenance or repair continued if the use, maintenance or repair is in accordance with the original design and location, and no hazard to the public health, safety or welfare has been created by such system. 
(2)  The owner or his/her designated agent shall be responsible for maintaining the pool system in a safe and sanitary condition. 
(d)  Nuisance declared, abatement. 
(1)  Any portion of a pool system found by the director of inspectional services or his designee to be unsanitary, as defined in this article, is hereby declared to be a nuisance. 
(2)  Where a nuisance exists or poses a danger to life or is detrimental to the health and well-being of the residents and visitors of the city, or a pool system is maintained in violation of this article or any notice issued pursuant to this article, the director or code official shall require the nuisance or violation to be abated immediately and, where necessary, shall be subjected to the general penalty as provided in chapter 2, division 2, administration and enforcement, of the Municipal Code of Calumet City. 
(3)  If the director of inspectional services or his designee determines that a nuisance is present at a given location, said code enforcement official shall attempt to serve notice upon the owner or occupant of the nuisance. On the same day that attempted service of notice is made, notice shall be placed visibly on said house containing a nuisance declaration. Said notice shall provide for a forty-eight-hour period during which the owner or occupant of said property must abate said nuisance. During said forty-eight-hour period, the city shall attempt to secure a court order or warrant allowing for entrance onto the premises. If after the expiration of the forty-eight (48) hours said nuisance has not been abated, and after the city has obtained a court order or warrant allowing entrance onto the premises for the purpose of abating said nuisance, the director of inspectional services or his designee may undertake the abatement of the cited nuisance. After the abatement of the nuisance, the city comptroller shall notify the owner or occupant of the premises of the abatement and the costs incurred as a result of the city's removal and disposal of the nuisance. Said notice shall read as follows: 
"IT HAS BEEN DECLARED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF INSPECTIONAL SERVICES THAT THE _______ (swimming pools, wading pools, spas, hot tubs, hydrotherapy spas, soaking tubs and Jacuzzis) ON THIS PREMISES POSES A NUISANCE AND IS A THREAT TO THE LIFE, SAFETY, AND WELFARE OF THE CITIZENS AND VISITORS OF THE CITY OF CALUMET CITY. SAID NUISANCE MUST BE ABATED IMMEDIATELY. IF AFTER FORTY-EIGHT (48) HOURS AFTER THIS NOTICE IS POSTED SAID NUISANCE HAS NOT BEEN ABATED, THE CITY OF CALUMET CITY SHALL ENTER SAID PROPERTY UPON THE AUTHORITY OF A COURT ORDER OR WARRANT FOR THE SOLE PURPOSE OF ABATING SAID NUISANCE. THE CITY COMPTROLLER SHALL FORWARD AN INVOICE FOR THE COST OF SAID ABATEMENT TO THE PROPERTY OWNER. IF PAYMENT FOR SAID COSTS FOR THE ABATEMENT ARE NOT PAID IN FULL WITHIN THIRTY (30) DAYS OF ISSUANCE OF THE INVOICE, THE CITY COMPTROLLER OR HER DESIGNEE SHALL FILE A LIEN WITH THE OFFICE OF THE COOK COUNTY RECORDER OF DEEDS AND WITH THE CIRCUIT COURT OF ILLINOIS." 
(4)  In the event payment is not received within thirty (30) days of issuance of an invoice by the city, the city comptroller, or his/her designee, shall file a notice of lien in the office of the Cook County Recorder of Deeds, then such costs and expense shall be a lien upon the real estate affected, superior to all subsequent liens, except tax liens. 
(5)  Upon payment of the costs and expenses by the owner of, or persons interested in such property after a notice of lien has been filed, the lien provide for by this chapter shall be released by the city. 
(e)  Right of entry. 
(1)  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this article, or whenever the director, code official or their authorized representative has reasonable cause to believe that there exist in any building or upon any premises any condition which makes such pool system unsafe, the director, code official or authorized representative may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the building or premises with the consent of the owner or occupant, or to perform any duty imposed upon the director by this article. If the building is unoccupied, the director, code official or authorized representative shall make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other personas having charge or control of the building or premises and demand entry. If the owner or occupant is unable to be located and the director deems that the threat is imminent, the director, code official or authorized representative shall document the condition which poses the danger and secure a warrant or court order to abate the nuisance. If such building or premises is occupied, the director, code enforcement official, or authorized representative shall first present proper credentials and demand entry, and state the reasons why they are there to inspect the pool or otherwise. If such entry is refused, the director, code official or his authorized representative shall have recourse to every remedy provided bylaw to secure entry. 
(2)  No owner or occupant, or any other person having charge, care or control of any building or premises, shall fail or neglect, after proper demand is made as provided in subsection (e)(1) of this section, to properly permit entry therein by the director, code official or their authorized representative for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this article. Any person violating this subsection shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 06-58, § 1, 7-18-2006; Ord. No. 18-48, § 9, 8-23-2018)  
Secs. 14-795—14-810. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
 
Sec. 14-811. - Permit. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install, enlarge or alter private residential swimming pool and appurtenances unless all permits therefore have first been obtained from the building commissioner, the electrical and plumbing inspectors. Any and all inspections, including but not limited to, staking, repour, rough and final inspections, are required to secure building, plumbing and electrical permits. Any person constructing or installing wading pools and nonpermanent pools which are thirty-six (36) inches or deeper shall secure permits for said pool and appurtenances from the building commissioner, the electrical and plumbing inspector. 
(b)  Fee. The fee for a permit for the erection or construction of a private residential swimming pool shall be the current, applicable costs for building, electric and plumbing inspections for every one thousand (1,000) cubic feet or fraction thereof to be contained within the proposed pool. Persons constructing or installing wading pools or nonpermanent pool thirty-six (36) inches or deeper shall pay all applicable permit fees for building, electrical, and plumbing permits. 
(Code 1980, §§ 6-188, 6-189; Ord. No. 89-4, § 3, 1-26-1989; Ord. No. 92-51, § 1, 11-12-1992; Ord. No. 06-58, § 2, 7-18-2006)  
Sec. 14-812. - Plans and drawings. 
(a)  All drawings and plans for the construction, installation, enlargement or alteration of any private residential swimming pool and appurtenances for which a permit is required shall first be presented to the building commissioner for examination and approval as to proper location, construction and use. 
(b)  All plans and drawings shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one-eighth ( 1/8 ) of an inch to the foot, on paper or cloth, in ink, or by some process that will not fade or obliterate. All distances and dimensions shall be accurately figured and drawings made explicit and complete, showing the lot line, and including information pertaining to the pool, walk and fence construction, water supply system, drainage and water disposal systems, and all appurtenances pertaining to the swimming pool. Detail plans and vertical elevations shall also be provided in accordance with the building code. 
(c)  Such swimming pools, appurtenances, water supply and drainage system shall be constructed in conformity with the approved plans. If any deviations from such plans are desired, a supplementary plan covering that portion of the work involved shall be filed for approval and shall conform to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1980, § 6-191)  
Secs. 14-813—14-830. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CONSTRUCTION AND INSTALLATION STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 14-831. - Materials; slope of walls. 
(a)  Generally. Private residential swimming pool walls and floor shall be constructed of any impervious material which will provide a tight tank with white or light-colored finish and easily cleaned surfaces. The floor or bottom surface of the pool shall have a nonslip finish as smooth as possible. 
(b)  Walls. The side and end walls of a pool shall present a smooth finish and shall be vertical to a depth of at least six (6) feet or shall have a slope or curvature meeting one (1) of the following conditions: 
(1)  The pool wall may be vertical for thirty (30) inches from the water level below which the wall may be curved to the bottom with a radius at any point equal to the difference between the depth, at that point, and thirty (30) inches. 
(2)  To a depth of six (6) feet, except as in subsection (b)(1) of this section, the wall slope shall not be less than one (1) foot horizontal to six (6) feet vertical. 
(Code 1980, § 6-192)  
Sec. 14-832. - Water pressure; slope of bottom. 
Private residential swimming pools shall be designed to withstand the water pressure from within and to resist the pressure of the earth when the pool is empty, to a pressure of two thousand two hundred (2,200) pounds per square foot. The slope of the bottom of any part of a pool in which the water is less than five (5) feet in depth shall not be more than one (1) foot in each ten (10) feet. The maximum slope where water is five (5) or more feet in depth shall not exceed one (1) foot in two (2) feet. 
(Code 1980, § 6-193)  
Sec. 14-833. - Fencing. 
Private residential swimming pools shall be completely enclosed by a fence erected along the periphery of the pool walks. All fence openings or points of entry into pool area enclosure shall be equipped with gates. The fence and gates shall be five (5) feet above the walk grade level and shall be constructed of a minimum number nine (9) gauge woven wire mesh corrosion-resistant material, or material approved by the building commissioner. All gates shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching devices placed at the top of the gate and made inaccessible to small children. All fence posts shall be resistant to decay or corrosion and shall be set in concrete bases. 
(Code 1980, § 6-194; Ord. No. 93-34, § 1, 10-28-1993)  
Sec. 14-834. - Walks. 
Unobstructed walk areas not less than thirty-six (36) inches wide shall be provided to extend entirely around private residential swimming pools. The walk area shall be constructed of impervious material, and the surfaces shall be of such as to be smooth and easily cleaned and of nonslip construction. The slope of the walks shall have a pitch of at least one-fourth (¼) inch to the foot, designed so as to prevent back drainage from entering the pool. 
(Code 1980, § 6-195)  
Sec. 14-835. - Steps and ladders. 
Two or more means of egress in the form of steps or ladders shall be provided for all private residential swimming pools. At least one (1) such means of egress shall be located on a side of the pool at both the deep end and shallow end of the pool. Treads of steps and ladders shall be constructed of nonslip material and at least three (3) inches wide for their full length. Steps and ladders shall have a handrail on both sides. 
(Code 1980, § 6-196)  
Sec. 14-836. - Lifesaving personnel and equipment. 
(a)  A skilled swimmer shall be present at all times that private residential swimming pools are in use. 
(b)  Every private residential swimming pool shall be equipped with one (1) or more throwing ring buoys not more than fifteen (15) inches in diameter and having sixty (60) feet of three-sixteenths ( 3/16 ) inch manila line attached, and one (1) or more light but strong poles with blunted ends and no less than twelve (12) feet in length, for making reach assists or rescues. 
(Code 1980, § 6-197)  
Sec. 14-837. - Recirculation system. 
(a)  Private residential swimming pools shall be of the recirculation type in which circulation of the water is maintained through the pool by pumps, the water drawn from the pool being clarified and disinfected before being returned to the pool. 
(b)  Private residential swimming pool recirculation systems shall consist of pumping equipment, hair and lint catcher, filters, together with the necessary pipe connections to the pool inlets and outlets, facilities and pipe connections necessary for backwashing filters, and facilities and equipment for disinfecting the pool water. 
(c)  Every private residential swimming pool shall have a recirculating system with an hourly capacity equal to the pool volume divided by eight (8). 
(d)  Private residential swimming pool water recirculation system inlets shall be located so as to produce so far as possible uniform circulation of water throughout the pool without the existence of dead spots and to carry pool bottom deposits to the outlets, and shall discharge at a minimum depth of ten (10) inches below the pool overflow level. A minimum of one (1) recirculation system inlet shall be provided for every six hundred fifteen (615) square feet of surface area of the pool. 
(e)  The recirculation system pump shall have sufficient capacity to discharge the volume of water required for an eight (8) hour turnover of the pool against the maximum head in the recirculating system. 
(f)  The pump used for backwashing filters shall have sufficient capacity to provide a filter backwash rate of at least twelve (12) gallons per minute per square foot of filter area. 
(g)  A hair and lint catcher or strainer shall be installed on the suction side of the circulation pump to prevent hair, lint and other extraneous matter from reaching the pump and filters. Hair and lint catchers shall be so designed that they can be easily dismantled for cleaning and inspection and shall be so located as to be easily accessible for cleaning. The design features shall be such that water passes through the strainer from the outside. The strainer shall be made of noncorrosive material; the width or diameter of strainer openings shall be not more than one-eighth ( 1/8 ) inch, and the area of the strainer openings shall be at least five (5) times the cross-sectional area of the inlet pipe to the strainer. 
(h)  Recirculating systems shall contain rapid pressure filters. Sufficient filter area shall be provided to filter the entire contents of the pool in eighteen (18) hours at the rate of not more than three (3) gallons per square foot of filter area per minute. The filter backwashing facilities shall be sufficient to backwash at a rate of twelve (12) gallons per minute per square foot of filter area. All backwash water and effluents shall be discharged to the sewer through an indirect connection. Pressure filters shall be equipped with readily accessible air relief valves, loss of head or pressure gauges on the inlet and outlet pipes, and an access head or hole large enough to permit inspection, maintenance and repair work. Sight glasses that can be easily removed for cleaning shall be provided in the effluent line from the filter units. 
(i)  Equipment shall be provided for the disinfection of all pool water. Any disinfection method using materials other than chlorine compounds shall have sufficient capacity to maintain a minimum free chlorine residual of five (5) parts per million. The disinfectant shall be introduced into the recirculation system ahead of the filters. 
(j)  Gaseous chlorination systems shall not be made use of as a disinfection method for pool water. 
(Code 1980, § 6-198)  
Sec. 14-838. - Skimmers. 
In every private residential swimming pool, at least one (1) skimming device shall be provided for each eight hundred (800) square feet of surface area or fraction thereof. Skimmers shall be located at least thirty (30) feet apart. Handholes shall be provided and consist of a bull-nosed coping not over two and one-half (2½) inches thick for the outer two (2) inches or an equivalent approved handhold. The handhold must be no more than nine (9) inches above the normal waterline. Skimming devices shall be built into the pool wall, shall adequately remove floated oils and waste, and shall meet the following general specifications: 
(1)  Each skimmer shall be designed for a flow-through rate of at least thirty (30) gallons per minute and a total capacity of all skimmers on any pool shall be at least fifty (50) percent of the required filter flow of the recirculation system. 
(2)  They shall be automatically adjustable to variations in water level over a range of at least three (3) inches. 
(3)  An easily removable and cleansable basket or screen through which all overflow water must pass shall be provided to trap large solids. 
(4)  The skimmer shall be provided with a device to prevent airlock in the suction line. If an equalizer pipe is used, it shall provide an adequate amount of makeup water for pump suction should the water of the pool drop below the weir level. This pipe shall be at least two (2) inches in diameter and shall be located at least one (1) foot below the lowest overflow level of the skimmer. 
(5)  An equalizer line shall be provided with a valve that will remain tightly closed under normal operating conditions, but will automatically open at a differential of not more than four (4) inches between the pool level and the level of the overflow tank. 
(6)  The overflow weir shall be of sufficient length to maintain a rate of flow of at least twenty (20) gallons per minute per linear foot of weir lip. 
(Code 1980, § 6-199)  
Sec. 14-839. - Water supply. 
No source of water other than that secured from the city waterworks distribution system shall be used in private residential swimming pools unless such source shall have been and continues to be tested and found to be equal to the state standards of purity for drinking water. 
(Code 1980, § 6-200)  
Sec. 14-840. - Electrical requirements. 
(a)  No underwater lighting fixtures or their circuit wiring shall be permitted for either public or private swimming pools in the city. Ceiling lighting and side wall lighting brackets only shall be installed. 
(b)  In all public swimming pools, side wall lighting brackets, if used, shall be placed a minimum of twelve (12) feet above the deck. All lighting fixtures and brackets are to be controlled by switches placed outside the entrance door to the swimming pool. 
(c)  No portable electrical equipment shall be operated from the deck. If vacuum cleaner is to be used, current supply shall be from ground fault interrupter receptacles outside the entrance door to the swimming pool. 
(d)  In all private swimming pools, no underwater lighting fixtures or their circuit wiring are permitted. Approved lighting methods shall be P.A.R. 38 incandescent lamps mounted on eaves of residences or on standards twelve (12) feet in height and set back a minimum of eight (8) feet from the outer edge of the deck. Overcurrent protection or disconnecting means shall be located at a remote distance from the pool and at the residence. 
(e)  No current-carrying electrical conductors shall cross private residential swimming pools, either overhead or underground, or within fifteen (15) feet of such pools. 
(f)  All metal fences, enclosures or railings near or adjacent to private residential swimming pools which might become electrically alive as a result of contact with broken overhead conductors or from any other cause shall be effectively grounded. 
(Code 1980, § 6-201; Ord. No. 92-50, §§ 1, 2, 11-12-1992)  
Sec. 14-841. - Drainage. 
(a)  Swimming pools shall be equipped with facilities for completely emptying the pool, and the discharge of the pool water to the sewer shall be at a rate not exceeding two hundred (200) gallons per minute. 
(b)  No direct connection shall be made to the sewer. 
(c)  Water drained from the pool shall not be discharged to the sewer system during periods of rain or storms. 
(Code 1980, § 6-202)  
Secs. 14-842—14-870. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIII. - PUBLIC SPAS 
 
Sec. 14-871. - Scope of article. 
The requirements of this article shall apply to all commercial public spas within the city limits. 
(Code 1980, § 6-411; Ord. No. 97-13, § 1, 2-27-1997)  
Sec. 14-872. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meaning ascribed thereto: 
Health department means the Health Department of the City of Calumet City. 
Inlet means an opening through which filtered water enters the pool. 
Main drain means the outlet or outlets in the lowest point of the floor of the spa. 
National Electrical Code means a code for the practical safe-guarding of persons and of buildings and their contents from hazards arising from the use of electricity for light, heat, power, or radio signaling, prepared by the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA). 
National Sanitation Foundation (NSF) means a nonprofit, noncommercial organization which wholly owns the National Sanitation Foundation Testing Laboratory, 2355 West Stadium Boulevard, P.O. Box 1468, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. 
Plumbing shall have the meaning in the Illinois State Plumbing License Law and Code (77 Ill. Adm. Code 890). 
Public water system means a system for the provision to the public of piped water for human consumption, if the system has at least fifteen (15) service connections or regularly serves an average of at least twenty-five (25) individuals daily at least sixty (60) days per year. 
Skimmer means a mechanical device connected to the recirculation piping which is used to remove materials from the water surface. 
Spa means a basin of water designed for recreational or therapeutic use which is not drained, cleaned, or refilled for each user. It may include hydrojet circulation, hot water, cold water mineral bath, air induction bubbles, or some combination thereof. Industry terminology for a spa includes "therapeutic pool," "hydrotherapy pool," "whirlpool," "hot spa," "hot tub," etc. 
Turnover means the time required to recirculate the water volume of the spa through the filtration system. 
(Code 1980, § 6-412; Ord. No. 97-13, § 1, 2-27-1997)  
Sec. 14-873. - Inspections. 
The director of the department of inspectional services or his designee and the director of the health department or his designee shall have the authority to inspect spa construction and operation for the purpose of enforcing rules and regulations and shall have the authority to require closing of any area when such action is considered necessary to prevent possible spread of infection or disease. 
(Code 1980, § 6-419; Ord. No. 97-13, § 1, 2-27-1997)  
Sec. 14-874. - Water supply. 
The water supply for drinking, showers, and bathing purposes and for all plumbing fixtures, as well as the supply serving the spa, shall be obtained from a public water system. 
(Code 1980, § 6-413; Ord. No. 97-13, § 1, 2-27-1997)  
Sec. 14-875. - Sewage disposal. 
Wastewater generated from the operation of a spa shall discharge to a public sewer. 
(Code 1980, § 6-414; Ord. No. 97-13, § 1, 2-27-1997)  
Sec. 14-876. - Spa construction. 
(a)  Structural design. The structural design and materials used in the spa shall be in accordance with local building codes. They shall provide a sound, durable structure which will safely sustain the weights and pressures for which they are designed. The spa shall be watertight and surfaces shall be inert, nontoxic, smooth and easily cleaned. Surfaces shall not constitute a cutting, puncturing or abrasion hazard to patrons. Spas shall have light-colored interiors. Wooden tubs shall not be allowed except where used in conjunction with a durable, inert liner. 
(b)  Depths and handholds. Spas shall be provided with handholds around their perimeter in areas where water depth exceeds three (3) feet, six (6) inches. 
(c)  Steps. Steps shall be of contrasting color from the bottom. Contrasting color bands or lines may be used to indicate breaks in the floor level of the spa. Step treads shall have slip-resistant surfaces. 
(d)  Heater and temperature requirements. Spa gas heaters must be certified as meeting the latest American National Standards Institute's (ANSI Z21.56) standard. All heaters for spas shall be tested and approved by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME) and bear the ASME seal. Current collectors having a separate ground shall be installed at each inlet and outlet of electric heaters. A heating coil or pipe shall not be installed in the spa. Thermometers shall be provided in the piping to check the temperature of the water returning from the spa and the temperature returning to the spa. A temperature and pressure relief valve shall be provided on all water heaters and shall be pied to within six (6) inches of the floor. Venting of gas or other fuel-burning water heaters shall be provided. The maximum operating temperature of spa water shall not exceed one hundred four (104) degrees Fahrenheit (forty (40) degrees Celsius). A thermostatic control for the water temperature shall be provided to ensure that this limit is not exceeded. It shall be accessible only to the operator. 
(e)  Electrical requirements. The latest National Electrical Code shall be used for the wiring and grounding of all electrical equipment associated with a spa and the bonding and grounding of all metallic appurtenances. Electrical switches, outlets and equipment shall be at least fifteen (15) feet from the edge of the spa and accessible only to the operator. 
(f)  Inlets and outlets. An over-the-rim fill spout with a six (6) inch air gap between the spout opening and the deck, properly shielded so as not to create a hazard, shall be provided. The spout shall have no sharp edges and shall not protrude more than two (2) inches beyond the edge of the spa. Where the fill spout cannot be located adjacent to a ladder or railing or railing, a hose bib located near the deck shall be provided to fill the spa. A means shall be provided to completely drain the spa. A bottom drain shall be provided. The total velocity through grate openings shall not exceed one and one-half (1½) feet per second. The opening in the grates shall be designed to prevent the entrapment of fingers, toes, etc. Water outlets shall be provided which consist of one (1) of the following: 
(1)  Two outlets having the same pipe diameter (this may be two (2) outlet drains or an outlet drain and a skimmer); 
(2)  One antivortex drain, which shall not provide a tripping hazard and shall prevent flows in excess of two (2) feet per second; 
(3)  A twelve (12) inch by twelve (12) inch or larger grate. 
(g)  Recirculation systems. The recirculation equipment shall provide a turnover rate for the entire water volume at least once every thirty (30) minutes. 
(h)  Overflow systems. The overflow system shall be designed and constructed so that the water level of the spa is maintained at the opening level of the weir. When surface skimmers are used as the sole overflow system, one (1) surface skimmer shall be provided for each one hundred (100) square feet, or fraction thereof, of the spa surface area. 
(i)  Filters. All filters shall meet the requirements of the National Sanitation Foundation Standard 50, and shall bear the NSF seal. 
(j)  Pumps and strainers. The recirculation pump shall deliver the flow necessary to obtain the turnover required in subsection (e) of this section. 
(k)  Valves. All valves shall be located where they will be easily accessible. 
(l)  Air induction systems. An air induction system, when provided, must prevent water backup that could cause electrical shock hazards. Such system shall be connected to a fifteen (15) minute timer located out of reach of any person in the spa. 
(m)  Disinfectant. A means of disinfecting the spa shall be employed which provides the required disinfectant residual in the water. A chlorine residual shall be maintained between three (3.0) and five (5.0) parts per million (ppm) as free chlorine, or a bromine residual shall be maintained between three (3.0) and five (5.0) ppm as free available bromine at all times. Where chlorinated cyanurates are used, the cyanuric acid concentration shall not exceed two hundred (200) ppm. The pH of the water shall be maintained in a range of seven and two-tenths (7.2) to seven and six-tenths (7.6). The department may consider the maintenance of a higher pH in conjunction with maintenance of a higher disinfectant residual in special cases where corrosive water supplies dictate the need for such measures to protect equipment. 
(n)  Chemical feeders. 
(1)  General. The minimum chemical feed equipment required shall include a unit for feed of a disinfectant. Chemical feed equipment shall comply with NSF Standard 50. 
(2)  Equipment capacity. 
a.  Chlorine. Equipment for supplying chlorine or compounds of chlorine shall be of sufficient capacity to feed the chlorine at a rate of twenty (20) ppm based on the required turnover rate and type of chlorine compound to be used. 
b.  Bromine. Pot feeders for supplying brom-chloro-dimethylhydantoin sticks shall contain at least 0.50 pound of bromo-chloro-dimethylhydantoin per thousand (1,000) gallons of spa capacity. The feeder shall have a method of feed rate adjustment. 
c.  Ozone. Ozone may be used as a supplement to chlorination or bromination. No more than one (1) gram per day of ozone per ten (10) gallons per minute of design flow rate will be allowed. The ambient air ozone concentration shall be less than .05 ppm at all times either in the vicinity of the ozonator or at the spa water surface. 
(3)  Positive displacement pumps (hypochlorinators). Where positive displacement pumps are used to inject the disinfectant solution into the recirculation line, they shall be of variable flow type and shall be of sufficient capacity to feed the amount of disinfectant required by section 14-876(n)(2). If calcium hypochlorite is used, the concentration of calcium hypochlorite in the solution shall not exceed five (5) percent. The solution container shall have a minimum capacity equal to the volume of solution required per day at the feed rate required in section 14-876(n)(2). 
(4)  Gas chlorinators. Gas chlorinators shall not be allowed. 
(5)  Erosion type chlorine feeders. 
a.  Erosion type chlorine or bromine feeders shall be approved in accordance with NSF Standard 50. 
b.  Where erosion type feeders are used, only the chemical specified by the feeder manufacturer shall be used as the disinfecting agent. 
c.  The chlorine feed capacity shall comply with section 14-876(n)(2). 
The chemical compound and percentage of chlorine in the compound, as well as the feeder flow capacity, shall be specified. A valve shall be provided to adjust the flow. 
(6)  Testing equipment. 
a.  A calorimetric DPD test kit shall be provided to determine free disinfectant residual and pH of the spa water. 
b.  Spas using chlorinated cyanurates for disinfection shall have a test kit to measure the cyanoric acid concentration. The cyanuric acid test kit shall permit readings in excess of two hundred (200) ppm Where bromine or chlorine is used as a disinfectant, a calorimetric test kit shall be provided which will determine free bromine or free chlorine residual and pH. At least five (5) standards shall allow measurements of the disinfectant in a range from three (3.0) to five (5.0) ppm. 
(o)  Sanitary facilities. Separate bather preparation facilities shall be provided for men and women. Each bather area shall consist of at least one (1) toilet, lavatory and shower. Each bather preparation room shall contain a floor drain. 
(p)  Ventilation. Equipment rooms, dressing rooms, and toilet spaces shall be lighted and ventilated. 
(Code 1980, § 6-415; Ord. No. 97-13, § 1, 2-27-1997)  
Sec. 14-877. - Decks. 
(a)  Decks and ramps shall be slip-resistant and free of standing water at all times. 
(b)  A paved, four (4) foot minimum, continuous unobstructed deck, which may include the coping, shall be provided around fifty (50) percent or more of the spa. 
(c)  The installation of deck coverings of synthetic fibrous material may be used only in separate patio or refreshment areas. 
(Code 1980, § 6-416; Ord. No. 97-13, § 1, 2-27-1997)  
Sec. 14-878. - Operation. 
(a)  Operating personnel. At least one (1) employee on duty during operating hours shall have completed the Standard First-Aid and Personal Safety Course as offered by the American National Red Cross or an equivalent course and shall be certified in cardiopulmonary resuscitation. 
(b)  Refilling. Spas shall be emptied, thoroughly cleaned with a disinfectant and refilled every week or at any time the turbidity is such that the bottom is not visible. 
(c)  Signs. A caution sign shall be posted adjacent to the spa's entrance. It shall contain the following warnings: 
CAUTION 
• 	Pregnant women, elderly persons, infants and persons requiring medical care, or suffering from high or low blood pressure should not enter the spa without prior medical consultation and permission from their doctor. 
	
• 	Use of the spa while under the influence of alcohol, tranquilizers, or other drugs or medicines that may cause drowsiness or may lead to serious consequences is prohibited. 
	
• 	Do not use at water temperatures greater than 104°F. 
	
• 	Do not use alone. 
	
• 	Unsupervised use by children under the age of fourteen (14) is prohibited. 
	
• 	Long exposure may result in nausea, dizziness, or fainting. 
	
• 	Keep all breakable objects out of the area. 
 
A sign shall be posted in the immediate vicinity of the spa stating the location of the nearest telephone and indicating that emergency telephone numbers are posted at that location. Those emergency telephone numbers shall include the name and phone number of the nearest available police, fire and/or rescue unit, physician, ambulance service, and hospital. 
A sign shall also be posted requiring a shower for each user prior to entering the spa and prohibiting oils, body lotion, and minerals in the water. 
(d)  Oils, body lotions, and minerals. The use of oils, body lotions, and minerals is prohibited. 
(e)  Personal hygiene. A shower shall be required before entering the spa. 
(f)  Water quality. The spa shall be closed when bacteriological analyses results show any of the following: 
(1)  Coliform concentrations of ten (10) per one hundred (100) ml in two (2) consecutive samples. 
(2)  Presence of fecal coliform in any sample or when the chlorine or bromine residual is below three (3.0) ppm as free chlorine, or three (3.0) ppm as free bromine. 
(Code 1980, § 6-417; Ord. No. 97-13, § 1, 2-27-1997)  
Sec. 14-879. - First aid kit. 
Each facility shall have a first aid kit which contains the following items: 
Two (2) units of three (3) inch bandage compress; two (2) units of eye dressing packet; two (2) units of triangular bandages; one (1) unit scissors and tweezers; one unit of one (1) inch adhesive tape; one (1) box band-aids of various sizes; antiseptic. 
(Code 1980, § 6-418; Ord. No. 97-13, § 1, 2-27-1997)  
Secs. 14-880—14-910. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIV. - BUILDING CONTRACTORS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 14-911. - Definitions. 
(a)  As used in this article, the term "building contractor" shall mean and include anyone engaged in the business of cement or concrete contracting, either flat, form or wall work, or as a masonry contractor; or as a carpenter contractor, or as a general building contractor; and engaged in the construction, alteration, demolition or repair of buildings or other structures, or sidewalks or street pavements. 
(b)  As used in this article, engaging in the construction, repair or alteration of any building, structure or street or sidewalk pavement in the city for which a permit is required under the ordinances of the city shall be construed as doing business as a contractor in the city. 
(Code 1980, § 6-31; Ord. of 12-22-1949, § 1)  
Sec. 14-912. - Compliance with laws required. 
It shall be the duty of all building contractors to comply with all ordinances relating to the construction of buildings or other structures, to the construction of street or sidewalk pavements, and all laws or ordinances pertaining to or regulating the activities that they are engaged in. 
(Code 1980, § 6-37; Ord. of 12-22-1949, § 4)  
Sec. 14-913. - Performance bond. 
When a building contractor shall build new construction on lots which have been heretofore undeveloped within the city limits, said contractor shall be required to install streets, curbs, sewers and infrastructure in conformity with current building regulations as approved by the city council, said cost to be borne by the contractor, prorata to the number of lots on such street. The contractor shall furnish to the city assurance of completion of all infrastructure requirements in a timely fashion in the form of a bond for performance in an amount of one hundred fifteen (115) percent of the estimated amount of completion costs, incorporating by reference the provisions of all contracts entered into to guarantee such completion. 
(Code 1980, § 6-38; Ord. No. 97-52, § 1, 9-29-1997)  
Secs. 14-914—14-930. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 14-931. - License required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to engage in business as a building contractor without first having obtained a license therefor. 
(b)  Prior to being issued a license, or upon annual renewal, each contractor who contracts to do work within the city limits shall post with the department of inspectional services a surety bond in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or as otherwise specified to indemnify and hold harmless the city against loss, costs, damage, judgement or liability of any kind whatsoever which the city may suffer or which may accrue against or be charged to the city or any of its officials arising out of or resulting from the conduct or operation of such business or the doings or failure to do any act in the connection herewith, in addition to any required license and permit fees. 
(c)  Any person violating this section shall be penalized by a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day any violation shall continue it shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1980, § 6-32; Ord. of 12-22-1949, §§ 1—6; Ord. No. 94-48, § 2, 8-11-1994; Ord. No. 97-51, § 1, 9-29-1997; Ord. No. 97-56, § 1, 10-9-1997)  
Sec. 14-932. - Subcontractors. 
Any person doing business as a subcontractor shall be construed as engaged in the business of a building contractor for which a license is required by this article. 
(Code 1980, § 6-33)  
Sec. 14-933. - Exception to article. 
The provisions of this article shall not be construed to require a license for the operation of the business of a plumbing contractor or for an electrical contractor who have registered pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1980, § 6-34; Ord. of 12-22-1949, §§ 1—6)  
Sec. 14-934. - License fees. 
(a)  The annual fee for a license required by this article shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00) for all general contractors and subcontractors, except for those persons subject to section 14-933 of this Code. 
(b)  The fee for a license obtained on or after July 1, of any year shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) for all general contractors and subcontractors, except for those persons subject to section 14-933 of this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 6-35; Ord. of 12-22-1949, § 5; Ord. No. 94-48, § 1, 8-11-1994; Ord. No. 05-87, § 2, 12-8-2005; Ord. No. 18-51, § 2, 9-13-2018)  
Sec. 14-935. - License revocation. 
Any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this article may be revoked by the city for the violation by the licensee of any of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1980, § 6-36; Ord. of 12-22-1949, § 4)  
Secs. 14-936—14-960. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVI. - HOUSE MOVING[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78. 
 
Sec. 14-961. - Permit. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to move any building on, through or over any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place without a permit from the building commissioner. 
(b)  Application. Applications for the permits required by this division shall be made in writing to the city clerk and shall state thereon the proposed route and the number of days it is intended that the building should occupy any portion of any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place. 
(c)  Approval; fee. Upon the approval of the intended route by the building commissioner, a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) plus ten dollars ($10.00) for each day or fraction thereof that it is intended that the building shall occupy any portion of any such public place shall be paid to the city clerk and the permit required by this article issued. An additional payment of five dollars ($5.00) for each day or fraction thereof over and above the time stated on the permit, during which any building shall occupy any such public place, shall be paid. 
(Code 1980, §§ 6-49, 6-50, 6-51; Ord. of 5-8-1958, § 13)  
Sec. 14-962. - Bond. 
Every person applying for a permit under this division shall submit with his application a bond in the sum of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) conditioned on his compliance with all the provisions of this article, and agreeing to pay, and holding the city harmless from any claim which may be made against it by reason of the occupying of any street, sidewalk, alley or other public place by the building or structure moved. 
(Code 1980, § 6-52)  
Sec. 14-963. - License. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful to engage in the business of house or garage moving, raising or storage without first having secured a license therefor. Applications for such licenses shall be made in writing to the city clerk. 
(b)  Fee. The fee for the license required by this division shall be one hundred thirty-five dollars ($135.00) per building. 
(Code 1980, §§ 6-64, 6-65; Ord. of 12-27-1973, § 34; Ord. No. 05-87, § 2, 12-8-2005)  
Sec. 14-964. - Lights and warnings. 
Whenever a street or alley is blocked by a house or structure which is being moved, warnings to that effect shall be placed by the city engineer so as to warn vehicles and persons from entering that portion of the street which is so blocked. The person moving any building through the streets shall keep warning signs and lanterns or lights at night on the building so as to guard any person or vehicle from colliding with it. 
(Code 1980, § 6-53)  
Sec. 14-965. - Wires. 
Whenever it shall be necessary to interfere with wires or cables of a public utility in moving a building, the terms of any special or franchise ordinance governing shall apply and the bond therein specified shall be given. If no such terms apply then the building commissioner shall estimate the expense of fixing the wires and the bond shall be given to cover this. 
(Code 1980, § 6-54)  
Sec. 14-966. - Planking street. 
The pavement of any street, alley or sidewalk on or along which any house is moved shall be protected by two-inch planks along the route. 
(Code 1980, § 6-55)  
Sec. 14-967. - Inspections. 
It shall be the duty of the chief of police to make or cause to be made such inspections as may be necessary to insure compliance with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1980, § 6-56)  
Secs. 14-968, 14-969. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVII. - VACANT BUILDINGS 
 
Sec. 14-970. - Intent. 
It is in the intent of this article to protect the public health, safety, and welfare by establishing a registration process for vacant buildings and requiring responsible parties to implement a maintenance plan for such buildings to remedy any public nuisance, prevent deterioration, unsightly blight and consequent adverse impact on the value of nearby property. 
This article shall not be construed to prevent the enforcement of other applicable laws, ordinances, codes and regulations which prescribe standards other than are provided herein, and in the event of conflict, the most restrictive shall apply. 
This article shall be construed liberally and justly to effect its purposes. 
(Ord. No. 11-30, § 2, 7-14, 2011)  
Sec. 14-971. - Declaration of policy. 
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city by: 
(1)  Establishing a program for the identification, registration and regulation of buildings which are or become vacant on and after the effective date of this article. 
(2)  Determining the responsibilities of owners of vacant buildings. 
(3)  Providing for the administration, enforcement, including abatement of public nuisances and imposition of penalties. 
(Ord. No. 11-30, § 2, 7-14, 2011)  
Sec. 14-972. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, and the interpretation and application thereof, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein, unless the context in which they are used shall indicate otherwise. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the singular number include the plural number and words in the plural number include the singular number. Words or phrases not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Building shall mean any structure occupied or intended for supporting or sheltering any occupancy or activity. 
Building official shall mean the building official, as designated by the director, as herein defined, for purposes of this Article. 
City shall mean the City of Calumet City, Cook County, Illinois. 
City Code shall mean the Municipal Code of the City of Calumet City, as from time to time supplemented and amended. 
Director shall mean the director of the department of inspectional services or his or her designee. 
Owner shall mean any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the state, county, or city as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court; or any such entity or designated agent owning, maintaining, operating or collecting rent for any building. Nothing contained in the definition herein should be construed to include a federal government mortgagee as an owner. 
Person shall mean a corporation, a partnership, or other entity as well as an individual. 
Premises shall mean a lot, plot or parcel of land including any structure thereon. 
Public nuisance shall mean and includes the following: 
(1)  The physical condition, or uses of any building regarded as a public nuisance at common law, under the Illinois Complied Statutes, or under the City Code; 
(2)  Any physical condition, use or occupancy or any building or its appurtenances considered an attractive nuisance to children, including, but not limited to, abandoned wells, shafts, basements, excavations, and unsafe fences or structures; 
(3)  Any building which has unsanitary sewerage or plumbing facilities; 
(4)  Any building designated by the director as unsafe for human habitation or use; 
(5)  Any building which is manifestly capable of being a fire hazard, or manifestly unsafe or insecure as to endanger life, limb or property; 
(6)  Any building which is unsanitary, or which is littered with rubbish or garbage, or which has an uncontrolled growth of weeds; 
(7)  Any building that is dangerous, in a state of dilapidation, deterioration or decay; faulty construction; open or vacant doors or windows, or other openings are boarded up or secured, by any means other than conventional methods used in design of the building or permitted for new construction of similar type; damaged by fire to the extent as not to provide shelter, in danger of collapse or failure and dangerous to anyone on or near the premises; or 
(8)  Any building defined or determined as dangerous or unsafe by any section of the City Code. 
Vacant building shall mean a building or portion thereof which lacks the habitual presence of human beings who have a legal right to be on the premises, or at which substantially all lawful business or construction operations or residential occupancy has ceased or which is substantially devoid of content, including buildings ordered vacated by the director pursuant to authority granted by the City Code, state law or a court of competent jurisdiction. In determining whether a building is "vacant," the building official may consider these factors, among others: 
(1)  A building at which substantially all lawful residential or business activity has ceased, or the building is unoccupied and secured by boarding, or other similar means, or is unoccupied and unsecured; 
(2)  The percentage of the overall square footage of occupied to unoccupied space or the overall number of occupied or unoccupied units shall be considered. 
(3)  The building is substantially devoid of contents. The condition and value of fixtures or personal property in the building are relevant to this determination. 
(4)  The building lacks utility services, i.e., water, sewer, electric or natural gas. 
(5)  The building is the subject of a foreclosure action. 
(6)  The building is not actively for sale as part of a contractual agreement to sell the building, the building lacks "for sale", "for rent" or similar signage. 
(7)  The building is unoccupied and the presence or recurrence of uncorrected code violations exist; 
(8)  The building is unoccupied and has been the site of unlawful activity within the previous six (6) months; 
(9)  The building is unlawfully occupied; or 
(10)  The building is unoccupied and during such time the city has issued an order to correct a public nuisance condition and said condition has not been corrected in a code-compliant manner. 
But not including: 
(1)  Vacant buildings which are undergoing construction, renovation, or rehabilitation and which are in compliance with all applicable ordinances, codes, legislation and regulations, and for which construction, renovation or rehabilitation is proceeding diligently to completion 
(Ord. No. 11-30, § 2, 7-14, 2011; Ord. No. 13-59, § 2, 10-24-2013)  
Sec. 14-973. - Vacant building determination; notice. 
The building official shall evaluate all buildings in the city that the building official believes to be unoccupied and make a determination for each as to whether the building is a vacant building within the meaning of section 14-972. The building official may determine that a building which meets any of the criteria set forth in section 14-972 is not to be regulated under this article for a stated period, if consideration of the building under this article would not serve the public health, welfare and safety and makes written finding in support of the decision that state the factual basis for the determination. 
For buildings the building official determines to be vacant buildings, the building official shall, within thirty (30) days of making that determination, send notice of such to the last taxpayer of record listed on the most recent Cook County tax roll requesting the registration of the building and submission of a vacant building plan with the building official. In the event any public nuisance exists in connection with the building or premises thereto then the building official shall specify in the notice the existence of such nuisances. Said notice of determination shall be sent first-class United States Mail, with proper postage prepaid. Failure of delivery shall not excuse a person from complying with the article. The building official may personally serve or cause personal service of the notice of determination. Any person making such service shall execute an affidavit attesting to the facts of service. The building official shall maintain an affidavit of such mailing for each notice of determination sent. 
The notice shall contain a statement of the obligations of the owner of a building determined to be a vacant building, a copy of the registration from the owner is required to file pursuant to this article and a notice of the owner's right to appeal the building official's determination. 
(Ord. No. 11-30, § 2, 7-14, 2011)  
Sec. 14-974. - Appeal of determination of vacant building. 
(a)  An owner of a building determined by the building official to be a vacant building may appeal that determination to the director. Such appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the director within fifteen (15) days of the date of mailing of the notice of determination. The filing of an appeal stays the owner's obligation to register the building as required by this article. The appeal shall contain a complete statement of the reasons the owner disputes the building official's determination, shall set forth specific facts in support thereof, and shall include all evidence the owner relies upon to support the appeal. The director shall decide the appeal on the basis of facts presented by the owner in the written appeal and the building official's written determination. 
(b)  The burden is upon the owner to present sufficient evidence to persuade the director that had the evidence been known to the building official at the time the building official made the determination, the building official would more likely than not have determined that the subject building was not a vacant building. 
(c)  The director shall send written notice of the decision to the owner within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the appeal. The director may, but is not required to, seek additional information from the owner. The director may, upon written notice thereof to the owner, take no more than thirty (30) additional days, to decide the appeal if it is determined that such additional time is required for consideration of the appeal. The decision of the director shall be final. 
(d)  An owner who wishes to challenge the applicability of the article to their building without the building official's determination having been made, shall set forth specific facts to support non-applicability in writing to the building official. In the event the building official determines that the subject building is a vacant building, the owner shall have the right to appeal the building official's determination as provided for herein. 
(Ord. No. 11-30, § 2, 7-14, 2011)  
Sec. 14-975. - Obligation to register vacant building. 
(a)  Except as provided in this article, whenever any building in the city is vacant or the owner who knows or from all the facts and circumstances should know, that their building is or has become a vacant building, or the owner, which the building official determines at any time to be a vacant building, or the owner whose appeal from the building official's determination has been denied shall register such building as a vacant building and submit a vacant building plan within thirty (30) days after either the date of the building official's notice of determination or occurrence of the facts that would cause a reasonable person to believe that the building was a vacant building, or denial of the appeal, whichever is applicable. 
(b)  Registration does not exonerate the owner from compliance with all applicable City Code requirements, including this article, nor does it preclude any of the actions the city is authorized to take pursuant to this article or elsewhere in the City Code. Registration shall be deemed as prima facie proof of the statements therein contained in any administrative enforcement proceeding or court proceeding instituted by the city against the owner of a building. 
(Ord. No. 11-30, § 2, 7-14, 2011)  
Sec. 14-976. - Registration of vacant building; annual fee. 
The owner registering a vacant building shall supply the following information on such form provided by the city. The form shall set forth, but not be limited to, the following information: 
(1)  Name, address, and telephone number of owner, a post office box address is not an acceptable address. 
(2)  Name, address, and telephone number of any local agent or representative, a post office box address is not an acceptable address. 
(3)  Name, address and telephone number of all persons with any legal interest in the property, building, and premises, a post office box address is not an acceptable address. 
(4)  Legal description and permanent index number of the premises on which the building is situated. 
(5)  The common address of the building. 
(6)  Date on which building became vacant. 
(7)  Vacant building plan. 
(8)  The form shall require the owner to indicate his or her "acceptance of notice" consenting to service of notices sent or required to be sent, pursuant to this article, by any designated local agent or representative. Any owner who fails to register or fails to renew registration or fails to maintain as current with the building official the information required regarding the person designated to accept notice and service of process of a vacant building under this article shall be deemed to consent to receive, by posting at the building, any and all notices of violations and all process in an administrative proceeding brought to enforce code provisions concerning the building. 
(9)  Obtain property and liability insurance and maintain such insurance for as long as the building is vacant, and file evidence of such insurance with the building official. 
The vacant building registration shall be filed with the building official accompanied with a two hundred dollar ($200.00) annual non-prorated non-refundable filing fee. All eleemosynary, religious, education, government and benevolent property are exempt from the payment of the annual registration fee, but shall otherwise comply with the requirements of this article. 
Registration of a vacant building shall be valid for a period of one (1) year. If the building is vacant at the expiration of any registration period, then the owner shall re-register such building and pay such annual filing fee, as herein required. 
(Ord. No. 11-30, § 2, 7-14, 2011)  
Sec. 14-977. - Vacant building plan. 
When a building is registered as required herein, the owner or agent shall submit a vacant building plan. The plan shall contain the following: 
(1)  A plan of action to repair any doors, windows, or other openings which are boarded up or otherwise secured by any means other than conventional methods used in the design of the building or permitted for new construction of similar type. Boarding shall be accomplished with materials and methods described by the city. The proposed repair shall result in openings secured by conventional methods used in the design of the building or by methods permitted for new construction of similar type. 
(2)  For buildings and premises thereof which are identified as being or containing public nuisances, then the vacant building plan shall contain a plan of action to remedy such public nuisances. 
(3)  For each required plan, a time schedule shall be submitted identifying a date of commencement of repair and date of completion of repair for each improperly secured opening and identified nuisance. 
(4)  When the owner proposes to demolish the vacant building, then the owner shall submit a plan and time schedule for such demolition. 
(5)  A plan of action to maintain the building and premises thereof in conformance with this article and the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 11-30, § 2, 7-14, 2011)  
Sec. 14-978. - Approval of vacant building plan. 
(a)  The building official shall review the proposed vacant building plan in accordance with the standards below. The building official shall send notice to the owner of his determination. 
(b)  Standards for plan approval. In considering appropriateness of a vacant building plan, the director shall consider the following and shall make written findings in accordance herewith: 
(1)  The purposes of this article and intent of the corporate authorities to minimize the time a building is boarded or otherwise vacant. 
(2)  The affect of the building and the proposed plan on adjoining property. 
(3)  The length of time the building has been vacant. 
(4)  The presence of any public nuisances on the property. 
(5)  The likelihood that the plan or portion(s) thereof will prevent or ameliorate the condition it is designed to address. 
(Ord. No. 11-30, § 2, 7-14, 2011)  
Sec. 14-979. - Authority to modify vacant building plan, right of appeal. 
The building official shall, upon notice to the owner, have the right to modify the vacant building plan by modifying the dates of performance, the proposed methods of action, or by imposing additional requirements consistent with this article, if the building official deems necessary to protect the public health, safety, or welfare. If the owner objects to the modifications made by the building official, such owner shall have the right of appeal to the director for final determination. Such appeal shall be filed with the director within fifteen (15) days of the date of mailing of the building official's notice of modification. The appeal shall contain a complete statement of the reasons the owner disputes the building official's determination, shall set forth specific facts in support thereof, and shall include all evidence the owner relies upon to support the appeal. The director shall decide the appeal on the basis of facts presented by the owner in the written appeal and the building official's proposed modifications or written determination. The director shall send written notice of the decision to the owner within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the appeal. The director may, upon written notice thereof to the owner, take no more than thirty (30) additional days, to decide the appeal if it is determined that such additional time is required. The decision of the director shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 11-30, § 2, 7-14, 2011)  
Sec. 14-980. - Failure to comply with vacant building plan. 
Failure to have an approved plan within thirty (30) days of filing the registration form or failure to comply with the approved plan, at anytime, shall constitute a violation of this article subjecting the owner of the building to penalties as provided in this article and to any remedies the City may avail itself of as provided for herein and elsewhere in the City Code, including, but limited to, an action to compel correction. 
(Ord. No. 11-30, § 2, 7-14, 2011)  
Sec. 14-981. - Maintenance of alarm and sprinkler systems. 
Whenever an owner is required to maintain an alarm or sprinkler system, the owner shall continue to maintain said alarm or sprinkler system during all times that a building is vacant. This shall include any and all necessary systems and appurtenances incident thereto to keep said alarm or sprinkler operable, including, but not limited to, source(s) of water, heat or electricity. 
(Ord. No. 11-30, § 2, 7-14, 2011)  
Sec. 14-982. - Owner responsibility to secure vacant building. 
Upon written notice of the building official, an owner shall provide bonded, licensed and insured guard service at the vacant building between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. Such service shall remain in place until the building official gives written notice to the owner that the service is no longer required. Such service shall be required when the building official makes a written determination that the vacant building constitutes a fire hazard, is otherwise dangerous to human life or the public welfare, involves illegal or improper use, occupancy, or maintenance, under such conditions that securing the building are insufficient to prevent the actual or threatened harm. 
(Ord. No. 11-30, § 2, 7-14, 2011)  
Sec. 14-983. - Other enforcement. 
The registration of a vacant building shall not preclude action by the city to demolish or to take other action against the building pursuant to other provisions of this article, the City Code, or other applicable legislation. 
(Ord. No. 11-30, § 2, 7-14, 2011)  
Sec. 14-984. - Change of ownership. 
The vacant building plan shall remain in effect notwithstanding a change in ownership. The new owner is required to file a new registration with the building official. The new registration shall be in the same form as the original registration, however, any remaining annual filing fee paid shall be prorated and credited to the new owner for such time remaining on the original registration. 
(Ord. No. 11-30, § 2, 7-14, 2011)  
Sec. 14-985. - Promulgation of rules and regulations. 
The director may issue rules and regulations for the administration of this article. These rules may designate materials and methods which must be used to secure a building or premises. 
(Ord. No. 11-30, § 2, 7-14, 2011)  
Sec. 14-986. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Any person found to have violated any provision of this article shall be subject to a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) minimum per day per violation up to seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) maximum per day per violation, in addition to any other legal or equitable remedies available to the city. Such other remedies include, but are not limited to, injunctive relief, application to a court of competent jurisdiction for a receiver, demolition, or condemnation, contracting for the repair or purchase of the premises, or foreclosure of any lien the city may have thereon. 
(b)  A separate and distinct offense shall be committed each day on which such person or persons shall violate the provisions of this article. 
(c)  The city may enforce this article in its administrative adjudication system or through the Circuit Court of Cook County, Illinois. 
(d)  Nothing herein contained shall prohibit the city from immediately condemning as provided by law or the City Code, a building or taking other immediate action upon a determination that the building is a public nuisance or poses an imminent danger to the occupants of the building, or the public, health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 11-30, § 2, 7-14, 2011)  
Chapter 18 - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 26; planning, ch. 66; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78; utilities, ch. 94; subdivisions, app. A; zoning, app. B. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 18-1—18-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 
 
Sec. 18-31. - Creation. 
There is hereby created the department of community and economic development. 
(Code 1980, § 2-481; Ord. No. 01-19, § 2, 5-10-2001)  
Sec. 18-32. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the department shall be to develop programs for neighborhood rehabilitation and community preservation and to promote and secure economic development for the benefit of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 2-482; Ord. No. 01-19, § 2, 5-10-2001)  
Sec. 18-33. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 07-125, adopted Dec. 13, 2007, deleted § 18-33, which pertained to executive board; membership and duties and derived from the 1980 Code; and Ord. No. 01-19, adopted May 10, 2001.  
Sec. 18-34. - Coordinator. 
There is hereby created the position of economic development coordinator of the department of economic and community development, who shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 2-484; Ord. No. 01-19, § 2, 5-10-2001)  
Sec. 18-35. - Employees. 
Such personnel as deemed necessary by the city council shall be employed in the department at such wages and compensation as set from time to time by the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 2-485; Ord. No. 01-19, § 2, 5-10-2001)  
Sec. 18-36. - Sale or lease of surplus real estate. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, the term "surplus real estate" means any real estate owned by the city and, in the opinion of the city council, deemed no longer necessary, appropriate, required for the use of, profitable to or in the best interest of the city to be owned by it. 
(b)  The mayor and city council, by resolution, may authorize the sale of any surplus real estate or the leasing of any surplus real estate for a term not exceeding ninety-nine (99) years and shall establish a sale price deemed by them to be in the best interest of the residents of the city. 
(c)  The resolution authorizing the sale or lease of surplus real estate may direct such sale or lease to be conducted by the office of the corporation counsel. The resolution shall also contain pertinent information concerning the size, use and zoning of the real estate and the terms of sale. 
(Ord. No. 07-68, § 1, 6-14-2007)  
Secs. 18-37—18-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Section 6 of Ord. No. 07-126, adopted Dec. 13, 2007, deleted art. III, which consisted of § 18-71, pertained to the housing authority and derived from the 1980 Code; Ord. No. 94-18, adopted May 12, 1994; Ord. No. 95-19, adopted May 11, 1995; and Ord. No. 95-37, adopted Aug. 10, 1995. 
 
Secs. 18-71—18-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - EQUITY ASSURANCE PROGRAM FOR SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCES 
 
Sec. 18-101. - Creation of program; purpose; name. 
There is hereby created an equity assurance program to be administered by the equity assurance commission of the city for the benefit of the citizens of the city. The purpose of the program is to insure the single-family residences in the city against the possibility of economic loss, and thereby help to eliminate irrational fears of racial change. The purpose of the program is not to insure against a regional or national decline in values in the single-family housing market. Therefore, in the event of a general economic decline in the value of single-family homes in the Chicago-Cook County-Metropolitan area single-family home market, the mayor and city council of the city reserve the right to review, revise and suspend payments under the equity assurance program. This program will provide greater community stability and will strengthen the tax base of the community by preserving and improving single-family home values. 
(Code 1980, § 2-411; Ord. No. 86-2, § 1, 1-23-1986)  
Sec. 18-102. - Creation of the equity assurance commission. 
(a)  There is hereby created an equity assurance commission (hereafter referred to as EAC) whose role will be to administer the equity assurance program (hereafter referred to as EAP). The specific duties and functions of the EAC in policy and administration shall include the following: 
(1)  Conduct the day-to-day operations of the EAP, including the employment of appropriate personnel, acquisition of necessary office space, and the receipt and disbursement of EAP funds. 
(2)  Establish policies and procedures for the EAP and recommend substantive changes to the city council. 
(3)  Select and enter into contractual arrangements necessary to administer the EAP subject to the approval of the mayor and city council. 
(b)  The equity assurance commission shall consist of seven (7) individuals, appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council. The initial terms shall be as follows: 
(1)  Two (2) members whose terms shall expire in one (1) year. 
(2)  Two (2) members whose terms shall expire in two (2) years. 
(3)  Three (3) members whose terms shall expire in three (3) years. 
No member shall serve more than three (3) consecutive years. 
(Code 1980, § 2-412; Ord. No. 86-2, § 2, 1-23-1986)  
Sec. 18-103. - Definitions. 
As used in this article the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed as follows: 
Application for standard appraisal fee means the fee established from time to time by the EAC for a standard appraisal on a single-family residence which becomes the application fee under the EAP. 
Appraised valuation means the dollar appraisal on the insured residence as determined by the certified appraiser on the appraised valuation date. 
Appraised valuation date means the date of certification of participation. 
Certified appraiser means one (1) of the members of a panel of appraisers approved by the EAC for determining appraised valuations under the provisions of this article. 
Family members means spouse, children, parents, parents of spouse, brothers and sisters. 
Insured residence means the single-family residence owned and used continuously as the place of residence by the member and described in the certificate of participation and entitled to coverage under this act. 
Member means a person who owns and occupies a single-family residence in the city and has applied for and been accepted as a member of the EAP as indicated by a certificate of participation; such family members who reside in the insured residence at least one (1) year prior to the death or incapacity of a member by a certificate of participation shall also be deemed members. 
Owner means the titleholder or beneficiary of the trust. 
Physical perils means physical occurrences such as, but not limited to, fire, windstorm, hail, water damage, nuclear explosion or seepage, war, insurrection, wear and tear, cracking, settling, vermin, rodents, vandalism, etc., and all such related occurrences or acts of God. 
Single-family residence means a building having not more than one (1) dwelling unit principally occupied by the members of no more than one (1) family, any appurtenant unoccupied structures, and grounds and private approaches thereto, provided that the dwelling is used principally as a private residence and that any business use of the premises is incidental to its use as a private dwelling. Exceptions may be owner occupied apartment buildings of not more than four (4) units; and owner occupied houses with a common wall separating each unit. Condominiums are excluded from the equity assurance program. 
Valuation at sale date means the dollar value of the insured residence stated in the consummated sales contract for the insured residence between the member and the prospective buyer. 
(Code 1980, § 2-413; Ord. No. 86-2, § 3, 1-23-1986)  
Sec. 18-104. - Eligible applicants. 
Those persons eligible to apply for membership in EAP shall be limited to owner occupants of single-family residences in the city and the exceptions listed in section 18-103. 
(Code 1980, § 2-414; Ord. No. 86-2, § 4, 1-23-1986)  
Sec. 18-105. - Application procedures. 
(a)  Eligible persons shall apply to the plan by submitting the application for standard appraisal fee. The standard appraisal fee for a single family residence is two hundred dollars ($200.00), one-half (½) of which is payable by the applicant and one-half (½) of which is subsidized by the city. The standard appraisal fee for owner-occupied two (2), three (3) or four (4) unit apartment buildings or townhouses is two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), one hundred dollars ($100.00) payable by the applicant and the remainder subsidized by the city. Upon receipt of the appraisal fee, the dwelling of the applicant shall be appraised by a certified appraiser to determine the current appraised valuation of the residence. 
(b)  A certificate of participation shall then be issued to the applicant certifying membership in the EAP and detailing the appraised valuation, the appraised valuation date, the address and description of the insured residence, and a summary of the coverages, conditions, and exclusions of this article. 
(Code 1980, § 2-415; Ord. No. 86-2, § 5, 1-23-1986; Ord. No. 96-26, § 1, 5-9-1996)  
Sec. 18-106. - Coverage provided by the equity assurance program. 
Members of their estates which are covered pursuant to section 18-107 of this program shall be paid eighty (80) percent of the difference between the appraised valuation as determined by this article and the valuation at sale date determined in section 18-107 below if the appraised valuation is higher than the valuation at sale date. Coverage provided by the EAP shall only apply to sales made five (5) years or more after date of issuance of the certificate of participation and coverage shall be provided subject to all of the terms, conditions and stipulations provided within this article. 
(Code 1980, § 2-416; Ord. No. 86-2, § 6, 1-23-1986)  
Sec. 18-107. - Procedures for obtaining benefits. 
(a)  In order to be eligible for benefits, a member must follow the procedures set forth herein. 
(b)  When an insured residence is placed on the market with the intent of sale, the member shall submit verifiable evidence of such placement including the date that such placement took place. Verifiable evidence may include a copy of advertisements for sale, a contract with a licensed real estate broker, or other evidence found satisfactory to a majority of the EAC. 
(c)  Upon receipt of verifiable proof by the EAC of the act of placing the insured residence on the market, a one hundred twenty (120) day waiting period shall commence from the date the insured residence is placed on the market. During the first ninety (90) days of the one hundred twenty (120) day waiting period, no coverage is afforded under this article; during the last thirty (30) days of the one hundred twenty (120) day waiting period, coverage shall be afforded pursuant to subsection (f) of this section. 
(d)  A member may offer his insured residence for sale or may exclusively list said residence with a real estate broker for sixty (60) days from the date the insured residence is placed on the market. Thereafter, a member must notify the EAC in writing of his inability to obtain an offer for purchase at the appraised valuation or more and further must agree to list the insured residence with the South Suburban Board of Realtors Multiple Listing Service or an agency with comparable sales coverage in the City of Calumet City for not less than sixty (60) additional days or until the insured residence is sold, whichever is sooner. 
(e)  Seventy-five (75) days from date insured residence is placed on the market, an inspection of the insured residence shall be made. That inspection, by a certified appraiser, shall determine if the insured residence is currently in at least substantially the same state of repair as on the appraised valuation date. If the insured residence fails to meet this standard, the following procedures must be followed: 
(1)  The certified appraiser will determine the percentage depreciation of the insured residence due to the failure of the owner to maintain the premises. 
(2)  This percentage figure shall be multiplied by the appraised valuation to determine the dollar depreciation due to failure to maintain the premises. 
(3)  This dollar depreciation shall be subtracted from the appraised valuation to derive a lower appraised valuation to be used for the purpose of determining the amount of coverage afforded under this article. 
(f)  From ninety (90) through one hundred twenty (120) days from the date the insured residence is placed on the market, coverage shall be in effect as hereinafter set forth. During this period, a member shall immediately forward to the EAC all offers for purchase at less than the appraised valuation as determined in subsection (e) of this section. Within three (3) working days from receipt of the offer(s) for purchase, the EAC shall either: 
(1)  Approve the offer for purchase, whereupon the member must accept the offer and the EAC shall authorize the payment of the amount of coverage afforded by section 18-106 of this article subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Sales involving eminent domain shall be covered as set forth in section 18-103(k). 
b.  Sales subsequent to an insured property and casualty loss shall be covered as determined by the appraised valuation in section 18-107(e). 
(2)  Reject the offer, whereupon the member shall continue showing the insured residence to prospective purchasers an additional one hundred twenty (120) days listed with the South Suburban Realtors Association Multiple Listing. 
(g)  Days used to satisfy real estate sales contracts contingencies, including mortgage contingency provisions, shall not be used in compounding the one hundred twenty (120) day waiting period. 
(h)  Where an insured residence is to be acquired by use of eminent domain, the following procedures shall apply: 
(1)  If the member rejects an offer from the condemning body equal to or greater than the appraised value, there shall be no coverage under the EAP. 
(2)  If the condemning body offers less than the appraised value, the EAP may either: 
a.  Offer to pay eighty (80) percent of the difference between the appraised value and the offering price if the member agrees to sell at the offered price. If the member does not agree to sell at the offered price, then in no event shall the member receive from the EAP any payment in excess of the EAP payment provided for in this subsection (h)(2)a. 
b.  Advise the member that the offer is inadequate and should be refused. If the member under these circumstances desires to accept the offer, then the property shall be acquired from the member by the EAP at the offered price plus eighty (80) percent of the difference between the offered price and the appraised value. If the member refuses the offer pursuant to this subsection (h)(2)b and the court determination of the value of the property is less than the appraised value, then the EAP shall pay eighty (80) percent of the difference between the judgment and the appraised value. 
(Code 1980, § 2-417; Ord. No. 86-2, § 7, 1-23-1986; Ord. No. 86-12, § 1, 4-24-1986)  
Sec. 18-108. - Other conditions. 
Members shall agree to abide by all conditions, stipulations and provisions of this article and shall not be eligible for coverage hereby unless all such conditions, stipulations and provisions have been met. 
(Code 1980, § 2-418; Ord. No. 86-2, § 8, 1-23-1986)  
Sec. 18-109. - Exclusions. 
(a)  Financial losses due to the occurrence of physical perils shall not be afforded coverage by this article. 
(b)  Depreciation due to failure to maintain in good repair the insured residence shall not be covered. This exclusion is reflected in the adjustment procedure of section 18-107(e), whereby a new, lower appraised valuation is derived reflecting this type of depreciation. 
(c)  Any person who knowingly affirms falsely to any matter or thing required to be affirmed by the terms of the equity assurance program is guilty of perjury. 
(d)  Any fraud, misrepresentation, or concealment on the part of a member in any process involving this article or the EAC shall negate all coverage provided that member by this article. 
(Code 1980, § 2-419; Ord. No. 86-2, § 9, 1-23-1986)  
Sec. 18-110. - Methods for establishing a new appraised valuation and appraised valuation date. 
(a)  A member has the option of applying for a new appraisal by a certified appraiser. This new appraised valuation shall be subject to all of the conditions, stipulations and provisions of this article. 
(b)  The member will be issued a new certificate of participation which will state the new appraised valuation. 
(c)  Requests for a new appraised valuation will be initiated by a member no more than once within any twelve (12) month period. 
(Code 1980, § 2-420; Ord. No. 86-2, § 10, 1-23-1986)  
Sec. 18-111. - Arbitration procedure. 
(a)  If a member or applicant disagrees with the appraised valuation determined by the certified appraiser, a three (3) person arbitration panel will be established composed of the following persons: The certified appraiser, an independent appraiser selected by the member or applicant, and an umpire selected and approved by these two (2) appraisers. If an umpire cannot be agreed upon within thirty (30) days, the umpire shall be selected by a judge of a court of record within the jurisdiction. The appraised valuation agreed to by any two (2) of the three (3) panel members shall be binding on all parties involved under this article. The cost of the independent appraiser shall be borne by the member or applicant. The cost of the umpire shall be borne equally by the applicant and the EAC. The cost of the certified appraiser shall be paid by the EAC. 
(b)  If a member disagrees with the amount of coverage afforded as determined by the EAC under this article, a three (3) person arbitration panel shall be established composed of the following persons: An appraiser chosen by the member, an appraiser chosen by the EAC, and an umpire chosen and approved by these two (2) appraisers. If an umpire cannot be agreed upon within thirty (30) days the umpire shall be selected by a judge of a court of record within the jurisdiction. The amount of coverage under the provisions of this article agreed to by any two (2) of these three (3) persons shall be binding on all parties involved under this article. Each party shall bear the cost of the appraiser chosen by them and the cost of the umpire and other arbitration expenses shall be evenly divided between the member and the EAC. 
(Code 1980, § 2-421; Ord. No. 86-2, § 11, 1-23-1986)  
Sec. 18-112. - Suits. 
No suit brought under the terms of this article shall be sustainable in a court of law or equity unless all conditions, stipulations and provisions of this article have been complied with, and unless the suit is brought within twelve (12) months after the sales contract signed by the prospective buyer and the affidavit executed by the prospective buyer and seller have been presented to the EAC. 
(Code 1980, § 2-422; Ord. No. 86-2, § 12, 1-23-1986)  
Sec. 18-113. - Other insurance. 
If other insurance or payment is available to provide coverage similar to that provided by this article, the EAC shall not be liable for a greater proportion of the loss than the amount of coverage provided by this article bears to the total amount of coverage available from all sources. 
(Code 1980, § 2-423; Ord. No. 86-2, § 13, 1-23-1986)  
Sec. 18-114. - Amendments. 
The EAP may be amended by the city council, but no such amendment shall substantially affect rights that have been vested pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1980, § 2-424; Ord. No. 86-2, § 14, 1-23-1986)  
Sec. 18-115. - Penalty. 
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall in addition to other remedies provided by law be fined not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense. 
(Code 1980, § 2-425; Ord. No. 86-2, § 15, 1-23-1986)  
ARTICLE V. - LOT NEXT-DOOR PROGRAM 
 
Sec. 18-116. - Establishment of program. 
Pursuant to the powers and authority granted under Article VII of the Constitution of the State of Illinois of 1970, and the home rule powers granted thereunder, the lot next-door program is hereby established by the City of Calumet City, a home rule unit of government. The lot next-door program shall be administered by the department of community and economic development. 
(Ord. No. 07-69, § 1, 6-14-2007)  
Sec. 18-117. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter: 
Adjacent neighbor means a person who owns and occupies, as their primary residence, an improved parcel of real property immediately adjacent to a city-owned parcel of non-buildable vacant property, and who is not delinquent in the payment of any property taxes or any debt owed to the City of Calumet City, County of Cook or State of Illinois. 
City means the City of Calumet City. 
Department means the department of community and economic development. 
LNDP means the lot next-door program. 
Parcel means a parcel of vacant real property which is bounded on at least one (1) side by an owner-occupied improved parcel of residential real property, which is occupied by the owner as their primary residence. 
(Ord. No. 07-69, § 1, 6-14-2007)  
Sec. 18-118. - List of city-owned real estate; required. 
The department shall prepare and maintain a list of city-owned real estate which shall include those parcels available for sale under LNDP. This list shall be made available to the public during normal business hours. 
(Ord. No. 07-69, § 1, 6-14-2007)  
Sec. 18-119. - Minimum purchase price required; sale procedures. 
The minimum purchase price of any parcel sold pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Upon receipt of an offer by an adjacent neighbor to purchase a parcel, the department shall give written notice by certified mail to any owner of additional adjacent property indicating that the department may accept the offer of the adjacent neighbor unless, within thirty (30) days, the additional adjacent neighbor notifies the department of his/her desire to purchase one-half (½) of the parcel for five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 07-69, § 1, 6-14-2007)  
Sec. 18-120. - Approval by city council. 
Any proposed conveyance under the LNDP must be approved by a majority of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 07-69, § 1, 6-14-2007)  
Sec. 18-121. - Property index number consolidation. 
After conveyance, the current property index number shall be terminated and the parcel, or that portion conveyed to each adjacent neighbor, shall be consolidated with the property index number of the adjacent neighbor's primary residence. 
(Ord. No. 07-69, § 1, 6-14-2007)  
Sec. 18-122. - Covenants in deed; termination of covenants. 
Any deed conveying a parcel to an adjacent neighbor pursuant to the provisions of the LNDP may contain covenants which (1) prohibit the adjacent neighbor from conveying, assigning or otherwise transferring the parcel except in conjunction with the conveyance of the parcel owned by the adjacent neighbor; and (2) require the adjacent neighbor to maintain the parcel in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal Code of Calumet City. The covenants shall terminate five (5) years after the date of the conveyance to the adjacent neighbor. 
(Ord. No. 07-69, § 1, 6-14-2007)  
Sec. 18-123. - Rules and regulations. 
The department may establish rules, regulations and procedures for the advertising, bidding and sale of parcels pursuant to the provisions of the LNDP. All such rules, regulations and procedures shall be published and made available by the department. 
(Ord. No. 07-69, § 1, 6-14-2007)  
Secs. 18-124—18-129. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - BUSINESS RETENTION GRANT PROGRAM 
 
Sec. 18-130. - Establishment of grant program. 
A business retention grant program is hereby established by the city with such funding level being determined by the city council, on an annual basis, and administered by the department of community and economic development and the mayor's advisory committee on business development. 
(Ord. No. 08-27, § 2, 5-8-2008)  
Sec. 18-131. - Grant program, rules, regulations and funding requirements. 
The coordinator of the department of community and economic development shall establish rules, regulations and procedures necessary for the administration of the grant program to allow for the submission of applications and evaluation of grant program funding requests by the mayor's advisory committee on business development, pursuant to the following requirements: 
(a)  Grant program funding request shall be allocated in amounts no less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) to a qualifying and for-profit business enterprise located in a commercial or industrial zoning district of the city not in arrears of any amount due or owing the city; 
(b)  Every project approved for grant program funding shall support private investment and shall be used to aid a business enterprise in an expansion plan, a real property improvement or such other endeavor providing for continued or increased employment opportunities; 
(c)  Every grant program funding award shall be a debt obligation due and owing the city against the business enterprise, as a recordable lien on the real property of the business, which shall be released by the city after a period of five (5) years and pursuant to all grant program funding rules, regulations and procedures; and 
(d)  Upon the submission of all required application documentation for a grant program funding request, the department of community and economic development and the mayor's advisory committee on business development shall determine eligibility and recommend any necessary action for the disbursement of a grant program funding award for approval by a majority vote of the city council before disbursement. 
(Ord. No. 08-27, § 2, 5-8-2008)  
Chapter 22 - EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 30; law enforcement, ch. 46. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 22-1. - Ambulance service fees. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Advanced  life support means the use of advanced paramedic equipment for life threatening injuries and/or sickness, including heart monitoring equipment and the administering of intravenous fluid and medications. The term advanced life support also includes the prescribed medications carried by the paramedical team for symptomatic injuries and/or illness and the use of telemetry for the notification of the resource hospital or the use of specific airway maintenance materials and the application of anti-shock devices. 
Basic  life support means any call which is not advanced life support. This includes responses for first aid and transport for victims who are sick and/or injured. 
Extrication  means any use of hand tools, forcible entry tools, battery powered tools, hydraulic tools, equipment or mechanical leverage required to remove an individual from a vehicle, building or debris. 
Hazardous  materials cleanup means the use of an damming, diverting or absorption of a hazardous substance or the use of detergents, foams or other chemical agents to dilute or dissolve a hazardous substance; provided that the amount and nature of the substance is such that it does not require a hazardous materials advisor be present to oversee operations. Incidents that require the presence of a hazardous materials advisor shall be subject to those regulations and fees, as described in chapter 26. 
(b)  Amount of fees. 
(1)  The fee structure for ambulance service shall be set at the following amounts: 
ALS treatment and transport ..... $800.00 
BLS treatment and transport ..... 700.00 
(2)  There shall also be a fee for ALS and BLS treatment without transport. These fees shall be separate from any fees billed by our resource hospital for supplies used in treatment. The fees shall be: 
ALS ..... $275.00 
BLS ..... 200.00 
(3)  Fees for mileage, oxygen and EKG therapy shall be billed at the following amounts: 
Oxygen ..... $50.00 
EKG ..... 60.00 
Mileage, per mile ..... 7.00 
(4)  Fees for extrication, cleanup, vehicle use and staff time shall be billed at the following amounts: 
Extrication ..... $500.00 
Vehicle Use, per hour ..... 125.00 
Staff Work, per hour ..... 35.00 
Command Response ..... 100.00 
Hazardous Materials Cleanup ..... 500.00 
(c)  Payment of fees. Said fees shall be paid to the city by the individual receiving such ambulance service within thirty (30) days after such service is provided; except that when such service is provided to a minor, such fee shall be paid by the parent or legal guardian. 
(d)  Destination. All transports performed by city fire department personnel shall be to St. Margaret Hospital, Hammond, Indiana; unless diverted by medical control or required by Illinois State law. 
(e)  Distribution of ambulance fees. Fees collected through ambulance fees shall be distributed in the following manner: 
(1)  Fifty (50) percent shall be deposited in the paramedic account to be used to pay for the following items: training of new paramedics, continuing education of current paramedics, supplies and equipment needed for the paramedic units, maintenance of the paramedic vehicles and equipment, and the purchase of new ambulances; and 
(2)  Fifty (50) percent shall be deposited into a new fire department apparatus account that would be used for repairs and supplies to current apparatus and purchase of new nonambulance apparatus (engines, aerial trucks, cars, etc.) for the fire department. 
(Code 1980, § 10-19; Ord. No. 89-42, § 1, 11-9-1989; Ord. No. 89-45, § 1, 11-21-1989; Ord. No. 95-39, § 1, 8-10-1995; Ord. No. 99-19, § 1, 2-25-1999; Ord. No. 03-55, § 2, 9-25-2003; Ord. No. 09-48, § 2, 9-10-2009; Ord. No. 10-7, § 2, 1-28-2010)  
Secs. 22-2—22-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND DISASTERS 
 
Sec. 22-31. - Appropriations. 
The city council may make an appropriation for the purpose of the emergency services and disaster agency in the manner provided by law. 
(Code 1980, § 7-1; Ord. of 9-29-1952, § 12; Ord. No. 87-7, § 1, 4-9-1987)  
Sec. 22-32. - Tax levy. 
The city council may levy in addition to all other taxes and for emergency service and disaster purposes only, a tax not to exceed five-hundredths (0.05) of one (1) percent of the equalized, assessed value of all taxable property. However, the amount collectible under such a levy shall in no event exceed twenty-five cents ($0.25) per capita. 
(Code 1980, § 7-2; Ord. of 9-29-1952, § 12; Ord. No. 87-7, § 1, 4-9-1987)  
Sec. 22-33. - Purchases and contracts. 
(a)  The city council may, on recommendation of the director of the local organization for the emergency services and disaster agency, authorize any purchase or contracts necessary to place the city in a position to combat effectively any disaster resulting from the explosion of any atomic or other bomb or missile, and to protect the public health and safety, protect property and provide emergency assistance to victims in the case of such disaster. 
(b)  In the event of such a disaster said director is authorized on behalf of the city to procure such services, supplies, equipment or material as may be necessary for such purposes, in view of the exigency, without regard to the statutory procedures or formalities normally prescribed by law pertaining to municipal contracts or obligations; provided, however, if the city council meets at such time he shall act subject to the directions and restrictions imposed by that body. 
(Code 1980, § 7-3; Ord. of 9-29-1952, § 9; Ord. No. 87-7, § 1, 4-9-1987)  
Secs. 22-34—22-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER AGENCY 
 
Sec. 22-71. - Established. 
There is hereby established the local organization for the emergency services and disaster agency to prevent, minimize, repair and alleviate injury or damage resulting from disaster caused by enemy attack, sabotage or other hostile action, in accordance with The Illinois Emergency Services and Disaster Agency Act (20 ILCS 3305/1 et seq.). 
(Code 1980, § 7-16; Ord. of 9-29-1952, § 1; Ord. No. 87-7, § 1, 4-9-1987)  
Sec. 22-72. - Composition. 
The local organization for the emergency services and disaster agency shall consist of the director and such additional members as may be selected by the director. 
(Code 1980, § 7-17; Ord. of 9-29-1952, § 2; Ord. No. 87-7, § 1, 4-9-1987)  
Sec. 22-73. - Appointment and removal of director. 
The director of the local organization for the emergency services and disaster agency shall be appointed by the mayor, with the consent of the city council, and shall serve until removed by the mayor. 
(Code 1980, § 7-18; Ord. of 9-29-1952, § 2; Ord. No. 87-7, § 1, 4-9-1987)  
Sec. 22-74. - Acting director. 
In the event of the absence, resignation, death or inability to serve of the director of the local organization for the emergency services and disaster agency, the mayor or any other person designated by him, shall be and act as director until a new appointment is made as provided in this article. 
(Code 1980, § 7-19; Ord. of 9-29-1952, § 2; Ord. No. 87-7, § 1, 4-9-1987)  
Sec. 22-75. - Duties of director. 
The director of the local organization for the emergency services and disaster agency shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration, training and operation of the emergency services and disaster agency, subject to the direction and control of the mayor as provided by statute. 
(Code 1980, § 7-20; Ord. of 9-29-1952, § 2; Ord. No. 87-7, § 1, 4-9-1987)  
Sec. 22-76. - Compensation. 
(a)  Members of the local organization of the emergency services and disaster agency who are paid city employees or officers, if called for training by the state director of the emergency services and disaster agency, shall receive for the time spent in such training the same rate of pay as is attached to the position held. 
(b)  Members who are not paid city employees or officers shall receive for such training time such compensation as may be established by the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 7-21; Ord. of 9-29-1952, § 7; Ord. No. 87-7, § 1, 4-9-1987)  
Sec. 22-77. - Oath. 
Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the local organization for the emergency services and disaster agency shall, before entering upon his duties, subscribe to the following oath, which shall be filed with the director: 
I, _______, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and defend and bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the territory, institutions and facilities thereof, both public and private, against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I take this obligation freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter. And I do further swear (or affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I, nor have I been a member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the Government of the United States or of this State by force or violence; and that during such time as I am affiliated with the municipal emergency services and disaster agency, I will not advocate nor become a member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the Government of the United States or of this State by force or violence. 
(Code 1980, § 7-22; Ord. of 9-29-1952, § 10; Ord. No. 87-7, § 1, 4-9-1987)  
Sec. 22-78. - Office. 
The mayor is authorized to designate space in the city hall or elsewhere as may be provided for by the city council for the local organization for emergency services and disaster agency. 
(Code 1980, § 7-23; Ord. of 9-29-1952, § 11; Ord. No. 87-7, § 1, 4-9-1987)  
Sec. 22-79. - Functions generally. 
The local organization for the emergency services and disaster agency shall perform such emergency and disaster services within the city as shall be prescribed in and by the state emergency services and disaster plan and program prepared by the governor, and such orders, rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the governor, and in addition shall perform such duties outside the corporate limits as may be required pursuant to any mutual aid agreement with any other municipality or quasi-municipality entered into as provided by law. All emergency services and disaster personnel shall be authorized to issue citations for parking violations and authorize the removal and towing of motor vehicles which impede traffic or otherwise are in violation of the ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 7-24; Ord. of 9-29-1952, § 3; Ord. No. 87-7, § 1, 4-9-1987; Ord. No. 90-33, § 1, 7-26-1990)  
Sec. 22-80. - Mutual aid agreements. 
The director of the local organization for emergency services and disaster may negotiate mutual aid arrangements with other political subdivisions, municipal corporations or bodies politic within the state for reciprocal emergency and disaster aid and assistance in case of a disaster too great to be dealt with unassisted, which arrangements shall not, however, be effective unless and until approved by each of such political subdivisions, municipal corporations or bodies politic as are parties thereto, in the manner provided by law, and unless and until filed with and approved in writing by the state director of the emergency services and disaster agency. 
(Code 1980, § 7-25; Ord. of 9-29-1952, § 5; Ord. No. 87-7, § 1, 4-9-1987)  
Sec. 22-81. - Emergency functions. 
If the governor declares an emergency services and disaster emergency exists in the event of actual enemy attack upon the United States or the occurrence within the state of a major disaster resulting from enemy sabotage or other hostile actions, it shall be the duty of the local organization for emergency services and disaster to cooperate fully with the state emergency services and disaster agency and with the governor in the exercise of emergency powers as provided by law. 
(Code 1980, § 7-26; Ord. of 9-29-1952, § 6; Ord. No. 87-7, § 1, 4-9-1987)  
Secs. 22-82—22-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - MOBILE SUPPORT TEAMS 
 
Sec. 22-101. - Designation. 
All or any members of the local organization for the emergency services and disaster agency may be designated as members of a mobile support team created by the state director of emergency services and disaster agency as provided by law. 
(Code 1980, § 7-34; Ord. of 9-29-1952, § 4; Ord. No. 87-7, § 1, 4-9-1987)  
Sec. 22-102. - Designation of leader. 
The leader of each mobile support team shall be designated by the director of the local organization for the emergency services and disaster agency. 
(Code 1980, § 7-35; Ord. of 9-29-1952, § 4; Ord. No. 87-7, § 1, 4-9-1987)  
Sec. 22-103. - Status of members. 
(a)  Any member of a mobile support team who is a city employee or officer, while serving on call to duty by the governor, shall receive the compensation and have the powers, duties, rights and immunities incident to such employment or office. 
(b)  Any such member who is not a paid officer or employee of the municipality, while so serving, shall receive from the state reasonable compensation as provided by law. 
(Code 1980, § 7-36; Ord. of 9-29-1952, § 4; Ord. No. 87-7, § 1, 4-9-1987)  
Sec. 22-104. - Treasurer's duty. 
The city treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund, any reimbursement by the state to the city for expenses incident to training members of the local organization for the emergency services and disaster agency as prescribed by the state director, compensation for services and expenses of members of a mobile support team while serving outside the municipality in response to a call by the state emergency services and disaster agency, and any other reimbursement made by the state incident to emergency services and disaster activities as provided by law. 
(Code 1980, § 7-37; Ord. of 9-29-1952, § 8; Ord. No. 87-7, § 1, 4-9-1987)  
Secs. 22-105—22-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - ALARM SYSTEMS 
 
Sec. 22-131. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm conditions means alarms activated by unlawful violation of a user's property or other violations that the systems were designed to protect against, acts of God, other violent conditions or by outside agencies or external forces not under the control of an alarm user. 
Alarm system means an assembly of equipment and devices arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring attention and to which the police or fire department are expected to respond. 
Alarm user means any person responsible for the premises on which an alarm system is maintained within the city except for alarm systems on motor vehicles, whether such person owns, leases or uses such premises. Also included are users of those systems which employ an audible signal or a flashing light or beacon intended to alert or signal persons outside the premises. 
Direct line means a telephone line leading directly into the telecommunications center that is for use only to report signals on a person-to-person basis. 
False alarm means the activation of an alarm system caused by improper operation, negligence of the alarm user or lessee of an alarm user or the employee, agent or visitor of any alarm user or equipment malfunction. 
Local alarm means a signaling system which, when activated, causes an audible or visual signaling device to be activated in or on the premises within which the system is installed. 
Primary trunk line means a telephone line leading into the telecommunications center that is for the purpose of handling emergency calls on a person-to-person basis, and which line is identified by a specific listing among the emergency numbers in the telephone directory issued by the telephone company serving the city. 
Special trunk line or operator trunk line means a telephone line leading into the telecommunications center that is for the primary purpose of handling emergency messages which originate from automatic protection devices and which are transmitted directly or through an intermediary, but in any event utilizes the microphone of a telephone for transmitting messages. 
Telephone company means the public utility that has a franchise from the city authorizing it to furnish telephone service to subscribers in the city. 
(Code 1980, § 18-170; Ord. No. 02-13, 4-25-2002)  
Sec. 22-132. - Permit required; fees. 
(a)  An alarm user shall not install, operate or maintain an alarm system within the boundaries of the city without first obtaining a permit. No alarm system which is connected to the telecommunications center or any sound alarm audible beyond the premises being served shall be installed within the boundaries of the city without first obtaining a permit. 
(b)  All applications for permits shall be made to the fire or police chief or his designated agent on a form provided by the city clerk. Permits shall be issued by the department of inspectional services, provided the system complies with all applicable sections of this article and this Code and an annual fee of ten dollars ($10.00) has been paid for each residential system and twenty dollars ($20.00) for all other systems. 
(c)  The annual fee shall be paid at the time of application or renewal of a permit. At any time there is a change in information required in the application the alarm user must file an amended application for review and approval. 
(Code 1980, § 18-171; Ord. No. 02-13, 4-25-2002)  
Sec. 22-133. - Testing of equipment. 
No alarm system designed to transmit alarm conditions directly to the telecommunications center for the city police and fire departments shall be tested or demonstrated without first obtaining permission. Permission is not required to test or demonstrate alarm devices not transmitting alarm conditions directly to the telecommunications center. Failure to notify the department prior to testing or demonstration of such an alarm system shall constitute a false alarm. 
(Code 1980, § 18-172; Ord. No. 02-13, 4-25-2002)  
Sec. 22-134. - False alarms. 
(a)  A fine of one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) shall be assessed against the alarm user for each false alarm in excess of two (2) but less than five (5) in any calendar year. 
(b)  A fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) shall be assessed against the alarm user for each false alarm in excess of four (4) but less than eight (8) in any calendar year. 
(c)  A fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall be assessed against the alarm user for each false alarm in excess of seven (7) in any calendar year. 
(d)  Where a security alarm user is in arrears for more than sixty (60) days with respect to payment of an outstanding fine set forth in this section, the police or fire chief may order a restricted response to any alarm signal from the alarmed premises or disconnection. 
(Code 1980, § 18-173; Ord. No. 02-13, 4-25-2002)  
Sec. 22-135. - Suspension or revocation of alarm system privileges. 
(a)  After eight (8) false alarms within a calendar year have been recorded for any alarm user, the fire or police chief, or his designated agent, shall send a letter, by postage paid U.S. mail to the security alarm user including the following: 
(1)  The date and time of which each false alarm was recorded; 
(2)  The need to take corrective action to eliminate false alarms; and 
(3)  A warning that after ten (10) false alarms within a calendar year, the police or fire chief may order the suspension or revocation of alarm system privileges. 
(b)  In accordance with this section, the police and fire chief may order the restricted response of departmental personnel to any alarmed premises for which: 
(1)  Ten (10) or more false alarms have been recorded in any calendar year; 
(2)  Fines due pursuant to this section remain unpaid for sixty (60) or more days. 
(Code 1980, § 18-174; Ord. No. 02-13, 4-25-2002)  
Sec. 22-136. - City's limited liability. 
(a)  The city assumes no liability for any defects in the operation of any alarm system or for the failure or neglect of any person associated with the installation, operation or maintenance of any alarm system; for the transmissions of alarm signals; for the relaying of such signals and messages; for the failure or neglect of any alarm user; for the transmission or receipt of alarm signals; or for any failure or neglect to respond upon receipt of an alarm signal from any source. 
(b)  In the event the city finds it necessary to revoke a permit, or to otherwise provide for the disconnection of any fire alarm system, the city shall have no liability for such action. 
(c)  No special duty other than that owed to the general public shall be created by virtue of this article, by virtue of the issuance of a permit or payment of a fee; or as a result of the transmission to or receipt of a transmission to the telecommunications center. 
(Code 1980, § 18-175; Ord. No. 02-13, 4-25-2002)  
Chapter 26 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 10; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; community development, ch. 18; floods, ch. 34; health and sanitation, ch. 38; planning, ch. 66; solid waste, ch. 74; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78; hazardous waste tax, § 82-511 et seq.; utilities, ch. 94; subdivisions, app. A; zoning, app. B. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 26-1. - Burning grass and leaves. 
(a)  No person shall make or cause a fire to be made for burning any combustible waste material including, but not limited to, grass and leaves in any public street or any public way. 
(b)  No person shall cause or allow open burning within the city except as provided under the Illinois Environmental Protection Act (415 ILCS 5/1 et seq.) and 35 Illinois Administration Code, Part 237. 
(c)  No person shall cause or allow the burning of any refuse in any chamber or apparatus unless such chamber or apparatus is designed for the purpose of disposing of the class of refuse being burned. 
(Code 1980, § 10-13; Ord. of 9-26-1963, § 1; Ord. No. 86-37, § 1, 12-22-1986) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 30.  
Secs. 26-2—26-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES 
 
Sec. 26-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Combustible means any substance having a flashpoint above eighty (80) degrees Fahrenheit to and including one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit as determined by the Tagliabue open cup test, except the combustibility of solids or contents of self-pressured containers shall be determined by methods generally applicable to such materials or containers respectively. 
Corrosive means any substance which in contact with living tissue causes destruction of tissue by chemical action, but does not refer to action on inanimate surfaces. 
Flammable means any substance that has a flashpoint of above twenty (20) degrees to and including eighty (80) degrees Fahrenheit as determined by the Tagliabue open cup test, except the flammability of solids and of the contents of self-pressured containers shall be determined by methods generally applicable to such materials or containers respectively. 
Hazardous material incident means an incident that threatens public health or safety involving the actual or potential release of a hazardous substance or hazardous material. 
Hazardous substance or hazardous material means any substance or material or mixture of substances that is toxic, corrosive, an irritant, a strong sensitizer, radioactive, flammable, combustible, or that generates pressure through decomposition, heat or other means and that may cause injury or illness to humans, domestic livestock, or wildlife or as defined by the state environmental protection act or any federal law. 
Irritant means any substance, not corrosive, which on immediate, prolonged or repeated contract with normal living tissue will include local inflammatory reaction. 
Radioactive means any substance that emits ionizing radiation. 
Strong sensitizer means any substance that will cause on normal living tissue through an allergic or photodynamic process a hypersensitivity, which becomes evident on reapplication of the same substance. 
Toxic means any substance, other than a radioactive substance, that has the capacity to produce bodily injury or illness to man through ingestion, inhalation, or absorption through any body surface. 
(Code 1980, § 10-70; Ord. No. 02-12, § 1, 4-25-2002)  
Sec. 26-32. - City liability. 
The city, its officers, agents or employees shall not have any liability or responsibility for any claim, injury or damage of any kind resulting from a hazardous material incident to which the city or any of its departments, officers, agents or employees respond. 
(Code 1980, § 10-71; Ord. No. 02-12, § 1, 4-25-2002)  
Sec. 26-33. - Control of hazardous substances or hazardous materials. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use, store, deliver or transport hazardous substances or hazardous materials or cause the use, storage, delivery or transporting of hazardous substances or hazardous materials in any manner inconsistent with the requirements of the fire prevention code of the city or any other applicable section of this Code, city ordinance, state law or federal law. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle carrying, transporting or containing a hazardous substance or hazardous material to park or stand, other than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaging in loading or unloading, on private property without the knowledge and the express consent of the person who is in charge of the property and who is aware of the nature of the hazardous substance or hazardous material the motor vehicle contains. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle carrying, transporting or containing a hazardous substance or hazardous material to fail to comply with all applicable sections of chapter 90 of this Code relating to traffic. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person using, storing, manufacturing, producing, disposing, treating, transporting or causing the use, storage, manufacture, production, disposal, treatment or transportation of any hazardous substance or hazardous material in any manner that results in a hazardous material incident. 
(Code 1980, § 10-72; Ord. No. 02-12, § 1, 4-25-2002)  
Sec. 26-34. - Hazardous material incident expense recovery. 
(a)  Any person causing or permitting a hazardous material incident shall be responsible for all of the following: 
(1)  Reimbursement in full for any and all costs incurred by the city in connection with the operation, maintenance, and staffing required to respond to such hazardous material incident in accordance with the following hourly fee or any fraction of an hour for each employee or vehicle or both who participates in such response to a hazardous material incident: 
Fire engine ..... $500.00 
Fire ladder truck ..... 500.00 
Ambulance ..... 250.00 
Command vehicle chief officer ..... 150.00 
Hazardous materials advisor ..... 100.00 
City supervisory advisors ..... 100.00 
Support personnel ..... 50.00 
Police car ..... 100.00 
ESDA car ..... 50.00 
Telecommunicator ..... 50.00 
Sewer vactor ..... 500.00 
Dump truck ..... 250.00 
Street sweeper ..... 500.00 
High lift ..... 250.00 
Public works foreman ..... 100.00 
Garbage truck ..... 250.00 
Plow ..... 250.00 
Miscellaneous DPW or city vehicle ..... 50.00 
An administrative fee of ten (10) percent shall be applied on the total amount to cover costs associated with the preparation of all accounting and billing. Dumping fees shall be extra. 
(2)  Reimbursement in full for any and all costs incurred by the city for equipment and materials used, damaged, lost, spent destroyed or rendered irreparable in connection with a hazardous material incident. 
(3)  Assumption of any and all liability and costs for any additional expense associated with a hazardous material incident, including but not limited to any evacuation, lodging or medical treatment of residents or city personnel. 
(4)  Assumption of any and all liability and costs for any cleanup or removal resulting from a hazardous material incident, including but not limited to any independent cleanup contractor necessitated by such hazardous material incident. 
(b)  The fire department shall prepare and forward to the person causing or permitting a hazardous material incident a bill for the total costs and expenses incurred for which such person is responsible pursuant to this section; provided, however, any cost in connection with any independent cleanup contractor shall be billed directly by such contractor. Payment of the total bill shall be made within thirty (30) days of receipt. Any bill or portion of a bill remaining unpaid after thirty (30) days of receipt shall accrue interest on the unpaid balance at the rate of one and one-half (1½) percent per month, or any fraction of a month. 
(Code 1980, § 10-73; Ord. No. 02-12, § 1, 4-25-2002)  
Secs. 26-35—26-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - TOXIC SUBSTANCE USE AS RAW MATERIALS IN MANUFACTURING 
 
Sec. 26-61. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this article shall be upon conviction fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense; and separate offenses shall be deemed committed on each day on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Code 1980, § 15-680; Ord. No. 82-9, § 2, 5-13-1982)  
Sec. 26-62. - Prohibition. 
The city council deems it necessary and advisable for the health, welfare and safety of its residents to ban the use of the following toxic substances as a raw material in a manufacturing process or to be manufactured within the city, namely: Acrylonitrile, arsenic, asbestos, benzene, beryllium, cadmium, chlorinated solvents (chloroform, trichlorethylene, (TCE), perchlorethylene (PCE), methycloroform), chlorofluorocarbons, chromates, coke oven emissions, diethylstilbestrol (DES), disromochloropropane (DBCP), ethylene dibromide, ethylene oxide, lead, mercury, nitrosamines, ozone, polybrominated biphenyls (PBBs) polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), ionizing radiation, sulphur dioxide, vinyl chloride, and toxic waste disposals. Any person, firm or corporation using any of said substances as of the date of enactment of this article shall be permitted to continue using said substances, and this article shall not apply to such uses and shall not be construed to prohibit such uses. 
(Code 1980, § 15-679; Ord. No. 82-9, § 2, 5-13-1982)  
Secs. 26-63—26-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - FUMIGATION AND PEST CONTROL  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 26-91. - Exception to chapter. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the fumigation of greenhouses or grain elevators. 
(Code 1980, § 12-2)  
Sec. 26-92. - Sale of material for generating hydrocyanic acid gas. 
No person shall sell or give away material for the purpose of fumigating premises with hydrocyanic acid gas, except to a person licensed as provided in this chapter unless a signed statement in writing is first obtained from the buyer or recipient of the material to the effect that it will not be used for the purpose of fumigating any building or portion thereof for which a permit is required to conduct such activity. 
(Code 1980, § 12-1)  
Secs. 26-93—26-110. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - FUMIGATION PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 26-111. - Compliance required; scope. 
When hydrocyanic acid gas and/or other dangerous gases or fumes are used for exterminating purposes, the method of procedure in this article shall be followed. 
(Code 1980, § 12-16)  
Sec. 26-112. - Permit required. 
It shall be the duty of every person licensed under this chapter, intending to generate or release hydrocyanic acid gas and/or other dangerous gases or fumes for fumigation purposes, before starting such generation or release, to notify, in writing, the health commissioner, giving the location of the building or enclosed space to be fumigated, and to secure from him a permit which shall state the day and hour when the work will be performed. Each application for such permit shall be accompanied by a fee of one dollar ($1.00) unless otherwise provided in this article, which fee shall be paid to the city treasurer before such permit shall be issued. Such permit shall be kept on the premises to be fumigated. Should the applicant be unable to perform the work on the hour and day set forth in the permit, and so notifies the health commissioner, sixteen (16) hours prior to the time set forth in the permit, the time of the permit may be extended. 
(Code 1980, § 12-17)  
Sec. 26-113. - Notification of occupants and vacating of premises. 
(a)  Before fumigating, the operator shall personally inspect the premises, and shall serve notice, over his signature, upon all responsible occupants in each room or apartment within the danger area, stating the danger of the process and the precautions to be observed, designating the rooms or apartments which must be vacated and indicating the time when the gas is to be generated or liberated (the form of this notice shall be approved by the health commissioner). 
(b)  Every room in the danger area shall be vacated. In the case of a building in which there are inner court, vent shaft or light well, or a lot line court with part wall, or in the case of two (2) buildings having adjacent lot line courts, upon which any room being gassed, opens, every room with windows or other apertures opening to such inner or lot line courts, vent shafts or light wells, shall be vacated and securely locked. Where the walls of any adjoining buildings are located within ten (10) feet of the rooms or apartments being gassed, the operator shall notify, over his signature, all responsible occupants of rooms or apartments with window openings in such walls that such windows as are directly opposite or above the area of the adjoining building which is under gas must remain closed, of the rooms vacated during the time the building gassed is being flushed or aired. All rooms or apartments ordered vacated but not under gas shall be well-ventilated during the process by keeping the windows of rooms or apartments open. 
(c)  Such vacation of premises and notification of occupants shall not be necessary where the fumigation is done in special rooms or vaults in furniture stores, secondhand stores, or household goods warehouses, when such special rooms or vaults are approved as to their location, construction and gas tightness by the health commissioner, and a provision is made for the airing of such vaults so as to allow the escape of gases at such location by a system of ducts and ventilation approved by him. Permits for fumigation of these last-named places shall be procured each time the premises are fumigated. The applicant for fumigation permit for the type of premises covered by this subsection shall be required to pay for no more than two (2) permits during any given year. 
(Code 1980, § 12-18)  
Sec. 26-114. - Danger area. 
The danger area shall be those portions of any structure or dwelling which lie within the boundary of the outside walls or the building under gas, the roof and basement or cellar floor, and such cutoff or fire walls as may exit in the structure in question. Such cutoff or fire walls shall be of solid masonry, gastight, at least eight (8) inches in thickness extending from the basement through the attic, with all openings locked and guarded against entry and effectively sealed against gas leakage. 
(Code 1980, § 12-19)  
Sec. 26-115. - Sealing rooms. 
Before fumigation with hydrocyanic acid gas and/or other dangerous gases or fumes, the operator shall securely seal all cracks, holes, crevices, openings and apertures in walls, ceilings and floors in such a way as to confine the gas to the premises intended to be fumigated. 
(Code 1980, § 12-20)  
Sec. 26-116. - Locking rooms and adjoining rooms or apartments; placarding generally. 
Before fumigation, it is required that the operator shall personally inspect all rooms and apartments ordered vacated under this article, and be assured that they are unoccupied by persons or domestic animals; afterwards all doors to all rooms or apartments, excepting one exit door to the rooms or apartments to be gassed, shall be securely locked; in addition, such windows or other wall openings as might possibly be used to gain entrance shall be locked or barred in such a way as to prevent entrance while still permitting thorough airing of the rooms. Immediately upon generating or liberating the gas, the door through which the operator leaves shall be securely locked and sealed, and all keys obtainable to all rooms or apartments ordered vacated shall be retained by the operator until all danger is passed. As an additional precaution, all rooms and apartments vacated shall be placarded. 
(Code 1980, § 12-21)  
Sec. 26-117. - Warning card. 
(a)  Prior to releasing the gas, suitable warning signs shall be posted on all entrances or doors to the premises to be fumigated, as follows: 
DANGER 
Skull and 
Crossbones 	Fumigating with
Cyanide Gas
Deadly Poison 	Skull and 
Crossbones 
 
All persons are warned to keep away
by order of the health commissioner
(Name and address of licensee as well as telephone number) 
(b)  Such signs shall be printed in red ink on white cardboard. The letters in the word "Danger" shall be at least two (2) inches high, all others except the signature at least three-fourths (¾) of an inch high. At night such signs shall be illuminated as to make the reading matter thereon plainly legible. Warnings posted where the natural light between sunrise and sunset is dim shall be artificially illuminated. 
(Code 1980, § 12-22)  
Sec. 26-118. - Guards. 
Whenever hydrocyanic acid gas and/or other dangerous gases or fumes are generated or liberated in any room or portion of a structure in the city, a sufficient number of capable, alert watchmen shall remain on duty at the entrance or entrances to the room, building or enclosed space vacated for gassing, to prevent people from entering while gas is present and for two (2) hours after the room or area gassed is open for airing. All guards or watchmen shall be reliable persons and must be acceptable as proper guards by the health commissioner. The licensee shall be held strictly responsible and accountable for the conduct of the guards or watchmen. In every case where the entire building is not vacated, the licensee, or his approved representative shall remain on the job during the progress of fumigation and airing, and shall constantly supervise the occupancy of the structure to ensure that no persons will be endangered by gas leakage. The licensee shall give all guards definite and proper instructions, and shall visit the premises being fumigated at regular and frequent intervals during the process to ensure that they are properly guarded. 
(Code 1980, § 12-23)  
Sec. 26-119. - Food removal. 
The operator shall see that all ice, food and drink are removed from the rooms ordered vacated; except that such food or drink as is sealed in airtight containers need not be removed. Completely dry foods, such as flour and cereals, when stored in elevators, warehouses or mills need not be removed when the fumigation is for the purpose of destroying vermin or insects or pests infecting these foodstuffs. 
(Code 1980, § 12-24)  
Sec. 26-120. - Fires. 
All fires within the premises under gas shall be put out whenever a flammable gas is used. For the purpose of this article, the health commissioner shall designate upon request whether the gas to be used shall be regarded as flammable or nonflammable. The licensee shall notify the fire department of any rooms, building or structure other than approved vaults placed under hydrocyanic acid gas or other dangerous gas fumigation. 
(Code 1980, § 12-25)  
Sec. 26-121. - Ingredient containers. 
An impermeable receptacle for containing the ingredients used for fumigation is hereby required. 
(Code 1980, § 12-26)  
Sec. 26-122. - Spilling of cyanide. 
No cyanide crystals shall be dropped on the floor or left exposed where people or domestic animals may come in contact with them. 
(Code 1980, § 12-27)  
Sec. 26-123. - Opening of rooms after gassing. 
At the conclusion of the gassing process, it shall be the duty of the operator to throw open doors and windows of the premises. Until all rooms have been opened for free access of air, no person other than the operator or operators shall be permitted to enter the premises until all traces of the gas have disappeared, and in no case shall the occupants of the rooms or areas gassed be permitted to enter until twelve (12) hours after airing. The operator or watchman shall keep all persons away from the doors and windows of the premises for two (2) hours after airing. Infants and children under six (6) years of age shall not be permitted to reenter the premises until eighteen (18) hours after the rooms or apartments are opened for airing. The licensee shall inform all occupants having children of this provision, in writing, over his signature. No room or space, except where the whole building is vacated, shall be left under gas after the time of sunset. 
(Code 1980, § 12-28)  
Sec. 26-124. - Residue disposal. 
The operator shall pour the residue left in the jars or containers, and the water used for cleaning such jars or containers, down the toilet bowl, which shall then be flushed thoroughly with water to remove all traces of the chemicals. 
(Code 1980, § 12-29)  
Sec. 26-125. - Containers. 
Every container in which hydrocyanic acid, either alone, mixed with or absorbed in, other material is handled, shipped or sold, shall be of a type of construction material and thickness approved by the health commissioner in order that accidental poisonings during handling, storage and shipment of such containers may be prevented. This approval shall not be necessary where the containers are accepted by United States officials for interstate shipment. 
(Code 1980, § 12-30)  
Sec. 26-126. - Additional rules. 
The health commissioner is hereby authorized and directed to prescribe and enforce such rules and regulations not in conflict with the provisions of this chapter as he may deem necessary for the protection of life and public health. 
(Code 1980, § 12-31)  
Sec. 26-127. - Warning gases. 
The health commissioner is hereby authorized to prescribe that a stink gas or tear gas shall be mixed with hydrocyanic acid gas or other dangerous gases or fumes to be used for fumigating, specifying in whatever detail he shall deem necessary the time and method for the generation or release of such stink or tear gases. 
(Code 1980, § 12-32)  
Secs. 26-128—26-150. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - FUMIGATORS  
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 26-151. - Employees. 
No person shall be engaged by a licensee under this article to work at the occupation of exterminator or fumigator employing the use of hydrocyanic acid gas and/or other dangerous gases or fumes as insecticides to kill or destroy insects, vermin, rats or other pests, without first filing an application and statement of experience and qualifications with and receiving the approval of the health commissioner. 
(Code 1980, § 12-50)  
Secs. 26-152—26-170. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - License 
 
Sec. 26-171. - License required. 
No person shall use hydrocyanic acid gas, cyanogen, chloropicrin, or any other poisonous, noxious or dangerous gases or fumes liable to affect human beings by causing severe sickness or death, for the extermination of household insects or vermin in any place of domestic habitation, hotel, apartment building, tenement building, office building, furniture store, secondhand store, household goods warehouse, place of public assembly, lodginghouse, roominghouse, asylum, hospital, home, institution or similar places without a license. 
(Code 1980, § 12-44)  
Sec. 26-172. - License application; processing. 
(a)  Any person desiring a license to engage in the extermination of household insects, vermin, rats or other household pests shall make written application for such license at the office of the city clerk. In addition, the applicant shall file with the health commissioner a sworn statement listing the training and experience tending to qualify the applicant for the performance of fumigating with hydrocyanic acid gas and other dangerous and noxious gases. In the case of firms or corporations, the statement shall cover the training and experience of the responsible officers. 
(b)  The health commissioner and city chemist shall make a thorough investigation of the training, experience, general qualifications, character and reputation of the applicants for licenses to fumigate with poisonous or noxious gases. The health commissioner and city chemist shall also examine applicants by giving such mental, written and oral examinations as they may deem necessary to determine the fitness and reliability of the applicant and to ascertain his knowledge of the requirements in regard to said business as set forth in this article and on any rules and regulations of the health commissioner in regulating and controlling said business. 
(c)  In the case of a firm or corporation, the responsible officers of such organizations or any agents or officials designated by such firm or corporation to supervise and control its fumigating work shall be subject to examinations of the applicants as herein provided. 
(d)  Based on the findings and recommendations of the health commissioner and city chemist, the health commissioner shall approve the issuance of a license to applicants he finds and considers reliable and safe to engage in the business of fumigating with hydrocyanic acid gas and other dangerous and noxious gases. 
(Code 1980, § 12-45)  
Sec. 26-173. - License fee. 
The fee for the license required by this article shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(Code 1980, § 12-46; Ord. of 12-27-1973, § 30; Ord. No. 05-87, § 2, 12-8-2005)  
Sec. 26-174. - License renewal. 
The approval of the health commissioner shall be obtained before the license required by the provisions of this article is renewed. 
(Code 1980, § 12-47; Ord. of 12-27-1973, § 30)  
Sec. 26-175. - License expiration date. 
All licenses issued under the provisions of this article shall expire on the thirty-first day of May following the date of issuance. 
(Code 1980, § 12-48; Ord. of 12-27-1973, § 30)  
Sec. 26-176. - License revocation. 
The license required by this article of any person violating any of the provisions of this article may be revoked by the mayor upon recommendation of the health commissioner, who shall give due hearing to the licensee before such recommendation. 
(Code 1980, § 12-49; Ord. of 12-27-1973, § 30)  
Secs. 26-177—26-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - WEEDS AND VEGETATION  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 26-201. - Removal. 
(a)  The city may undertake the removal and disposal of plant growth in violation of this chapter from any lot, block or parcel within the boundaries of the city at a cost of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per lot within a residential district and five hundred dollars ($500.00) per lot within a commercial district. 
(b)  After the abatement of the nuisance provided for above, the city comptroller, in conjunction with the superintendent of public works or his designee, shall notify the owner or occupant of the premises from which all plantings have been removed of the costs incurred as a result of the city's removal and disposal of plantings as were in violation of this chapter as hereinafter provided. 
(Code 1980, § 28-4; Ord. No. 8-22-1935, § 5; Ord. No. 81-36, § 2, 10-22-1981; Ord. No. 94-33, § 1, 7-14-1994; Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 6-13-2002; Ord. No. 05-43, § 1, 7-14-2005; Ord. No. 18-48, § 4, 8-23-2018)  
Sec. 26-202. - Prohibited; nuisance declared. 
Any weeds such as jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cockleburr, or other weeds of a like kind, found growing in any lot or tract of land are hereby declared to be a nuisance, and it shall be unlawful to permit any such weeds to grow or remain in any such place. 
(Code 1980, § 28-1; Ord. of 8-25-1955, § 1)  
Sec. 26-203. - Maximum height; nuisance declared. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone to permit weeds, grasses or plants, other than trees, bushes, flowers, or other ornamental plants to grow to a height exceeding six (6) inches; any such weeds, grasses or plants exceeding such height are hereby declared to be a nuisance. 
(Code 1980, § 28-2; Ord. of 8-25-1955, § 2; Ord. No. 81-36, § 1, 10-22-1981; Ord. No. 05-36, § 1, 6-9-2005)  
Sec. 26-204. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 04-37, § 1, adopted June 10, 2004, repealed § 26-204, which pertained to barberry bushes and was derived from Code 1980, § 28-3; and Ord. of 8-25-1955, § 3.  
Sec. 26-205. - Citation to owner. 
It shall be the duty of the department of inspectional services to serve or caused to be served a citation upon the owner or occupant of any premises on which plantings were removed by the city in order to abate the nuisance and forward a copy of this citation to the city comptroller. In addition, the city comptroller shall prepare an invoice for the cost and expense of removal and forward said invoice to the owner with a demand for payment in full within thirty (30) days of the invoice. 
(Code 1980, § 28-5; Ord. of 8-25-1955, § 4, Ord. No. 90-22, § 1, 5-10-1990; Ord. No. 02-24, § II, 6-13-2002; Ord. No. 18-48, § 5, 8-23-2018) 
State Law reference— Power of city to destroy weeds at expense of property owner, 65 ILCS 5/11-20-6.  
Secs. 26-206—26-230. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - REMOVAL LIEN 
 
Sec. 26-231. - Filing for. 
In the event payment is not received within thirty (30) days of issuance of an invoice by the city, the city comptroller shall file a notice of lien in the office of the county recorder of deeds, then such cost and expense shall be a lien upon the real estate affected, superior to all subsequent liens, except tax liens. 
(Code 1980, § 28-6; Ord. No. 02-24, § III, 6-13-2002; Ord. No. 18-38, § 6, 8-23-2018) 
State Law reference— Power of city to obtain lien for weed removal, 65 ILCS 5/11-20-7.  
Sec. 26-232. - Notice. 
The notice of lien required by this chapter shall consist of a sworn statement setting out a description of the real estate sufficient for identification thereof, the amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for the service and the date or dates when such cost and expense was incurred by the city or person authorized by it. 
(Code 1980, § 28-7) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 65 ILCS 5/11-20-7.  
Sec. 26-233. - Validity. 
The lien provided for by this chapter shall not be valid as to any purchaser whose rights in and to such real estate have arisen subsequent to the weed cutting and prior to the filing of such notice, and the lien shall not be valid as to any mortgagee, judgment creditor or other lienor whose rights in and to such real estate arise prior to the filing of such notice. 
(Code 1980, § 28-8) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 65 ILCS 5/11-20-7.  
Sec. 26-234. - Release of lien upon payment. 
Upon payment of the costs and expense by the owner of, or persons interested in such property after notice of lien has been filed, the lien provided for by this chapter shall be released by the city or person in whose name the lien has been filed and the release may be filed of record as in the case of filing notice of lien. 
(Code 1980, § 28-9) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 65 ILCS 5/11-20-7.  
Chapter 30 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Board of fire and police commissioners, § 2-811 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; emergency services, ch. 22; burning grass and leaves, § 26-1; fireworks, § 62-171 et seq.; obstructions to doors, windows or fire escapes, § 70-3; attaching to fire escape or standpipe, § 70-4; burning garbage, § 74-38; directing traffic at fire, § 90-42. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 30-1. - Conduct of spectators at fires. 
It shall be the duty of all spectators at fires to obey the orders of the members of the fire department on duty there with respect to keeping away from the scene of the fire or the handling or interference with the apparatus of the department. 
(Code 1980, § 10-10)  
Sec. 30-2. - Fire lanes. 
(a)  The fire chief may require and designate public or private fire lanes as deemed necessary for the efficient and effective use of fire apparatus. 
(b)  Designated fire lanes shall be maintained free of obstructions and vehicles and marked in a manner prescribed by the fire chief. 
(c)  No person shall park, stop or leave standing any vehicle or obstruction in said fire lane. 
(d)  The street and alley commissioner shall post the appropriate signs. Any signs posted in commercial shopping centers shall be at the expense of the respective shopping center. 
(e)  Any person violating any provisions of this section shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Code 1980, § 10-17; Ord. No. 84-8, § 1, 2-23-1984) 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 90.  
Sec. 30-3. - Smoke detectors. 
All detectors installed in dwellings, rooming houses or apartment houses constructed or remodeled on or after the passage of this section [Ord. No. 85-5] shall be powered by a nonswitchable 120VAC source or an approved fire alarm control panel. Detectors installed within dwelling units or rooming units constructed before the passage of this section shall be powered by batteries, a nonswitchable AC source, or an approved fire alarm control panel. All detectors installed within common stairwells of buildings constructed before the passage of this section and containing less than six (6) dwellings or rooming units shall be powered by an AC source or an approved fire alarm control panel. Detectors installed in common stairwells or hallways of buildings containing six (6) or more dwelling units shall be monitored and powered by an approved fire alarm control panel. 
(Code 1980, § 10-18; Ord. No. 85-5, § 1, 2-14-1985; Ord. No. 86-18, § 1, 7-10-1986; Ord. No. 92-49, § 1, 11-12-1992)  
Secs. 30-4—30-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Departments, § 2-566 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 30-31. - Established. 
There is hereby established a fire department, an executive department of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 10-26; Ord. of 2-27-1942, § 1)  
Sec. 30-32. - Composition. 
The fire department shall consist of the fire chief, deputy chief, assistant chief, four (4) captains, four (4) lieutenants, nine (9) engineers and such number of firefighters as may be provided from time to time by the mayor and council. Provided, however, that any person holding rank in the fire department upon the adoption of this section shall continue to hold said rank, but no person may be appointed to said rank if the appointment would increase the number of captains, lieutenants or engineers above the number herein provided. 
(Code 1980, § 10-27; Ord. No. 82-32, § 1, 12-9-1982; Ord. No. 85-13, § 1, 4-11-1985; Ord. No. 90-34, § 1, 7-26-1990)  
Sec. 30-33. - Fire chief, deputy chief, assistant chief—Generally. 
(a)  Fire chief. There is hereby established the position of fire chief, an executive office of the city. The fire chief shall be appointed by the mayor by and with the advice and consent of the city council. Provided, however, when there is a vacancy in the office of fire chief and no person has been appointed by the mayor, the deputy chief shall be in charge of the fire department until a fire chief is appointed. In the event the deputy chief is unable to accept said office, then the person holding the next highest rank shall so act as fire chief. Where there is more than one (1) fire person holding said rank, the fire person having the longest time in grade shall so act as fire chief. 
(b)  Deputy chief. A deputy chief shall be appointed by the fire chief from the ranks of captain or lieutenant. The deputy chief shall serve at the fire chief's pleasure and shall hereby be second in command of the fire department. 
(c)  Assistant chief. An assistant chief shall be appointed by the fire chief from the ranks of captain or lieutenant. The assistant chief shall serve at the fire chief's pleasure and shall hereby be third in command of the fire department and perform duties assigned by the fire chief. 
(Code 1980, § 10-28; Ord. No. 79-24, § 1, 5-24-1979; Ord. No. 79-35, § 1, 7-12-1979; Ord. No. 90-34, § 2, 7-26-1990) 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-231 et seq.  
Sec. 30-34. - Same—Duties. 
(a)  Fire chief. The fire chief shall be responsible for all activities of the fire department and the Bureau of Fire Prevention and Inspectional Services and the conduct of the members thereof. He shall cause the keeping of such records as provided by law and make such reports showing the activities of his department as may be required by the mayor and/or city council. 
(b)  Deputy chief. The deputy chief shall be second in command and assist the chief of the fire department in the daily activities of the fire department. He shall supervise shift and division activities, perform duties of the training officer and department safety officer, assist the chief in the preparation and review of the department budget, and perform such other duties as assigned by the chief. 
(c)  Assistant chief. The assistant chief shall be third in command of the fire department and be responsible for the day-to-day operation of the bureau of fire prevention and inspectional services and perform such other duties as assigned by the chief. 
(Code 1980, § 10-29; Ord. No. 90-34, § 3, 7-26-1990)  
Sec. 30-35. - Appointments. 
(a)  Members of the fire department, except the chief, deputy chief and assistant chief, shall after examination be appointed by the board of fire and police commissioners and promotions shall be made in the same manner as is provided by statute. 
(b)  Hereafter, the board of fire and police commissioners shall not hire any new or additional firemen without prior authorization of the city council. 
(c)  Hereafter, the board of fire and police commissioners shall not hire any new or additional firemen without prior authorization of the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 10-30; Ord. No. 79-17, § 1, 5-10-1979; Ord. No. 89-12, § 2, 3-9-1989; Ord. No. 90-34, § 4, 7-26-1990; Ord. No. 93-4, § 1, 12-9-1993) 
State Law reference— For similar provisions, 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-4.  
Sec. 30-36. - Candidate probationary period. 
Every candidate appointed to the fire department shall be on probation for a period of twelve (12) months and shall be given monthly examinations in firemanship by the officer in charge of his company. The results of such examinations shall be reported to the fire chief who shall make his recommendations to the board of fire and police commissioners at the end of the probationary period. 
(Code 1980, § 10-31; Ord. of 5-8-1975, § 1)  
Sec. 30-37. - Discharge. 
No fireman shall be discharged except after a hearing before the board of fire and police commissioners as is provided by law. 
(Code 1980, § 10-32) 
State Law reference— For similar provisions, 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-3.  
Sec. 30-38. - Functions. 
It shall be the function of the fire department, and the duty of the members thereof, to prevent and extinguish accidental or destructive fires occurring in the city, and to enforce all ordinances relating to the fire hazards. It shall be the duty of the members to perform their duties in the highest possible levels of safety for all as per department safety policy. 
(Code 1980, § 10-33; Ord. No. 90-34, § 5, 7-26-1990)  
Sec. 30-39. - Chief to supervise; obedience to orders. 
The fire chief shall have charge of the members of the fire department and all apparatus, and the firemen shall obey the orders of the superior officers of the department, while on duty. 
(Code 1980, § 10-34)  
Sec. 30-40. - Arrests. 
The fire chief and all firemen shall have the power and authority to arrest any person, at or near the scene of an accidental or destructive fire, for any interference with the fire department in the performance of its duties, or for the commission of any crime or ordinance violation in connection with the fire. 
(Code 1980, § 10-35)  
Sec. 30-41. - Rules and regulations. 
The fire chief may, with the consent of the city council, make rules and regulations for the hours of duty, uniforms, vacations and conduct of the members and volunteers, which shall be binding on all such firemen while on duty. 
(Code 1980, § 10-36)  
Sec. 30-42. - Property at fires. 
The members of the fire department shall have charge of property removed from the scene of a fire by them to avoid loss or damage, until the same is turned over to the owner or agent of the owner thereof. 
(Code 1980, § 10-37)  
Sec. 30-43. - Paramedic program. 
(a)  Certification required. All candidates for the position of firefighter/paramedic on the city shall be Illinois state-certified paramedics prior to appointment to the city fire department. There shall be no exceptions to this requirement. In the event a candidate does not hold a State of Illinois paramedic certificate at the time of a vacancy in the fire department, the candidate shall be passed on the eligibility list to the next candidate who holds such certification. The candidate who was passed will hold his position on the list for future vacancies, and shall have the opportunity for future vacancies in the department, provided he/she meets the criteria of having an Illinois state paramedic certificate. This section will affect only those candidates on new eligibility lists created after the date of the passage of Ordinance No. 97-21. 
(b)  Maintenance of certification. Each and every firefighter below rank of engineer who is a member of the fire department of the city, or shall become a member of the fire department of the city, must remain a certified paramedic during the entire period that he is serving as a member of the city fire department, and the failure to remain certified as a paramedic shall be a basis for immediate removal and discharge from the city fire department by the fire chief. The fire chief, for the effective use of the department, may limit the number of paramedics functioning as same at any given time. 
(Code 1980, § 10-38; Ord. No. 80-3, § 1, 4-10-1980; Ord. No. 84-16, § 1, 5-10-1984; Ord. No. 97-21, §§ 1, 2, 4-10-1997)  
Sec. 30-44. - Participation in Illinois Fire Protection Training Act programs; training course. 
(a)  Election to participate. The city hereby elects to participate in the programs provided for in the Illinois Fire Protection Training Act (50 ILCS 740/1 et seq.). 
(b)  Prerequisite to regular full-time employment. Before an individual may commence regular full-time employment as a firefighter, he must have been certified by the Illinois State Fire Marshal as a firefighter II and as having successfully complete an approved training course as provided in said Act. 
(c)  Completion of training. The firefighter II training must be completed by the trainee within his probationary period of twenty-four (24) months, except for volunteers, part-time and paid-on-call personnel. 
(d)  Amendments to personnel rules. The board of fire and police commissioners is hereby instructed and directed to make the necessary amendments to the personnel rules, the manual of rules of the city fire department, and rules of said board of fire and police commissioners in order to require that any person appointed to the fire department shall not become a regular member of the city fire department unless and until he shall complete, pursuant to said Illinois Fire Protection and Training Act (50 ILCS 740/1 et seq.), the approved training course within twenty-four (24) months of the date of his initial employment. 
(Code 1980, § 10-39; Ord. No. 82-31, §§ 1—4, 12-9-1982) 
State Law reference— Fire Protection Training Act, 50 ILCS 740/1 et seq.  
Sec. 30-45. - Preference for persons with prior qualified training. 
Persons whose names appear on any register of eligibles resulting from an examination for original entrance in the classified service of the fire department shall be given preference for original appointment if they have satisfactorily completed an approved training course and been certified by the Illinois State Fire Marshall as a firefighter II. Said preference shall be in the form of five (5) points added to the final score of the applicant, provided certification documentation is provided to the fire and police commission at the time of original application during the application period. 
(Code 1980, § 10-40; Ord. No. 83-26, § 1, 10-27-1983; Ord. No. 97-21, § 3, 4-10-1997)  
Sec. 30-46. - Members of fire department declared to be city employees; residency required. 
The members of the fire department are hereby classified as employees of the city and are entitled to all the rights and privileges of an employee. All firemen of the city shall be residents of the City of Calumet City, Illinois. 
(Code 1980, § 10-41; Ord. No. 84-47, § 1, 12-27-1984)  
Sec. 30-47. - Civil service rank. 
Any person filing the position of fire chief, deputy fire chief or assistant fire chief shall retain their civil service rank while serving in such position, but there shall not be a vacancy in the rank that they are holding. 
(Code 1980, § 10-42; Ord. No. 90-34, § 7, 7-26-1990)  
Secs. 30-48—30-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PENSION FUND 
 
Sec. 30-71. - Established. 
There is hereby established a firemen's pension fund. 
(Code 1980, § 10-44) 
State Law reference— Fund required, 40 ILCS 5/4-101.  
Sec. 30-72. - Funding. 
There shall be deposited in the firemen's pension fund the sum required by statute. 
(Code 1980, § 10-45) 
State Law reference— Financing pension fund, 40 ILCS 5/4-118.  
Sec. 30-73. - Board of trustees generally. 
There is hereby established a board of trustees of the firemen's pension fund which shall have the composition required by state law. 
(Code 1980, § 10-46) 
State Law reference— Board of trustees generally, 40 ILCS 5/4-121.  
Sec. 30-74. - Powers and duties of board. 
The board of trustees of the firemen's pension fund shall have administration of such funds, as provided by statute. 
(Code 1980, § 10-47) 
State Law reference— Powers of board, 40 ILCS 5/4-122 et seq.  
Secs. 30-75—30-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - LEAVE POLICY 
 
Sec. 30-101. - Established; definitions. 
(a)  Sick leave established. There is hereby established the amount of sick leave earned and to which a fireman is entitled. All members after one (1) month of service, are eligible for sick leave with pay. Sick leave with pay will be granted for personal illness or physical incapacity resulting from causes beyond members control. 
(b)  Terms defined. As used in this division, the following words and terms shall mean as follows: 
Base pay shall mean the salary of various positions. 
Fireman shall have the same definition as in state law and who devotes not less than a minimum of thirty (30) hours per week. 
Line duty shall mean twenty-four (24) hours on and forty-eight (48) hours off. 
Sick leave shall mean time off due to illness or injury received off duty. 
Staff duty shall mean eight (8) hour days, five (5) days a week. 
(Code 1980, § 10-48; Ord. No. 84-45, § 1, 11-19-1984)  
Sec. 30-102. - Authorization. 
(a)  Sick leave will be earned at the rate of one (1) day per month for a total of twelve (12) days per year. 
(b)  When on sick leave a member of the department shall notify the department when they leave and also when they return home. 
(c)  In order for a member to be paid for any designated legal holiday, they shall not be absent the scheduled work day before a holiday or the schedule work day after the designated holiday. 
(d)  If a person runs out of sick time, they may under unusual circumstances request additional time which may be granted by the city council after investigation and proof that the individual deserves the additional time, not to exceed six (6) months. 
(Code 1980, § 10-49; Ord. No. 84-45, § 1, 11-19-1984)  
Sec. 30-103. - Authority and responsibility. 
(a)  Each supervising or commanding officer will assume the duties and obligations of his rank to prevent abuses of sick leave. 
(b)  It will be the responsibility of the commanding officer or supervisor to determine the cause of each absence reported to them. 
(c)  Staff duty sick leave in excess of three (3) consecutive days/or line duty in excess of two (2) scheduled work days will require a written statement by a licensed physician certifying that the member's condition prevented the member from performing the required duties. 
(Code 1980, § 10-50; Ord. No. 84-45, § 1, 11-19-1984)  
Sec. 30-104. - Retroactive sick leave. 
Each member in service at the time of adoption of this division will be given sick leave credits for past service at the rate of twelve (12) days per year to a maximum of two hundred forty (240) days. 
(Code 1980, § 10-51; Ord. No. 84-45, § 1, 11-19-1984)  
Sec. 30-105. - Maternity leave. 
Female members who become pregnant shall be entitled to a maternity leave. This leave time shall be charged against their accumulated sick leave. By the end of the fifth month of pregnancy, such employee who desires to continue to work shall provide the employer with a statement from her attending physician certifying the expected date of delivery, their physical ability to continue working, and the date to which they are permitted to work. The employee shall return to work within sixty (60) calendar days following the termination of pregnancy, unless the attending physician certifies that the employee is physically unable to return to work. In any case, no maternity will be granted for a period in excess of twelve (12) months. All male officers shall be entitled to one (1) tour of duty upon the birth of a baby to their spouse. 
(Code 1980, § 10-52; Ord. No. 84-45, § 1, 11-19-1984)  
Sec. 30-106. - Unused sick leave. 
Members will be paid for unused sick leave accrued during their working career at the time of retirement, disability retirement, or honorable termination. 
(1)  The formula for payment shall be as follows: Unused accrued sick leave pay shall be determined by multiplying the number of accrued days times the appropriate percentage as herein after provided times the firefighters hourly rate of pay times eight (8) hours. 
(2)  The percentage of accrued sick leave is established as follows: For termination of service between: ;$; 
March 1, 1985 and April 30, 1986\25% 
May 1, 1986 and April 30, 1987\30% 
May 1, 1987 and April 30, 1988\35% 
May 1, 1988, and April 30, 1989\40% 
May 1, 1989 and April 30, 1990\45% 
May 1, 1990 and thereafter\50% ;\$; 
(3)  The hourly rate of pay of the firefighter shall be determined by dividing the gross annual salary attached to the rank of said firefighter and dividing same by two thousand eighty (2,080). 
(Code 1980, § 10-53; Ord. No. 84-45, § 1, 11-19-1984; Ord. No. 85-15, § 1, 4-25-1985)  
Sec. 30-107. - On-duty injury leave. 
On-duty injury leave will be subject to the provisions of the State of Illinois Workers' Compensation Act (820 ILCS 305/1 et seq.). 
(Code 1980, § 10-54; Ord. No. 84-45, § 1, 11-19-1984)  
Sec. 30-108. - Military leave. 
Military leave will be subject to the provisions of the United States Code titled "Veterans Reemployment Rights Statute." 
(Code 1980, § 10-55; Ord. No. 84-45, § 1, 11-19-1984)  
Sec. 30-109. - Policy. 
The head of the department shall write policy outlining the procedures necessary to implement the sick leave ordinance. He will also institute reports and be the keeper of records as is needed to effectively comply with this division. 
(Code 1980, § 10-56; Ord. No. 84-45, § 1, 11-19-1984)  
Secs. 30-110—30-130. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE BOARD[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Boards and commissions, § 2-799 et seq. 
 
Sec. 30-131. - Established. 
There is hereby established a foreign fire insurance board. 
(Code 1980, § 10-57; Ord. No. 90-24, § 1, 5-24-1990)  
Sec. 30-132. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this division, the following definitions shall apply: 
Board means the foreign fire insurance board. 
Department means the city fire department. 
Fund means the foreign fire insurance tax fund. 
Members of the department means any sworn personnel currently employed by the city fire department. 
Temporary election committee means the city fire department election committee. 
(Code 1980, § 10-58; Ord. No. 90-24, § 1, 5-24-1990)  
Sec. 30-133. - Election of members. 
(a)  The foreign insurance board shall consist of four (4) members. 
(b)  The members of the city fire department shall elect four (4) officers who shall serve as the members of the board. The chief of the fire department shall be the ex officio fifth member of the board. 
(c)  The members of the department shall elect the following officers: 
(1)  Chairman; 
(2)  Vice-Chairman; 
(3)  Secretary; and 
(4)  Treasurer. 
(d)  Members of the board shall serve two-year terms and until their successors are elected and installed; provided, however that two (2) of the initial appointees shall serve two-year terms and two (2) of the initial appointees shall serve one-year terms. The initial terms of office of the members of the board shall begin on October 1, 1990, and expire on September 30, 1991, and September 30, 1992. 
(e)  Vacancies shall be filled by election by the members of the department for the balance of the unexpired term. 
(Code 1980, § 10-59; Ord. No. 90-24, § 1, 5-24-1990; Ord. No. 90-47, § 1, 12-13-1990)  
Sec. 30-134. - Election procedure. 
(a)  There is hereby established a temporary fire department election committee. The temporary election committee shall consist of three (3) members. The chief of the fire department shall serve ex officio as chairman of the committee. The chief shall appoint two (2) members of the department to serve on the committee, one (1) member of which shall be from the classified ranks. 
(b)  The temporary election committee shall be responsible for organizing, conducting and supervising the initial election of department officers to serve on the board. Thereafter, the board shall establish election procedures consistent with this division. 
(c)  The board shall develop a procedure for governing the nomination of members to run for the various offices to serve on the board. The nominating procedure shall be established a minimum of thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the board members' terms of office. 
(d)  The board shall develop a procedure for the final election of members to the various offices on the board. The final election procedure shall be established a minimum of thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the board members' terms of office. 
(e)  The board may adopt rules and regulations governing the election of officers of the board. All rules and regulations with respect to the election process shall be posted throughout the department a minimum of thirty (30) days prior to the election. 
(Code 1980, § 10-60; Ord. No. 90-24, § 1, 5-24-1990)  
Sec. 30-135. - Fund established. 
(a)  All funds received by the city from the foreign fire insurance gross receipts shall be paid by the municipal treasurer to the treasurer of the board. 
(b)  The city treasurer shall provide the treasurer of the board an annual accounting of receipts. 
(c)  No expenditure shall be made from the fund without the approval of the board. 
(d)  The treasurer of the board shall give sufficient bond to the city. The bond shall be approved by the mayor. 
(e)  The treasurer of the foreign fire insurance board shall make semiannual reports to the city council of all receipts and expenditures of the fund. 
(Code 1980, § 10-61; Ord. No. 90-24, § 1, 5-24-1990; Ord. No. 90-47, § 2, 12-13-1990)  
Sec. 30-136. - Officers, quorum, special meetings. 
The board shall, in accordance with the Open Meetings Law (5 ILCS 120/1.01 et seq.), establish a regular time and place for its meetings. The chairman shall preside at the meetings. The secretary shall keep a record of all resolutions, proceedings and actions of the board, and these records shall be open to the public. Three (3) members of the board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of its business. The affirmative vote of three (3) members of the board shall constitute approval of business before it. Special meetings may be called by the chairman or by no less than three (3) members of the board. Any person shall be entitled to appear and be heard on any matter before the board. 
(Code 1980, § 10-62; Ord. No. 90-24, § 1, 5-24-1990)  
Sec. 30-137. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The board shall have the power to approve the expenditure of monies from the fund for the maintenance, use and benefit of the department. 
(b)  The board may adopt rules and regulations for governing the board and the execution of the duties of the board, and provide for election of the board and management of the fund. 
(c)  The board may amend or revoke rules and regulations so adopted. 
(Code 1980, § 10-63; Ord. No. 90-24, § 1, 5-24-1990)  
Secs. 30-138—30-160. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Code enforcement, § 2-941 et seq. 
 
Sec. 30-161. - Adoption of fire prevention code. 
A certain document, one (1) copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as the "2003 International Fire Code" be and is hereby adopted as the Fire Prevention Code of the city for the control of buildings, structures and premises as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the 2003 International Fire Code as hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 30-162 of this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 10-1; Ord. of 11-22-1967, § 1; Ord. No. 4-27-1972, § 1; Ord. No. 81-41, § 1, 12-10-1981; Ord. No. 87-6, § 1, 3-26-1987; Ord. No. 92-6, § 1, 2-13-1992; Ord. No. 94-44, § 1, 7-28-1994; Ord. No. 00-62, § 1, 10-12-2000; Ord. No. 05-71, § 1, 10-13-2005) 
State Law reference— Power of city to adopt technical codes by reference, 65 ILCS 5/1-3-2; 50 ILCS 220/2.  
Sec. 30-162. - Amendments to fire prevention code. 
The following sections are hereby revised as follows: 
Section 101.1. Insert: City of Calumet City. 
Section 103.1. Delete and replace with the following: The department of fire prevention shall also be known as the department of inspectional services and all references in city codes or ordinances to the department of fire prevention and the department of inspectional services shall be interchangeable. 
Add Section 105.1.4. The fee for an operation permit is hereby established at twenty-five dollars ($25.00), payable to the City Clerk of the City of Calumet City. 
Section 108.1. Delete and replace with the following: 
Decisions or determinations made by the director of inspectional services relative to the application and interpretation of this Code may be appealed by written application to the Chief of the Fire Department of the City of Calumet City who shall act on said appeal within five (5) business days of receipt. The decision of the fire chief may then in turn be appealed, in writing, to the public safety committee within five (5) business days and the committee's decision may subsequently be appealed to the full city council, in writing, within five (5) business days from the receipt of the decision of the committee. The decision of the city council shall be final and shall be subject to judicial review under the provisions of the Administrative Review Law (735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.). 
Sections 108.2 and 108.3. Delete. 
Section 109.3. Insert "misdemeanor" for [SPECIFIC OFFENSE], insert seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for [AMOUNT] and delete the words "or by imprisonment not exceeding [NUMBER OF DAYS], or both such fine and imprisonment." 
Section 408.11.2. Delete the words "provided with a secondary exit to the exterior or exit corridor" and add to the end of the first sentence "at all exits leading to corridors or exterior." 
Section 503.4. Add: Parking in a designated fire lane shall result in a penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
Section 505.1. Add the words "and alley adjacent to" after the words "street or road" in the first sentence. 
Section 506.1. Add after first sentence: A key box is also required when a structure of any use group has an automatic fire sprinkler system unless 24-hour security personnel is provided on site to allow immediate access upon arrival when responding to the structure. This shall not exempt covered mall buildings. 
Add Section 901-9. Required alarm. All automatic sprinkler systems or other automotive fire suppression systems shall have a direct system activation, water flow or fire alarm connection to the Calumet City Fire Department alarm panel, or an alternate method of connection as approved by the fire chief or his duly authorized representative. 
(Code 1980, § 10-1.1; Ord. No. 97-4, § 3, 1-9-1997; Ord. No. 00-62, § 4, 10-12-2000; Ord. No. 08-55, § 2, 8-14-2008)  
Sec. 30-163. - Restriction on permit issuance. 
No permit shall be issued pursuant to the fire prevention code if the building, structure or installation it is for violates or will violate any of the provisions of the zoning ordinance. 
(Code 1980, § 10-6)  
Secs. 30-164—30-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PUBLIC BUILDINGS 
 
Sec. 30-201. - Responsibility. 
The owner, agent, occupant or person charged with the custody of any public building, auditorium, hotel, theater, lodge hall, or church and in the case of schools, the president of the board of education, or the person in charge thereof and owning the same, shall be held liable for the equipment and maintenance of such apparatus as is required in this article for the maintenance and safety of all exits, stairs, doors, windows or passageways. 
(Code 1980, § 18-100; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 30-202. - Enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the fire chief to inspect all apparatus to be installed, and their locations, and to make or cause to be made periodic inspections concerning the operation and accessibility of regular and emergency exits in such public places. 
(Code 1980, § 18-101; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 30-203. - Removal of fire apparatus. 
It shall be unlawful to remove from its proper place any fire apparatus or appliances except for inspection or in case of emergency. 
(Code 1980, § 18-103; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Chapter 34 - FLOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 26; health and sanitation, ch. 38; planning, ch. 66; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78; utilities, ch. 94; subdivisions, app. A; zoning, app. B. 
State Law reference— Drainage generally, 70 ILCS 605/1-1 et seq.; flood control powers of city, 65 ILCS 5/11-30-2. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 34-1—34-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 34-31. - Authority. 
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to this city by 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-2, 5/11-30-8, and 5/11-31-2. 
(Code 1980, § 8-1; Ord. No. 00-65, § 1, 10-12-2000)  
Sec. 34-32. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to: 
(1)  Protect buildings and other property from damage due to flooding; 
(2)  Protect the life, health and safety of the residents of this city; 
(3)  Minimize disruption of commerce and governmental services and the impairment of the tax base caused by flooding; 
(4)  Prevent new development from increasing the flood or drainage hazard to others; 
(5)  Prevent future public expenditures for repairs and recovery activities following a flood and for drainage improvements and flood protection projects; 
(6)  Preserve and enhance the quality of surface water; 
(7)  Preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses and floodplains to moderate flood and stormwater impacts, improve water quality, and preserve aquatic/riparian habitat; 
(8)  Reduce the sedimentation in the watercourses of the city; 
(9)  Meet the requirements of 615 ILCS 5/18g; and 
(10)  Make federally subsidized flood insurance available for property in the city by fulfilling the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program. 
(Code 1980, § 8-2; Ord. No. 00-65, § 1, 10-12-2000)  
Sec. 34-33. - Organization. 
To protect people and property from flooding, development of land must be managed both in the watershed (where the water comes from) and in the floodplain (where it accumulates). Therefore, this chapter has three (3) parts. 
(1)  General and administrative procedures. Article I of this chapter includes the definitions, permit procedures and similar administrative matters that apply to all development projects. 
(2)  Site development requirements. Article II of this chapter contains the land development requirements that manage the runoff of stormwater that leaves the development site. It includes criteria for the amount of water that can leave a site and measures that must be taken to improve the quality of the water. 
(3)  Floodplain development requirements. Article III of this chapter contains requirements for developments that will be located in the floodplain. It includes criteria to protect the new development, to minimize the impact of the development on flooding to other properties, and to protect the flood conveyance channel. 
(4)  Overlapping requirements. 
a.  Floodplains are part of the watershed. All floodplain developments must also meet the site development requirements of article II, where applicable. 
b.  The definitions in section 34-34 and the administrative procedures in sections 34-35 and 34-36 apply to both articles II and III. 
(5)  Development. This chapter regulates all development as defined in section 34-34, definitions. 
a.  The regulatory criteria are different for three (3) different sizes of development: level 1, level 2 and level 3, which are also defined in section 34-34. 
b.  When the term development is used alone, it includes all three (3) levels. 
(Code 1980, § 8-3; Ord. No. 00-65, § 1, 10-12-2000; Ord. No. 08-57, § 2, 8-14-2008)  
Sec. 34-34. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them on this chapter, except where the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning: 
Accessory structure means a non-habitable structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. 
Act means an act in relation to the regulation of the rivers, lakes and streams of the State of Illinois, 615 ILCS 5/5 et seq. 
Applicant means any person, firm, corporation or agency which submits an application. 
Appropriate use means only uses of the designated floodway that are permissible and will be considered for permit issuance. The only uses that will be allowed are as specified in section 34-93. 
Base flood means the flood having a one (1) percent probability of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year frequency flood event. Application of the base flood elevation at any location is as defined in section 34-65 of this chapter. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation in relation to mean sea level of the crest of the base flood. 
Basement means that portion of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Best management practice (BMP) means a measure used to control the adverse impacts of a stormwater discharge on water quality downstream. BMPs include structural devices (e.g., grassed swales, filter strips and detention basins) designed to remove pollutants and reduce runoff volumes and nonstructural measures such as public information on proper disposal and use of pesticides and herbicides. 
Building means a walled and roofed structure, including gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally aboveground, including manufactured homes, prefabricated buildings, and gas or liquid storage tanks. The term also includes recreational vehicles and travel trailers installed on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days per year. 
Buffer means an area of natural vegetation adjacent to channels, wetlands, lakes, ponds or other surface waters to be left open for the purpose of eliminating or minimizing adverse impacts to such areas. 
By-pass flow means an approach that routes tributary drainage area runoff around and not through a stormwater control structure. 
Channel means any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial depression, ponded area, flowage, slough, ditch, conduit, culvert, gully, ravine, wash, or natural or manmade drainageway, which has a definite bed and banks or shoreline, in or into which surface or groundwater flows, either perennially or intermittently. 
Channel modification means the alteration of a channel by changing the physical dimensions or materials of its bed or banks. Channel modification includes damming, rip-rapping (or other armoring), widening, deepening, straightening, relocating, lining and significant removal of native vegetation from the bottom or banks. Channel modification does not include the clearing of dead or dying vegetation, debris, or trash from the channel. Channelization is a severe form of channel modification involving a significant change in the channel cross-section and typically involving relocation of the existing channel (e.g., straightening). 
City means the City of Calumet City, Cook County, Illinois. 
Compensatory storage means an artificially excavated, hydraulically equivalent volume of storage within the SFHA used to balance the loss of natural flood storage capacity when artificial fill or buildings are placed within the floodplain. The uncompensated loss of natural floodplain storage can increase off-site floodwater elevations and flows. 
Conditional approval of a designated floodway map change means preconstruction approval by IDNR/OWR and FEMA of a proposed change to the floodway map. This preconstruction approval, pursuant to this part, gives assurances to the property owner that once an appropriate use is constructed according to permitted plans, the floodway map can be changed, as previously agreed, upon review and acceptance of as-built plans. 
Conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) means a letter which indicates that FEMA will revise base flood elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood boundaries or floodway as shown on an effective flood hazard boundary map or flood insurance rate map, once the as-built plans are submitted and approved. 
Control structure means a structure designed to control the rate of flow that passes through the structure, given a specific upstream and downstream water surface elevation. 
Critical facility means any facility which is critical to the health and welfare of the population and, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster. Damage to these critical facilities can impact the delivery of vital services, can cause greater damage to other sectors of the community, or can put special populations at risk. Examples of critical facilities where flood protection should be required include: emergency services facilities (such as fire and police stations), schools, hospitals, retirement homes and senior care facilities, major roads and bridges, critical utility sites (telephone switching stations or electrical transformers), and hazardous material storage facilities (chemicals, petrochemicals, hazardous or toxic substances). Examples of critical facilities where flood protection is recommended include: sewage treatment plants, water treatment plants, and pumping stations. 
Dam means all obstructions, wall embankments or barriers, together with their abutments and appurtenant works, if any, constructed for the purpose of storing or diverting water or creating a pool. Dams may also include weirs, restrictive culverts or impoundment structures. Underground water storage tanks are not included. 
Designated floodway means the channel, including on-stream lakes, and that portion of the floodplain adjacent to a stream or watercourse, generally depicted on the FEMA FIRM map, which is needed to store and convey the existing 100-year frequency flood discharge with no more than a 0.1 foot increase in stage due to the loss of flood conveyance or storage, and no more than a ten-percent increase in velocities. 
1.  The floodways are designated for on the countywide flood insurance rate map of Cook County prepared by FEMA and dated August 19, 2008. When two (2) floodway maps exist for a waterway, the more restrictive floodway limit shall prevail. 
2.  The floodways for those parts of unincorporated Cook County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City of Calumet City that may be annexed into the City of Calumet City are designated for the Little Calumet River on the countywide flood insurance rate map prepared by FEMA and dated August 19, 2008. 
To locate the designated floodway boundary on any site, the designated floodway boundary should be scaled off the designated floodway map and located on a site plan, using reference marks common to both maps. Where interpretation is needed to determine the exact location of the designated floodway boundary, IDNR/OWR should be contacted for the interpretation. 
Detention basin means a manmade structure for the temporary storage of stormwater runoff with controlled release during and immediately following a storm. 
Development means any manmade change to real estate, including: 
1.  Construction, reconstruction, repair, or placement of a building or any addition to a building; 
2.  Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days. If the travel trailer or recreational vehicle is on site for more than 180 days, it must be fully licensed and ready for highway use; 
3.  Drilling, mining, installing utilities, construction of roads, bridges, or similar projects; 
4.  Demolition of a building or redevelopment of a site; 
5.  Clearing of land as an adjunct of construction; 
6.  Construction or erection of levees, walls, fences, dams, or culverts; channel modification; filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving, or other nonagricultural alterations of the ground surface; storage of materials; deposit of solid or liquid waste; 
7.  Subdivision of land, annexation agreements, and finalization of a plat, replat, planned unit development or manufactured home park; 
8.  Any other activity of man that might change the direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface water, including extensive vegetation removal; and 
9.  Substantial improvement of an existing building. 
The term "development" does not include: 
1.  Maintenance of existing buildings and facilities such as reroofing or resurfacing of roads when there is no increase in the ground or road surface elevation; 
2.  Gardening, plowing, and similar agricultural practices that do not involve filling, grading or construction of levees; 
3.  Erection of a storage shed, accessory building, fence and playground equipment, that: 
a.  Has a footprint of less than fifty (50) square feet; 
b.  Is not located in a floodway or within ten (10) feet of a property line; and 
c.  Is properly anchored to withstand surface water flows. 
Director of inspectional services or director means the director of inspectional services or designee. 
Elevation certificate means a form published by FEMA that is used to certify the elevation to which a building has been elevated. 
Emergency overflow means the structure in a detention or retention basin designed to protect the basin in the event of a malfunction of the primary outlet or a storm event greater than the basin design storm. 
Erosion means the general process whereby soils are moved by flowing water or wave action. 
Excavation means any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced, relocated or bulldozed. The term shall include the conditions resulting therefrom. 
Exceptional functional value wetland means any wetland that either: 
(1)  Meets the Illinois Natural Area Inventory's definition for determining exceptional functional value; or 
(2)  Is located in an Illinois Natural Area Inventory site. 
Exempt organizations means organizations which are exempt from this article per Illinois Compiled Statutes (ILCS) including state, federal or local units of government. 
Existing grade means the vertical location of the existing ground surface prior to excavation or filling. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) has been completed before April 1, 1990. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
FEMA means Federal Emergency Management Agency and its regulations at 44 CFR 59-79, as amended. 
Flood means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from overflow of inland or tidal waves, or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood frequency means a period of years, based on a statistical analysis, during which a flood of a stated magnitude may be expected to be equaled or exceeded. 
Flood fringe means that portion of riverine floodplains outside of the designated floodway. 
Flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) means a map prepared by FEMA that depicts the special flood hazard area (SFHA) within the city. This map includes insurance rate zones and floodplains and may or may not depict floodways. 
Flood insurance study means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations. 
Floodplain means that land typically adjacent to a body of water with ground surface elevations at or below the base flood or the 100-year frequency flood elevation. Floodplains may also include detached special flood hazard areas, ponding areas, etc. The floodplain is also known as the special flood hazard area (SFHA). 
1.  The floodplains are those lands within the jurisdiction of the City of Calumet City that are subject to inundation by the base flood or 100-year frequency flood. The SFHAs of the City of Calumet City are generally identified as such on panel number(s) 17031C00664, 17031C00668, 17031C0669J, 17031C0752J, 17031C0754J, 17031C0756J, 17031C00757J, 17031C0758J, 17031C0759J of the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of the City of Calumet City prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated August 19, 2008. 
2.  The SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated Cook County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City of Calumet City or that may be annexed into the City of Calumet City are generally identified as such on panel number(s) 17031C00664, 17031C00668, 17031C0669J, 17031C0752J, 17031C0754J, 17031C0756J, 17031C00757J, 17031C0758J, 17031C0759J of the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map prepared for Cook County by the Federal Emergency Management Agency) and dated August 19, 2008. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to a building, which reduces or eliminates flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodproofing certificate means a form published by FEMA that is used to certify that a building has been designed and constructed to be structurally dry floodproofed to the flood protection elevation. 
Flood protection elevation (FPE) means the elevation of the base flood or 100-year frequency floods plus one (1) foot of freeboard at any given location in the SFHA. 
Historic building means any building that is: 
1.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the department of interior) or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the national register; 
2.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
3.  Individually listed on the state inventory of historic places by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency; and 
4.  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that has been certified by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency. 
Hydrologic and hydraulic calculations means engineering analysis which determine expected flood flows and flood elevations based on land characteristics and rainfall events. 
INDR/OWR means the Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water Resources. 
Letter of map amendment (LOMA) means official determination by FEMA that a specific structure is not in a 100-year floodplain; amends the FIRM. 
Letter of map revision (LOMR) means letter that revises base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevations, floodplains or floodways as shown on an effective FIRM. 
Level 1 development means a development project that meets any of the following criteria: 
1.  Is a single-family residential development on ten (10) acres or more; 
2.  Is a multifamily or nonresidential development on three (3) acres or more; or 
3.  Disturbs more than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of land area. 
Level 2 development means a development project which does not qualify as a level 1 development but meets any of the following criteria: 
1.  Has one (1) or more new dwelling units; 
2.  Has more than one (1) existing dwelling unit; 
3.  Has more than one (1) platted lot; 
4.  Will be used for other than residential, agricultural or public purpose; or 
5.  Disturbs more than ten thousand (10,000) square feet of land area or adds an additional one thousand (1,000) square feet of new impervious area. 
Level 3 development means a development project that does not meet the criteria for the definition of level 2 development. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this article. 
Major drainage system means that portion of a drainage system needed to store and convey flows beyond the capacity of the minor drainage system. 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designated for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles placed on site for more than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle". 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Minor drainage system means that portion of a drainage system designed to safely convey the ten-year runoff event or less. It includes street gutters, storm sewers, small open channels and swales. 
Mitigation means mitigation including those measures necessary to minimize the negative effects which floodplain development activities might have on the public health, safety and welfare. Examples of mitigation include: excavation of compensatory storage, soil erosion and sedimentation control, and channel restoration. Mitigation may also include those activities taken to reduce a structure's susceptibility to flooding. 
New construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) has been completed on or after April 1, 1990. 
NAVD 88 means National American Vertical Datum of 1988. NAVD 88 supersedes the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 (NGVD). 
Natural, when used in reference to channels, means those channels formed by the existing surface topography of the earth prior to changes made by humans. A natural stream tends to follow a meandering path; its floodplain is not constrained by levees; the area near the bank has not been cleared, mowed or cultivated; the stream flows over soil and geologic materials typical of the area with no substantial alteration of the course or cross-section of the stream caused by filling or excavating. A modified channel may regain some natural characteristics over time as the channel meanders and vegetation is re-established. Similarly, a modified channel may be restored to more natural conditions by man through regarding and revegetation. 
Ordinary highwater mark (OHWM) means the point on the bank or shore up to which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous so as to leave a distinctive mark, such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation or other easily such recognized characteristics. 
Overland flow path means an area of land which conveys stormwater for all events up to and including the base flood event. The overland flow path can be determined using topographic information and shall take into account all on-site and off-site tributary areas. 
Public flood control project means a flood control project that will be operated and maintained by a public agency to reduce flood damages to existing buildings and structures, including a hydrologic and hydraulic study of the existing and proposed conditions of the watershed. Nothing in this definition shall preclude the design, engineering, construction or financing, in whole or in part, of a flood control project by persons or parties who are not public agencies. 
Public bodies of water means all open public streams and lakes capable of being navigated by watercraft, in whole or in part, for commercial uses and purposes, and all lakes, rivers, and streams which in their natural condition were capable of being improved and made navigable, or that are connected with or discharge their waters into navigable lakes or rivers within, or upon the borders of the state, together with all bayous, sloughs, backwaters, and submerged lands that are open to the main channel or body of water directly accessible thereto. 
Recreational vehicle or travel trailer means a vehicle which is: 
1.  Built on a single chassis; 
2.  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
3.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty vehicle; and 
4.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Regional permits means regional permits are offered for pre-approved projects which are considered minor projects that are permissible per IDNR/OWR Part 3708 rules for Northeastern Illinois regulatory floodways. A complete listing of the terms and conditions for specific project types can be obtained from the IDNR/OWR website. 
Registered land surveyor means a land surveyor registered in the State of Illinois, under the Illinois Land Surveyors Act. (225 ILCS 330/1, et seq.) 
Registered or licensed professional engineer means an engineer registered in the State of Illinois, under The Illinois Professional Engineering Practice Act. (225 ILCS 325/1 et seq.) 
Repair, remodeling or maintenance means development activities that do not result in any increases in the outside dimensions of a building or any changes to the dimensions of a structure. 
Repetitive loss means flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds twenty-five (25) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Retention/detention facility means a retention facility stores stormwater runoff without a gravity release. A detention facility provides for storage of stormwater runoff and controlled release of this runoff during and after a flood or storm. 
Riverine SFHA means any SFHA subject to flooding from a river, creek, intermittent stream, ditch, on-stream lake system or any other identified channel. This term does not include areas subject to flooding from lakes, ponding areas, areas of sheet flow, or other areas not subject to overbank flooding. 
Runoff means the water derived from melting snow or rain falling on the land surface, flowing over the surface of the ground or collected in channels or conduits. 
Special flood hazard area (SFHA): See "floodplain" definition. 
Sedimentation means the processes that deposit soils, debris, and other materials either on other ground surfaces or in bodies of water or watercourses. 
Start of construction, including substantial improvement, means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. 
Statewide permits means statewide permits are offered for pre-approved projects that are considered minor projects which are permissible per the IDNR/OWR Part 3700 rules. A complete listing of the statewide permits and permit requirements can be obtained from the IDNR/OWR website. 
Structure: See "building" definition. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cumulative percentage of damage during the life of the building equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred regardless of actual repair work performed. Volunteer labor and materials must be included in this determination. The term includes repetitive loss buildings. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or improvement of a structure taking place during a ten-year period in which the cumulative percentage of improvements equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the improvement or repair is started. 
1.  Substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. This term includes structures that have incurred repetitive loss or substantial damage, regardless of the actual work done. 
2.  The term does not, however, include either: 
a.  Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, or 
b.  Any alteration of a "historic structure" listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the Illinois Register of Historic Places, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
Transition section means reaches of the stream or floodway where water flows from a narrow cross-section to a wide cross-section or vice versa. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the city's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
Watershed means the land area above a given point on a channel that contributes stormwater to that point. 
Waters of the United States means those waters under the authority of the corps of engineers under the Clean Water Act and defined in 33 CFR Part 328, as amended. This includes most lakes, rivers, streams, ponds and wetlands. 
Wetland means a subset of the waters of the United States. A wetland is land that is inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, under normal conditions, a prevalence of vegetation adapted for life in saturated soil conditions (known as hydrophytic vegetation). A wetland is identified based upon three (3) attributes: (1) hydrology, (2) soils and (3) vegetation as mandated by the federal wetland determination methodology. 
Wetland impact means any development activity within the boundary of a delineated wetland. Final determination of wetland impact is performed by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the U.S. Corps of Engineers based on 33 CFR Part 230 Section 404(b)(1) and 33 CFR Parts 320 through 330, as amended. 
(Code 1980, § 8-4; Ord. No. 00-65, § 1, 10-12-2000; Ord. No. 08-57, § 2, 8-14-2008)  
Sec. 34-35. - Permit procedures. 
(a)  Site development permit required. 
(1)  No person, firm, corporation or governmental agency shall commence any development regulated by this chapter on any lot or parcel of land without first obtaining a site development permit from the director of inspectional services. 
(2)  A permit shall be issued if the proposed development meets the requirements of this chapter. 
(3)  No development site shall be occupied, no certificate of occupancy shall be issued, and no subdivision or other development shall be accepted by the city council unless and until all provisions of this chapter are met, including the issuance of a final letter of map revision, where appropriate. 
(b)  Grandfathering. 
(1)  Development projects that have been approved or permitted prior to the effective date of this chapter are exempt from this chapter providing the stormwater management facilities and flood protection measures are installed, functioning and in compliance with all applicable stormwater and floodplain regulations in effect at the time of approval or permit. 
(2)  If a previously developed site is redeveloped or modified so that the amount of impervious surface or the amount of stormwater runoff will increase, then the redevelopment or modification project shall comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(3)  Improvements, modifications, additions and repairs to an existing building in the special flood hazard area shall meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(c)  Contiguous property. 
(1)  In order to preclude inappropriate phasing of developments to circumvent the intent of this chapter, when a proposed development activity will occur on a lot or parcel of land that has contiguous lots or parcels of lands owned by the same property owner, then the criteria as defined in this section will be applied to the total land area compiled from aggregate ownership parcels. 
(2)  The determination of level 1, 2 or 3 developments will be based on the total area of all of the contiguous parcels under the same ownership. 
(d)  Other permits. 
(1)  The permit applicant shall be responsible for: 
a.  Obtaining all other federal, state, and local permits, approvals or permit-not-required letters that may be required for this type of activity; 
b.  Providing copies of the permits, approvals and letters to director of inspectional services; 
c.  The director of inspectional services shall not issue a site development permit unless all other federal, state, and local permits have been obtained; 
d.  The director of inspectional services is responsible for obtaining and maintaining copies of all other required federal, state, and local permits. 
(e)  Conditional approval. 
(1)  The director of inspectional services may issue a letter of conditional approval of: 
a.  The regulatory floodplain and regulatory floodway delineation, overland flow path, wetland delineation, runoff volume reduction hierarchy, and/or detention and bypass computations for a development; and/or 
b.  Parts of the development project that comply with local requirements. A letter of conditional approval shall not be issued for those parts of the project that are awaiting state or federal approval. 
(2)  A conditional approval to alter the floodway delineation shall not be granted until a CLOMR has been issued by FEMA. 
(3)  A conditional approval will be based on conformance with the performance standards, and the submittal of the appropriate application requirements. 
(4)  The letter of conditional approval will state the conditions placed on the permit applicant. Variation from these conditions is considered a violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(5)  Before the issuance of a letter of conditional approval, the permit applicant shall sign a statement that he or she understands that: 
a.  The project has not been granted a final site development permit; 
b.  The final site development permit may require changes to the plans; and 
c.  The applicant proceeds at his own risk pending issuance of the final permit. 
(f)  Timing of work. 
(1)  Stormwater management facilities shall be functional before building permits are issued. 
(2)  Foundation only permits may be issued for nonresidential developments prior to completion of the stormwater systems. 
(3)  Soil erosion and sediment control measures shall be functional before general construction begins. 
(4)  Where development of a site is to proceed in phases, the timing requirements shall apply to each phase. 
(g)  Fees. An application for a site development permit shall be accompanied by the fees necessary for the city-approved city engineer to review and approve. 
(h)  Application review. 
(1)  The director of inspectional services shall approve, deny or identify what needs to be changed in an application within sixty (60) days. 
(2)  If an application is incomplete or otherwise needs to be revised, the amended permit applications shall be reviewed within sixty (60) days of receipt. 
(i)  Permit termination. A permit shall be terminated for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Noncompliance with any condition of the permit; 
(2)  The permittee's failure to disclose fully all relevant facts in the application process or the permittee's misrepresentation of any relevant facts at any time; or 
(3)  If the authorized work is not commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days after issuance of the permit or, if the authorized work is suspended or abandoned, for a period of one hundred (180) days after the time of commencing the work, unless an extension has been granted in writing by the director of inspectional services. The extension should be requested of the director of inspectional services, in writing no sooner than ninety (90) days prior to the termination of the permit. 
(Code 1980, § 8-5; Ord. No. 00-65, § 1, 10-12-2000)  
Sec. 34-36. - Permit materials. 
(a)  All development. Application for a development permit shall be made on a form provided by the director of inspectional services. All applications for a site development permit shall include the following: 
(1)  Name and address of applicant; 
(2)  Address and legal description of the property; 
(3)  Site location of the property, drawn to scale, showing: 
a.  If the project is in the SFHA; and 
b.  If the project is in an incorporated or unincorporated area. 
(4)  Description of the proposed activity; 
(5)  Statement of purpose of the proposed activity; 
(6)  Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity; 
(7)  Name and mailing address of the owner of the subject property if different from the applicant; 
(8)  Plans of the proposed activity, drawn to scale, showing: 
a.  Graphic or numerical scale; 
b.  North arrow; 
c.  Property lines and dimensions; 
d.  Location and dimensions of easements; 
e.  Location and names of roads in the vicinity; 
f.  Location and names of waterways in the vicinity; and 
g.  Location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings. 
(9)  Acknowledgment by the applicant that representatives of any federal, state or local unit of government with regulatory authority over the project are authorized to enter upon the property to inspect the development. 
(10)  Signature of the applicant or the applicant's agent; 
a.  If the applicant is a corporation, the president or other authorized officer shall sign the application form; 
b.  If the applicant is a partnership, each partner shall sign the application form; and 
c.  If the applicant is a land trust, the trust officer shall sign the name of the trustee by him as trust officer. A disclosure affidavit shall be filed with the application, identifying each beneficiary of the trust by name and address and defining the respective interests therein. 
(b)  Level 2 development application materials. In addition to the materials required under subsection (a) of this section, an application for a level 2 development project shall also include: 
(1)  A topographic survey of the property at one (1) foot contour intervals keyed to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum 1988, adjusted. The survey shall show: 
a.  Existing terrain; 
b.  Proposed conditions showing all changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling; 
c.  Adjacent areas necessary to determine off-site impacts to the proposed drainage plan; and 
d.  If the development project does not involve regrading the site, then the elevations of the top of foundation, the corners of the lot and representative spots on the lot lines and within the lot may be submitted in lieu of a topographic survey. 
(2)  A narrative describing the existing and proposed stormwater management system, including all discharge points, collection, conveyance and stormwater storage facilities. 
(3)  A drainage system map including, but not limited to the following: 
a.  Sub-watershed boundaries and the property's location within the larger watershed; 
b.  Location of all existing drainage features, such as streams, lakes, wetlands and field tiles; 
c.  Proposed drainage system including but not limited to storm sewers, overland flow paths, detention facilities and roads; 
d.  Proposed post-development terrain at one (1) foot contour intervals; 
e.  Soil classifications; and 
f.  Proposed buffer areas. 
(4)  Copy of all stormwater calculations, sealed by a licensed professional engineer, including but not limited to, detention basin sizing, storm sewer sizing and overland flow path design. 
(5)  Copy of the proposed plat or deed restrictions for all stormwater management features. 
(6)  Copy of the draft operation and maintenance procedures for all stormwater management features. 
(7)  Copy of any wetland submittal to the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, a letter from the corps stating a permit is not required, or a letter from a qualified person stating no corps of engineers permits are required. 
(8)  Subdivisions, annexation agreements, plats, replats, manufactured home parks and PUDs shall include a signed statement by a licensed professional engineer that accounts for changes in the drainage of surface waters in accordance with the Plat Act (765 ILCS 205/0.01 et seq.). 
(9)  Copy of the erosion and sediment control plan (see section 34-64). 
(c)  Level 1 development application materials. In addition to the materials required under subsections (a) and (b) of this section for level 2 development applications, an application for a level 1 development project shall also include: 
(1)  Calculations and a plan defining the flood levels and flow areas through the development for the runoff from the one hundred (100) year storm; 
(2)  Cross-section data for open channel flow paths and designated overland flow paths; 
(3)  Flow rates and velocities at representative points in the drainage system; and 
(4)  A statement by the design engineer of the drainage system's provisions for handling events greater than the one hundred (100) year runoff. 
(d)  Level 3 development application materials. An application for a level 3 development project shall include a plan of the parcel showing pre-development and post-development surface drainage flows. 
(e)  Flood fringe development application materials. In addition to the site development application materials of subsections (a) through (d) of this section, a permit application for a development project in the flood fringe shall include: 
(1)  Drawings of the site, drawn to scale, showing property line dimensions and legal description for the property and sealed by a licensed engineer, architect or land surveyor. The plan must show the relation of the property to the floodplain and floodway boundary. 
(2)  For all proposed buildings, the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) and lowest adjacent grade shall be shown on the submitted plans and the development will be subject to the requirements of subsection 34-92(e) of this article. 
(3)  Drawings showing any proposed change in the designated floodway location. 
(4)  Additional base flood elevation and floodway calculations and data that may be needed as identified in other sections of this chapter. 
(5)  A soil erosion and sediment control plan for disturbed areas shall be submitted. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the identification of a responsible party to ensure post-construction maintenance. 
(f)  Floodway development application materials. No person, firm, corporation or governmental body not exempted by state law shall commence any development in a floodway without first obtaining a development permit from the Department of Inspectional Services and IDNR/OWR. In addition to the site development application materials of subsections (a) through (d) of this section, a permit application for a development project in the floodway shall include: 
(1)  Site location (including legal description) of the property, drawn to scale, on the designated floodway map, indicating whether it is proposed to be in an incorporated or unincorporated area; 
(2)  Name of stream or body of water affected; 
(3)  Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which include as a minimum: 
a.  A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of the waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site, graphic or numerical scale, and north arrow; 
b.  A plan view of the project and engineering study reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the structure or work, elevations, using the North American Vertical Datum of 1988, adjacent property lines and ownership, drainage and flood control easements, location of any channels and any existing or future access roads, distance between proposed activity and navigation channel (when the proposed construction is near a commercially navigable body of water), designated floodway limit, floodplain limit, specifications and dimensions of any proposed channel modifications, location and orientation of cross-sections, north arrow, and a graphic or numerical scale; 
c.  Cross-section views of the project and engineering study reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the work as shown in plan view, existing and proposed elevations, normal water elevation, ten-year frequency flood elevation, 100-year frequency flood elevation and graphic or numerical scales (horizontal and vertical); 
d.  A soil erosion and sediment control plan for disturbed areas. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the identification of a responsible party to ensure post-construction maintenance; and 
e.  A copy of the designated floodway map, marked to reflect any proposed change in the designated floodway location. 
(4)  Any and all other federal, state, and local permits or approval letters that may be required for this type of development. 
(5)  Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be submitted showing that the proposed work will meet the permit criteria of this article. 
(6)  If the designated floodway delineation, base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation will change due to the proposed project, the application will not be considered complete until IDNR/OWR has indicated conditional approval of the designated floodway map change. No structures may be built until a Letter of Map Revision has been approved by FEMA. 
(7)  The application for a structure shall be accompanied by drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line dimensions and existing ground elevations and all changes in grade resulting from any proposed excavation or filling, and floodplain and floodway limits; sealed by a licensed professional engineer, licensed architect or licensed land surveyor; the location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings; and the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed buildings subject to the requirements of this article. 
(8)  If the proposed project involves a channel modification, the applicant shall submit the following information: 
a.  A discussion of the purpose of and need for the proposed work; 
b.  A discussion of the feasibility of using alternative locations or methods (see subsection 34-65(e)(1)) to accomplish the purpose of the proposed work; 
c.  An analysis of the extent and permanence of the impacts each feasible alternative identified in subsection (e)(1) of this section would have on the physical and biological conditions of the body of water affected; and 
d.  An analysis of the impacts of the proposed project, considering cumulative effects on the physical and biological conditions of the body of water affected. 
(g)  SFHA with no designated floodway application materials. In addition to the site development application materials of subsections (a) through (d) of this section, a permit application for a development project in the SFHA with no designated floodway shall include: 
(1)  Drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line dimensions; and existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling, sealed by a licensed engineer, architect or surveyor; the location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings; and the elevations of the lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed buildings subject to the requirements of this article. 
Site location (including legal description) of the property, drawn to scale, on the designed floodplain maps, indicating whether it is proposed to be in an incorporated or unincorporated area; 
(2)  Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which include as a minimum: 
a.  A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of the waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site, graphic or numerical scale, and north arrow; 
b.  A plan of the project and engineering study reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the structure or work, elevations, using the North American Vertical Datum of 1988, adjacent property lines and ownership, drainage and flood control easements, distance between proposed activity and navigation channel (when the proposed construction is in or near a commercially navigable body of water), floodplain limit, location and orientation of cross-sections, north arrow, and a graphical or numerical scale; 
c.  Cross-section views of the project perpendicular to the flow of floodwater and engineering study reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the work as shown in plan view, existing and proposed elevations, normal water elevation, ten-year frequency flood elevation, 100-year frequency flood elevation, and graphical or numerical scales (horizontal and vertical); and 
d.  A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for disturbed areas. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a description of a final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the identification of a responsible party to ensure post-construction maintenance. 
(3)  Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be submitted showing that the proposed work will meet the criteria of this article. 
(4)  Any and all other federal, state and local permits or approvals that may be required for this type of development. 
(5)  Based on the best available existing data according to federal, state or other sources, the director shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. 
a.  Should no elevation information exist for the site, the developer's engineer shall calculate the elevation according to subsection 34-91(b). 
b.  Any development located on land that can be shown to have been higher than the base flood elevation of the current flood insurance rate map identification is not in the SFHA and, therefore, not subject to the requirements of this section. 
c.  The director shall maintain documentation of the existing ground elevation at the development site and certification that this ground elevation existed prior to the date of the site's first flood insurance rate map identification. 
(h)  Plats. Plats or plans for new subdivisions, mobile home parks and planned unit developments (PUDs) shall include: 
(1)  A signed statement by a licensed professional engineer that the plat or plans account for changes in the drainage of surface waters in accordance with 765 ILCS 205/2. 
(2)  The delineation of all SFHAs which appear on the plat, signed and sealed by an Illinois registered land surveyor as per the requirements of law. 
(i)  Records. 
(1)  The director of inspectional services shall maintain all permit and inspection records, including copies of elevation and floodproofing certificates. Such records shall be made readily available for a period of up to three (3) years after the project is completed. 
(2)  All stormwater management facilities shall be located and described within a deed or a plat restriction. 
(3)  All stormwater management facilities shall be located within easements or rights-of-way that explicitly provide for public access for maintenance of such facilities. 
(4)  Perpetual operation and maintenance responsibility and emergency access shall be designated on the plat or deed. Stormwater management facilities that service a single parcel or two (2) parcels of property may be excused from this requirement upon approval of the director of inspectional services. 
(j)  Permits for dams. 
(1)  Any work involving the construction, modification or removal of a dam as defined in section 34-34 per 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part 3702 (Rules for Construction of Dams) shall obtain an IDNR/OWR permit prior to the start of construction of a dam. 
(2)  If the director finds a dam that does not have an IDNR/OWR permit, the director shall immediately notify the IDNR/OWR Bartlett office. 
(3)  If the director finds a dam which is believed to be in unsafe condition, the director shall immediately notify the owner of the dam, the IDNR/OWR Bartlett office, and the Illinois Emergency Management Agency (IEMA). 
(Code 1980, § 8-6; Ord. No. 00-65, § 1, 10-12-2000; Ord. No. 08-57, § 2, 8-14-2008)  
Sec. 34-37. - Duties of the enforcement officials. 
The director of inspectional services shall be responsible for the general administration and enforcement of this chapter which shall include the following: 
(1)  Upon receipt of a development permit application, the director shall review the application to determine the following: 
(a)  Whether the proposed improvements qualify as a level 1, 2 or 3 development; and 
(b)  Whether the site is within a special flood hazard area (SFHA). If the site is in the SFHA, the director must: 
1.  Compare the elevation of the site to the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation to determine if any development located on land that can be shown to be higher than the base flood elevation of the current flood insurance rate map and which has not been filled after the date of the site's first floor insurance rate map without a permit as required by this article is not in the SFHA and, therefore, not subject to the requirements of this article. Conversely, any development located on land shown to be below the base flood elevation and hydraulically connected, but shown on the current flood insurance rate map is subject to the provisions of this article. 
2.  Maintain documentation of the existing ground elevation at the development site and certification that this ground elevation existed prior to the date of the site's first flood insurance rate map identification. 
(2)  Ensure that any and all required federal, state and local permits are received prior to the issuance of a watershed development permit; 
(3)  Ensure that all development in a floodway (or floodplain with no delineated floodway) meets the damage prevention requirements of this article; 
(4)  Inspect all development projects before, during and after construction to assure proper elevation of the structure and to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter and inspect the floodplain on an annual basis and document the results of the inspection; 
(5)  Require and obtain copies of all necessary federal, state and local permits and ensure that development projects are constructed in accordance with those permits; 
(6)  Ensure that the building protection requirements for all buildings subject to this article are met and maintained a record of the as-built elevations of the lowest floor (including basement) or floodproofing certificate. Maintain permit files including: 
(a)  An elevation certificate certifying the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of a residential or nonresidential building subject to this article, and/or; 
(b)  The elevation to which a nonresidential building has been floodproofed, using a floodproofing certificate, for all buildings subject to this article. 
(7)  Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request base flood data, SFHA and designated floodway maps, copies of federal or state permit documents, variance documentation, conditional letter of map revision, letter of map revision, letter of map amendment and "as-built" elevation and floodproofing certificates for all buildings constructed subject to this article; 
(8)  Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to improve base flood or 100-year frequency flood and floodway data and to improve the administration of this article; 
(9)  Submit reports as required for the national flood insurance program; 
(10)  Make damage determinations of all damaged buildings in the SFHA after a flood to determine substantially damaged structures, which must comply with this article. 
(11)  Notify FEMA of any proposed amendments to this chapter. 
(12)  Submit data to IDNR and FEMA to support proposed revisions to the regulatory maps. 
(13)  Ensure that development projects authorized by state and federal authorities are constructed in accordance with the related state and federal permits. 
(14)  Assure that all subdivisions and annexations meet the requirements of this article. 
(15)  Use the criteria listed in this article, base flood elevations, to determine whether the development site is located within a floodplain. 
Once it has been determined that a site is located within a floodplain, the director must determine whether the development site is within a flood fringe, a designated floodway, or within a SFHA or floodplain for which no floodway has been identified, or in a floodplain for which a detailed study has not been conducted and which drains more than one (1) square mile. 
Check whether the development is potentially within an extended SFHA (with a drainage area less than one square mile), indicating that the development would have adverse impacts regarding storage, conveyance, or inundation which would be the basis for the applicant being required to delineate the floodplain and floodway and be subject to the remaining sections of this article. 
If the site is within a flood fringe, the director shall require that the minimum requirements of this article be met. 
If the site is within a floodway, the director shall require that the minimum requirements of this article be met. 
If the site is located within a SFHA or floodplain for which no detailed study has been completed and approved, the director shall require that the minimum requirements of section 34-94 be met. 
If a variance is to be granted for a proposal, the director shall review the requirements of section 34-40 to make sure they are met. In addition, the director shall complete all notification requirements. 
(16)  In order to assure that property owners obtain permits as required in this article, the Director may take any and all actions as outlined in section 34-39. 
(17)  Professional engineer review. If the development site is within a floodway or in a floodplain for which a detailed study has not been conducted and which drains more than one (1) square mile, the permit shall be referred to a licensed professional engineer under the employ or contract of the city for review to ensure that the development meets sections 34-92 or 34-93. 
In the case of an appropriate use, the professional engineer shall state in writing that the development meets the requirements of section 34-93. 
(18)  State permits. Ensure that construction authorization has been granted by IDNR/OWR, for all development projects subject to sections 34-92 or 34-93 and of this article. However, the following review approvals are not delegated to the city and shall require review or permits from IDNR/OWR: 
(a)  Organizations which are exempt from this article, as per the Illinois Compiled Statutes; 
(b)  IDNR/OWR projects, dams or impoundment structures as defined in section 34-34 and all other state, federal or local unit of government projects, including projects of the city and county, except for those projects meeting the requirements of section 34-93; 
(c)  An engineer's determination that an existing bridge or culvert crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis indicating the proposed flood profile, per section 34-93; 
(d)  An engineer's analysis of the flood profile due to section 34-93; 
(e)  Alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent compensatory storage as indicated in section 34-93; 
(f)  Permit issuance of structures within, under, or over publicly navigable rivers, lakes and streams; 
(g)  Any changes in the mapped floodway or published flood profiles. 
(19)  Cooperation with other agencies. 
(a)  Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to improve base flood or 100-year frequency flood and floodway data and to improve the administration of this article; 
(b)  Submit data to IDNR/OWR and FEMA for proposed revisions of a regulatory map within six (6) months whenever a modification of the floodplain may change the base flood elevation or result in a change to the floodplain map; 
(c)  Submit reports as required for the National Flood Insurance Program; and 
(d)  Notify FEMA of any proposed amendments to this article. 
(20)  Promulgate rules and regulations as necessary to administer and enforce the provisions of this article, subject however to the review and approval of IDNR/OWR and FEMA for any article changes. 
(Code 1980, § 8-7; Ord. No. 00-65, § 1, 10-12-2000; Ord. No. 08-57, § 2, 8-14-2008)  
Sec. 34-38. - Disclaimer of liability. 
(a)  The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information derived from engineering and scientific methods of study. 
(b)  Larger floods may occur or flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that development, either inside or outside of the SFHA, will be free from flooding or damage. 
(c)  This chapter does not create liability on the part of the city or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision made lawfully thereunder. 
(Code 1980, § 8-7; Ord. No. 00-65, § 1, 10-12-2000)  
Sec. 34-39. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
(a)  Failure to comply with the requirements of a permit or conditions of a variance resolution shall be deemed to be a violation of this chapter. 
(b)  Upon due investigation, the director of inspectional services may determine that a violation of the minimum standards of this chapter exist. The director of inspectional services shall notify the owner in writing of such violation. 
(c)  If such owner fails after ten (10) days' notice to correct the violation: 
(1)  The city may make application to the circuit court for an injunction-requiring conformance with this chapter or make such other order, as the court deems necessary to secure compliance. 
(2)  Any person who violates this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense. 
(3)  A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(4)  The city may record a notice of violation on the title to the property. 
(d)  The director of inspectional services shall inform the owner that any such violation is considered a willful act to increase flood damages and, therefore, may cause coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be suspended. 
(e)  The director of inspectional services is authorized to issue an order requiring the suspension of the subject development. The stop-work order shall be in writing, shall indicate the reason for the issuance, and shall order the action, if necessary, to resolve the circumstances requiring the stop-work order. The stop-work order constitutes a suspension of the permit. 
(f)  No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or revoked until a hearing is held by the zoning board of appeals. Written notice of such hearing shall be served on the permittee and shall state: (1) the grounds for noncompliance or reasons for suspension or revocation; and (2) the time and place of the hearing. At such hearing, the permittee shall be given an opportunity to present evidence on his behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing, the zoning board of appeals shall determine whether the permit shall be suspended or revoked. 
(g)  Nothing herein shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith shall accrue to the person responsible. 
(Code 1980, § 8-7; Ord. No. 00-65, § 1, 10-12-2000)  
Sec. 34-40. - Variances. 
(a)  No variances shall be granted to any development located in a designated floodway as defined herein. 
(b)  Whenever the standards of this chapter place undue hardship on a specific development proposal, the applicant may apply to the zoning board of appeals for a variance. 
(1)  The zoning board of appeal shall review the applicant's request for a variance and shall submit its recommendation to the city council. The city council may attach such conditions to granting of a variance as it deems necessary to further the flood protection intent of this chapter. 
(2)  No variance shall be granted to the requirements of this chapter unless the applicant demonstrates that all of the following conditions are met: 
a.  An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not granted; and 
b.  The relief requested is the minimum necessary; 
c.  There will be no additional threat to public health, safety, beneficial stream uses and functions, especially aquatic habitat, or creation of a nuisance; and 
d.  There will be no additional public expense for flood protection, lost environmental stream uses and functions, rescue or relief operations, policing, or repairs to streambeds and banks, roads, utilities, or other public facilities; and 
e.  The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not establish a pattern inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP and 
f.  The provisions regarding preventing increased damage of this article shall still be met; and 
g.  The activity is not in a designated floodway; and 
h.  The granting of the variance will not alter the essential character of the area involved including existing stream uses; and 
i.  The development activity cannot be located outside the SFHA; and 
j.  All other required state and federal permits or waivers have been obtained. 
(3)  The zoning board of appeals shall notify an applicant in writing that a variance from the requirements of section 34-92 that would lessen the degree of protection to a building will: 
a.  Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage; 
b.  Increase the risks to life and property; and 
c.  Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and that he will acknowledge in writing that he assumes the risk and liability. 
(4)  Variances requested in connection with restoration of a historic site, building or structure, as defined herein, may be granted using criteria more permissive than the above requirements, subject to the conditions that: 
a.  The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the building or structure; and 
b.  The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the building or structure being removed as a certified historic building or structure. 
(Code 1980, § 8-7; Ord. No. 00-65, § 1, 10-12-2000; Ord. No. 08-57, § 2, 8-14-2008)  
Sec. 34-41. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
(1)  This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. 
(2)  Where this chapter and other chapters, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(3)  This chapter is intended to repeal the original ordinance or resolution, which was adopted to meet the national flood insurance program regulations, but is not intended to repeal the resolution, which the city passed in order to establish initial eligibility for the program. 
(Code 1980, § 8-7; Ord. No. 00-65, § 1, 10-12-2000)  
Secs. 34-42—34-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SITE DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 34-61. - General requirements. 
(a)  General requirement. No development shall adversely affect the flow of surface waters to or from neighboring properties. 
(b)  Existing systems. 
(1)  Stormwater systems shall properly incorporate and be compatible with existing subsurface and surface drainage systems including agricultural systems. 
(2)  All existing drain tiles shall be incorporated into the new storm sewer system. 
(c)  Drainage easements. 
(1)  No obstructions shall be placed in any drainage easement that may block or divert the flow of surface drainage. 
(2)  All fences built in or across a drainage easement shall be either: 
a.  Open to allow the flow of surface water; or 
b.  Have the bottom of the fence at least six (6) inches above grade to allow the unobstructed flow of surface water. 
(d)  Stormwater depths. 
(1)  The maximum depth of stormwater or floodwaters on new streets, parking lots, and other paved areas shall be eight (8) inches measured at the gutter. 
(2)  The maximum depth of stormwater in other areas that are not designated drainageways or water bodies shall be one (1) foot. 
(e)  Diversions. Transfers of waters between watersheds shall be prohibited except when such transfers will not violate the provisions of this chapter. 
(f)  Best management practices. Developments shall incorporate all best management practices as may be required pursuant to the United States Clean Water Act, as amended. 
(g)  Runoff volume reduction hierarchy. 
(1)  An applicant shall choose a strategy to meet the release rate requirements that minimizes the increase in runoff volumes and rates from the development and improves water quality. 
(2)  The applicant shall use appropriate best management practices and the following hierarchy in preparing a drainage plan: 
a.  Preservation of natural resource features of the development site (e.g. floodplains, wetlands, prairies and woodlands); 
b.  Preservation of the existing natural streams, channels and drainageways; 
c.  Minimizing impervious surfaces created at the site (e.g., narrowing road width, minimizing driveway length and width, clustering homes and shared driveways); 
d.  Design of open vegetated channels to convey stormwater runoff; 
e.  Preservation of the natural infiltration and storage characteristics of the site (e.g., interspersing grass filter strips in areas with impervious cover and installing on-lot bioretention facilities); 
f.  Implementation of structural measures that provide water quality and quantity control, such as constructing wet bottom versus dry bottom basins; and 
g.  Implementation of structural measures that provide only quantity control and conveyance. 
(h)  Design rainfall. 
(1)  Unless a continuous simulation approach to drainage system hydrology is used, all design rainfall events shall be based on Illinois State Water Survey's Bulletin 70. 
(2)  The first quartile point rainfall events shall be used for the design and analysis of conveyance systems with duration of less than twelve (12) hours. 
(3)  The third quartile point rainfall distributions shall be used for the design and analysis of detention basins and conveyance systems with a duration greater than twelve (12) and less than or equal to twenty-four (24) hours. 
(4)  The fourth quartile distribution shall be used in the design and analysis of systems with durations greater than twenty-four (24) hours. 
(5)  The SCS type II distribution may be used as an alternative. 
(i)  Design methods. 
(1)  Major conveyance systems for tributary areas up to ten (10) acres may be designed using the rational method. All minor conveyance systems may be designed using the rational method. 
(2)  Event hydrograph methods shall be used to calculate design runoff volumes for stormwater storage basins and major conveyance systems with greater than ten (10) acres of drainage area. 
(3)  The following hydrologic design procedures are considered acceptable for generation of hydrographs: corps of engineers HEC-1, TR-20, TR-55 subject to rainfall distribution modifications, and continuous simulation models. 
(4)  Event methods must use antecedent moisture condition 2. 
(5)  The hydrologic model used shall assume that the watershed is either fully urbanized or fully developed according to current zoning ordinances that have jurisdiction over the area. The model may assume that detention will be construction for new development as required by current ordinances that have jurisdiction over the area. 
(Code 1980, § 8-8; Ord. No. 00-65, § 1, 10-12-2000)  
Sec. 34-62. - Stormwater storage. 
(a)  Release rates. 
(1)  No level 1 or 2 development shall allow the stormwater runoff to leave the development site at a rate greater than the peak runoff from the site under the conditions that exist when the permit is applied for. 
(2)  The drainage system for a property shall be designed to control the peak rate of discharge from the property for the two (2) year, twenty-four (24) hour and one hundred (100) year, twenty-four (24) hour events. 
(3)  The peak discharge for events less than or equal to the two (2) year event shall not be greater than four-hundredths (0.04) cfs per acre of property drained. The peak one hundred (100) year discharge shall not be greater than fifteen hundredths (0.15) cfs per acre of property drained. 
(4)  Upon approval of the director of inspectional services, storage volume calculations for level 2 developments may be based on the development's percentage of impervious area, using the calculations in Detention Volume versus Impervious Area, (South Suburban Mayors and Managers Association, May, 2000). 
(b)  Emergency overflow. 
(1)  All stormwater infiltration, retention and detention facilities shall be provided with an emergency overflow structure capable of passing the one hundred (100) year peak flow inflow rate without damage to buildings or property. 
(2)  The overflow shall be established at the one hundred (100) year highwater elevation. 
(3)  The remainder of the basin shall have at least one (1) foot of freeboard. 
(c)  Outlet design. 
(1)  Single pipe outlets shall have a minimum inside diameter on twelve (12) inches. 
(2)  If design release rates call for a smaller outlet, a design that minimizes the possibility of clogging, such as a perforated riser, shall be used. 
(3)  The minimum outlet restrictor size shall be four (4) inches in diameter provided there is adequate downstream capacity. 
(4)  All outlets shall be "gravity only" unless otherwise approved by the director of inspectional services. 
(5)  Backwater on the outlet structure from the downstream drainage system shall be evaluated when designing the outlet. 
(d)  Dam construction. If the construction of a storage basin involves the construction, modification or removal of a dam or in-stream impoundment structure, as defined in 17 IL Adm. Code 3702 (Rules for Construction of Dams), the applicant shall obtain an Illinois Division of Water Resources Dam Safety Permit or letter stating no permit is required prior to the start of work. 
(e)  Off-site flow. Stormwater infiltration, retention and detention facilities required to meet a development's discharge requirements shall be designed to bypass off-site tributary flow from streams and channels unless approved by the director of inspectional services. 
(f)  Depressional storage. 
(1)  The function of existing on-site depressional storage shall be preserved independently of required detention. 
(2)  When depressional storage is removed it must be compensated for by an on-site runoff storage facility at a 1:1 ratio. This requirement is in addition to the site runoff storage requirements of this chapter. 
(g)  Storage basins. Detention and retention basins shall be designed with the following guidelines: 
(1)  Provisions for all basins: 
a.  The facility shall incorporate either open water or wetland features to improve water quality; 
b.  The facility shall be designed to remove stormwater pollutants; 
c.  To the extent feasible, the distance between detention inlets and outlets shall be maximized. Where possible, they should be at opposite ends of the basin; and 
d.  The dry portions of the facility may be made available for recreational use. 
(2)  Provisions for areas with open water: 
a.  The water shall be at least three (3) feet deep, excluding nearshore banks and safety ledges. If fish habitat is to be provided, at least twenty-five (25) percent of the bottom area shall be ten (10) feet deep to prevent winter freeze-out. 
b.  The side slopes shall be no steeper than 5:1 (horizontal to vertical). 
c.  The permanent pool volume at normal depth shall be equal to the runoff volume from its watershed for the two (2) year storm. If this cannot be achieved, the bottom shall be under drained or wetland plantings shall be used. 
d.  Shoreline protection shall be provided to prevent erosion. Native vegetation is the preferred landscaping material. 
e.  Facilities shall be available, if possible, to allow the pond level to be lowered by gravity flow for cleaning purposes and shoreline maintenance. 
f.  Aeration facilities may be required to prevent pond stagnation. Agreements for the perpetual operation and maintenance of aeration facilities shall be prepared to the satisfaction of the director of inspectional services. 
(3)  Provisions where wetland features are used: 
a.  The design criteria, vegetation selection, performance criteria, and maintenance and monitoring guidelines in Naturalized Stormwater Management Facilities (South Suburban Mayors and Managers Association, May, 2000) shall be followed. 
b.  Sediment basins should be provided at all major inlets to the facility. The volume of the basins should be at least five hundred (500) cubic feet per acre of impervious surface in the drainage area. Side slopes below one (1) foot of depth should be no steeper than three (3) to one (1) (horizontal to vertical) and basin depth should be at least three (3) feet and designed to allow access for sediment removal equipment. 
c.  There should be no low flow bypass between the inlet and outlet. Paved low flow channels shall not be used. 
(4)  Provisions for shoreline zones: 
a.  The shoreline zone is that area between one (1) foot above normal pool stage and one (1) foot below normal pool stage. 
b.  The side slope in the shoreline zone shall not be steeper than 10:1 (horizontal to vertical). 
c.  Appropriate soil conditions shall be provided in the shoreline zone. 
1.  Compaction of both subsoil and topsoil shall be minimized (i.e., to less than 275 psi). 
2.  Where subsoil compaction cannot be avoided, it should be disked to a depth of six (6) to eight (8) inches with a chisel plow before spreading topsoil. 
3.  A suitable uncompacted topsoil, at a minimum thickness of one (1) foot, shall be spread to provide a suitable growing medium for aquatic plants. Coarse soils with minimal clay content and a high organic content are recommended. 
d.  Water tolerant, preferably native, vegetation shall be used to landscape the shoreline zone. 
1.  The selected plants and planting methods shall conform to the soils, hydrology, and water quality conditions present in such facilities, with plants being tolerant of highly variable hydrologic conditions and degraded water quality (e.g., high turbidity and salinity content). 
2.  Plant selection should conform to the guidance in the Native Plant Guide for Streams and Stormwater Facilities in Northeastern Illinois (NRCS et al, 1998). 
(5)  Provisions for areas (other than shoreline zones) that are intended to remain dry: 
a.  The minimum bottom slope for turf shall be two (2) percent. If this cannot be achieved, the bottom shall be underdrained or wetland plantings shall be used. 
b.  The side slopes shall be no steeper than 4:1 (horizontal to vertical) for all turf areas. 
(h)  Streets, parking and underground storage. 
(1)  No storage basin shall be constructed within a distance of ten (10) feet plus one and half (1½) times the depth of any basin to the right-of-way of any public roadway without written permission from director of inspectional services. 
(2)  The owner of a parcel being developed adjacent to a state or county road right-of-way shall notify the proper highway authority in writing of the proposed development. The owner shall request that the proper highway authority provide, at the cost of the highway authority or as otherwise provided by law, the amount of additional capacity in any stormwater detention facility to be constructed in the development for the future availability of the highway authority for meeting stormwater detention requirements of any future public construction on the highway. 
(3)  The maximum depth of stormwater storage for paved areas designated for public parking is eight (8) inches. 
(4)  Underground storage of stormwater shall be avoided. If used, adequate storm sewer inlets must be provided to pass the one hundred (100) year flow into the underground storage. 
(i)  Storage in floodplains. 
(1)  Stormwater retention and detention facilities shall not be constructed in the SFHA unless approved by director of inspectional services. 
(2)  If a storage facility is constructed in the SFHA, the volume of detention storage required to meet the standards of this section shall be in addition to the floodplain compensatory storage required for the development. 
(j)  On-stream detention. 
(1)  "On-stream" detention means an in-stream impoundment or other detention basin that includes construction of a dam or other barrier in an existing channel. 
(2)  All on-stream detention shall provide a detention volume safety factor equal to one plus five-hundredths (0.05) times the ratio of off-site tributary drainage area to on-site tributary drainage area. The maximum detention volume safety factor shall be one and five-tenths (1.5). 
(3)  The applicant for a permit to construct an on-stream detention facility shall provide the director of inspectional services with either an IDNR dam safety permit or a letter from IDNR stating that a dam safety permit is not required. 
(4)  On-stream detention shall not be allowed if: 
a.  The off-site to on-site tributary drainage area ratio is greater than ten (10) to one (1), except for developments providing a watershed benefit; or 
b.  The tributary drainage area is greater than six hundred forty (640) acres, except for detention that provides a watershed benefit. 
(5)  The release rate shall be the total of the following: 
a.  Four-hundredths (0.04) cubic feet per second per acre of the total tributary drainage area (on-site and off-site) at the elevation created by impoundment of the on-site two (2) year storm volume plus the detention volume safety factor; and 
b.  Fifteen-hundredths (0.15) cubic feet per second per acre of the total tributary drainage area (on-site and off-site) at the elevation created by impoundment of the on-site one hundred (100) year storm volume plus the detention volume safety factor; and 
c.  The required compensatory storage; and 
d.  The release rate and on-site detention volume shall be calculated using the twenty-four (24) hour storm event. This release rate calculation shall be used unless other site conditions warrant further analysis and modification from this standard or unless watershed-specific release rates have been adopted. 
(6)  On-stream detention shall provide water quality treatment. One (1) of the following two (2) methods shall be used: 
a.  A wet detention facility shall be constructed with a minimum permanent pool volume equal to the calculated sediment volume accumulated over a one (1) year period for the entire upstream watershed and an average normal water depth of at least four (4) feet. The facility shall also have a live storage volume that meets the standard storage requirements of this section. 
b.  A separate off-line sediment basin shall be used with a volume appropriate for the tributary drainage area to the sediment basin. 
(7)  Impoundment of the stream as part of on-stream detention shall not prevent the migration of indigenous fish species, which require access to upstream areas as part of their life cycle, and shall not cause or contribute to the degradation of water quality or stream aquatic habitat. These fish species may be present or potentially present. 
(8)  Compensatory storage requirements shall be satisfied and shall be in addition to detention volume requirements. 
(9)  No on-stream detention shall be allowed in areas designated as an exceptional functional value wetland. 
(Code 1980, § 8-9; Ord. No. 00-65, § 1, 10-12-2000)  
Sec. 34-63. - Stormwater conveyance. 
(a)  Capacity. 
(1)  Minor stormwater conveyance systems shall be sized to convey the ten (10) year runoff. 
(2)  Major conveyance systems shall be sized to carry the one hundred (100) year runoff. 
(b)  Storm sewers and swales. 
(1)  The ten (10) year design storm shall be used as a minimum for storm sewers and minor swales. 
a.  Storm sewers shall contain the ten (10) year storm within the pipes and manholes. 
b.  Roadside ditches and swales shall contain the ten (10) year storm without water encroaching on the pavement. 
(2)  Storm sewer design shall be based on full flow conditions; otherwise, hydraulic grade calculations shall be performed that show that the rims are not inundated at the design storm. 
(3)  Storm sewers and swales shall not connect to sanitary sewers. 
(c)  Existing systems. 
(1)  Field tile systems disturbed during construction must be reconnected by those responsible for their disturbance unless an approved drainage plan includes provisions for the disturbed system. All abandoned field tiles shall be removed in their entirety. 
(2)  Storm sewers and swales may connect to existing drain tiles or storm sewers only if the applicant submits a maintenance agreement, recorded easements and a report that indicates the existing system has adequate hydraulic capacity and structural integrity. The recorded easement and maintenance agreement must extend from the connection to the discharge point in an open channel. 
(d)  Easements. 
(1)  All storm sewers and swales shall be located in a public road right-of-way or maintenance easement. 
(2)  The following easement widths shall be used to provide sufficient maintenance access: 
Pipe diameter (inches) 	Easement width (feet) 
Less than 11 	10 
18 to 36 	12 
36 to 60 	15 
greater than 60 	10 feet plus the diameter of the pipe 
 
(3)  The director of inspectional services shall require additional easement widths if the storm sewer depth is greater than average. 
(4)  All drainage easements shall be accessible to vehicular equipment; however, vehicles do not have to be able to drive down the entire length of the easement. 
(e)  Erosion protection. 
(1)  All stormwater conveyance systems shall be designed and constructed to withstand the expected velocity of flow from all events up to the base flood without erosion. 
(2)  Stabilization adequate to prevent erosion shall be provided at the inlets and outlets for all pipe and channel transitions. 
(f)  Sewer design. 
(1)  The minimum storm sewer shall be ten (10) inches for the first pipe and twelve (12) inches for subsequent reaches unless approved by the director of inspectional services. 
(2)  The minimum design velocity for a storm sewer shall be 2.5 fps. The maximum design velocity for a storm sewer shall be eight (8.0) fps. 
(3)  All flared end sections for twelve (12) inch or larger storm sewers shall have grates to stop people, animals or large debris from entering. The grates shall have openings no larger than three (3) inches horizontal to eight (8) inches vertical. 
(g)  Streams and channels. Where an existing stream or channel is proposed as part of the conveyance system for the development's increased runoff, the following requirements shall apply: 
(1)  The project shall meet all requirements in sections 34-64, 34-65 and 34-93 on channel and bank protection. 
(2)  Clearing of channel vegetation shall be limited to that which is necessary. A revegetation plan is required using the Native Plant Guide for Streams and Stormwater Facilities in Northeastern Illinois, NRCS, et al, as a minimum standard. 
(3)  A minimum maintenance easement of twelve (12) feet from the top of bank is required along one (1) side of all channels draining twenty (20) or more acres. 
(h)  Overland flow paths. 
(1)  The development must have an overland flow path that will pass the one hundred (100) year flood flow without damage to buildings or property. 
(2)  If the upstream drainage area is less than twenty (20) acres, the storm sewer pipe and inlet systems sized for the base flood can be constructed in lieu of providing an overland flow path. 
(3)  The critical duration one hundred (100) year flood flow shall be used to design the overland flow path limits and it shall include all on-site and off-site tributary areas. 
(4)  Overland flow paths shall be protected from fencing, landscaping or storage shed placement, which could impair its function. This protection shall be established through an easement, deed or plat restriction as required in section 34-36(g). 
(5)  All principal buildings on parcels containing or adjoining an overland flow path or other high water level designation shall have a lowest adjacent grade elevation: 
a.  Five-tenths (0.5) feet above the overflow elevation for tributary areas of twenty (20) acres or less. 
b.  One (1) foot above the overflow elevation for tributary areas greater than twenty (20) acres. 
(Code 1980, § 8-10; Ord. No. 00-65, § 1, 10-12-2000)  
Sec. 34-64. - Erosion and sediment control. 
(a)  General principles. 
(1)  The requirements of this section shall only affect level 1 and 2 developments. 
(2)  Development should be related to the topography and soils of the site so as to create the least potential for erosion. Areas of steep slopes, where high cut and fills may be required, should be avoided and natural contours should be followed as closely as possible. 
(3)  Natural vegetation should be retained and protected. Clearing of natural ground cover and/or trees within a buffer area as defined in section 34-65 should be left undisturbed wherever possible. 
(4)  The smallest practical area of land should be exposed at any one (1) time. 
(5)  Prior to site clearing and grading, sediment basins or traps, filter barriers, diversions and other appropriate control measures shall be installed. 
(6)  Permanent vegetation and structures should be installed and functional as soon as practical during development. Native vegetation is preferred for developments near, or adjacent to high quality natural areas, wetlands and streams. 
(7)  Those areas being converted from agricultural purposes to other land uses shall be vegetated with an appropriate protective cover prior to development. 
(8)  All waste generated as a result of site development shall be properly disposed of and shall be prevented from being carried off the site by either wind or water. 
(b)  On-site control measures. The on-site control measures shall be designed based on the size of the disturbed areas as follows: 
(1)  For disturbed areas draining less than one (1) acre, filter barriers (including filter fences, straw bales, or equivalent control measures) shall be constructed to control all off-site runoff as specified in referenced handbooks. Vegetated filter strips, with a minimum width of twenty-five (25) feet may be used as an alternative where runoff in sheet flow is expected. 
(2)  For disturbed areas draining more than one (1) acre but less than five (5) acres, a sediment trap or equivalent control measure shall be constructed at the downslope point of the disturbed area in conjunction with other filter barriers. 
(3)  For disturbed areas draining more than five (5) acres, a sediment basin or equivalent control measure shall be constructed at the downslope point of the disturbed area in conjunction with other filter barriers. 
(4)  Sediment basin and trap design shall provide for both detention storage and sediment storage. The detention storage shall be for equal volumes of wet detention storage and dry detention storage. Each shall be sized for the two (2) year, twenty-four (24) hour runoff from the site. The release rate shall be that rate required to achieve a minimum detention time of ten (10) hours. The outlet structure shall be placed such that it only drains the dry detention storage. 
(5)  The sediment storage shall be sized to store the estimated sediment load generated from the site over the duration of the construction period with a minimum storage equivalent to the volume of sediment generated in one (1) year. A sediment removal schedule is required for construction periods exceeding one (1) year. 
(c)  Stormwater conveyance channels. Stormwater conveyance channels, ditches, swales, and diversions, shall convey a ten (10) year frequency storm without erosion. All channels shall be stabilized within forty-eight (48) hours, consistent with the following standards: 
(1)  For grades up to four (4) percent, seeding in combination with mulch or erosion blankets shall be placed along the channel sides with sod or erosion blanket applied to the bottom; 
(2)  For grades of four (4) to eight (8) percent, sod shall be used; and 
(3)  For grades greater than eight (8) percent, use rock or rip-rap, or reduce the grade using drop structures. 
(d)  Channel protection. 
(1)  A vegetated buffer strip of at least twenty-five (25) feet in width shall be preserved and/or reestablished, where possible, along existing channels. 
(2)  Land disturbance activities in stream channels and construction vehicle use of channels shall be minimized. 
(3)  Temporary stream crossings shall be constructed, where necessary, to minimize erosion. Temporary crossings shall be constructed of nonerosive materials such as rip-rap or gravel. 
(4)  The temporary stream crossing shall be completely removed and the stream restored to its preconstruction condition within forty-eight (48) hours after completion of construction, incorporating appropriate native vegetation. Also see section 34-92 requirements in floodways. 
(e)  Additional requirements. 
(1)  Storm sewer inlets and culverts shall be protected by sediment traps or filter barriers meeting accepted design standards and specifications. 
(2)  If dewatering devices are used, discharge locations shall be protected from erosion. All pumped discharges shall be routed through appropriately designed sediment traps or basins, or equivalent. 
(3)  Each site shall have graveled entrance roads, access drives and parking areas of sufficient length and width to prevent sediment from being tracked onto public roadways. Any sediment reaching a public or private road shall be removed by shoveling or street cleaning (not flushing) before the end of each workday and transported to a controlled sediment disposal area. 
(f)  References adopted. 
(1)  Specifications for erosion control measures shall be in accordance with the "Illinois Urban Manual" (1995) or latest edition. 
(2)  Sediment and erosion control planning shall be in accordance with "Procedures and Standards for Urban Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control in Illinois" (revised July, 1988) by the Urban Committee of the Association of Illinois Soil and Water Conservation Districts (the "Green Book") Chapters 1—5. 
(3)  Where the requirements of sections 34-63(b)—(e) of this chapter, the Illinois Urban Manual or the "Green Book" conflict, the more restrictive requirement shall prevail. 
(g)  Plan requirements. An erosion and sediment control plan shall include the following: 
(1)  Proposed sequencing schedule, including dates, for: 
a.  Stripping; 
b.  Installation of temporary on-site control measures and perimeter controls; 
c.  Clearing and grading; 
d.  Construction; 
e.  Installation of storm drainage and paving; and 
f.  Final grading, removal of temporary measures and landscaping. 
(2)  Location, standard details and design specifics of sediment basins and traps. The design specifics should include outlet details and the drainage area to each measure. 
(3)  Location and description of all control measures, including seeding mixtures and rates, types of sod, method of seedbed preparation, expected seeding dates, kind and quantity of mulching for both temporary and permanent vegetative control measures and types of nonvegetative stabilization measures. 
(4)  Description of dust and traffic control measures and location and specifications for construction entrances. 
(5)  Locations of stockpiles and description of stabilization measures. 
(6)  Volumes, locations and methods of stabilization for off-site fill or borrow. 
(7)  Provisions for maintenance of control measures, including a maintenance schedule. 
(8)  Description of permanent stabilization measures including identification (name, address and telephone) of the person(s) or entity responsible for maintenance during and after construction. 
(h)  Extended construction shutdown period. Disturbed areas shall be stabilized with temporary or permanent measures within seven (7) calendar days following the end of active disturbance or redisturbance. The condition of the construction site for the winter shut-down period shall address proper sediment and erosion control early in the fall growing season. Stabilization measures include seeding, mulching, sodding or erosion control blankets. 
(i)  Final site stabilization. All temporary control measures shall be disposed of within thirty (30) days after permanent soil stabilization measures have been installed. Trapped sediment and other disturbed soils resulting from the temporary measures shall be permanently stabilized to prevent further erosion and sedimentation. 
(Code 1980, § 8-11; Ord. No. 00-65, § 1, 10-12-2000)  
Sec. 34-65. - Stream and wetland protection. 
(a)  Buffer areas required. Buffer areas shall be required along all streams, lakes, waterways, channels and wetlands, except for the following: 
(1)  Roadside ditches; 
(2)  Existing excavated stormwater storage facilities; 
(3)  Borrow pits and quarries; 
(4)  Leveed waterways; and 
(5)  Improvements to existing public roads and utilities. 
(b)  Buffer area dimensions. 
(1)  Linear buffers. Linear buffers shall be designated along both sides of all streams and natural channels. A minimum buffer of thirty (30) feet on each side of the channel shall be provided. 
(2)  Water body buffers. Water body buffers shall encompass all lakes, wetlands and other nonlinear bodies of water. A minimum buffer of thirty (30) feet on each side of the channel shall be provided. 
(3)  Exceptional functional value wetlands shall have a minimum buffer of one hundred (100) feet. 
(4)  In areas having state or federal threatened and endangered species present or for Illinois Natural Area Inventory Sites, buffer widths may be modified to meet the terms and conditions specified during consultation with the Illinois Department of Natural Resources or United States Fish and Wildlife Service, pursuant to state and federal laws and regulations. 
(5)  The buffer area for all waters of the United States shall extend from the ordinary highwater mark. The buffer area for wetlands shall extend from the edge of the delineated wetland. A property may contain a buffer area that originates from the waters of the United States on another property. 
(6)  Buffer averaging may be allowed by the director of inspectional services, provided the buffer width is at least one-half (½) of the buffer width required by this chapter the minimum width required by a corps of engineers permit, whichever is wider. 
(c)  Buffer requirements. 
(1)  Features of the stormwater management system may be within the buffer area of a development. 
(2)  Access through buffer areas shall be provided, when necessary, for maintenance purposes. 
(3)  Preservation of buffer areas shall be provided by deed or plat restriction. 
(d)  Allowed uses in buffer areas. 
(1)  All buffer areas shall be maintained free from development except for the following uses: 
a.  Passive recreation, including pedestrian, bicycle or equestrian trails. 
b.  Construction and maintenance of utilities and stormwater facilities. 
(2)  Structures and impervious surfaces related to recreational facilities, such as trails and paths, may occupy a maximum of twenty (20) percent of the buffer surface area, provided the runoff from such facilities is diverted away from the waters of the United States or such runoff is directed to enter the buffer area as unconcentrated flow. Boat docks, boat houses and piers shall be allowed and count as a structure when calculating percent of impervious area. 
(3)  Buffer areas hydrologically disturbed by allowing construction or as part of a revegetation plan shall be revegetated using the Native Plant Guide for Streams and Stormwater Facilities in Northeastern Illinois, (NRCS, et al.) as a minimum standard. 
(e)  Channel protection. 
(1)  If the proposed activity involves a channel modification, the permit applicant shall demonstrate that 
a.  There are no practicable alternatives to the activity, which would accomplish its purpose with less impact to the natural conditions of the body of water affected. Possible alternatives include levees, bank stabilization, floodproofing or existing structures, removal or structures from the floodplain, clearing the channel, high flow channel, or the establishment of a stream side buffer strip or green belt. Channel modification is acceptable if the purpose is to restore natural conditions and improve water quality and fish and wildlife habitat. 
b.  Water quality, habitat, and other natural functions would be significantly improved by the modification and no significant habitat area may be destroyed, or the impacts are offset by the replacement of an equivalent degree of natural resource values. 
(2)  A channel modification shall be designed and constructed in a way which will minimize its adverse impacts on the natural conditions of the body of water affected, consistent with the following criteria: 
a.  The physical characteristics of the modified channel shall match as closely as possible those of the existing channel in length, cross-section, slope and sinuosity. If the existing channel has been previously modified, restoration of more natural physical conditions should be incorporated into channel modification design, where practical. 
b.  Hydraulically effective transitions shall be provided at both the upstream and downstream ends of the project, designed such that they will prevent erosion. 
c.  One-sided construction of a channel shall be used when feasible. Removal of streamside (riparian) vegetation should be limited to one (1) side of the channel, where possible, to preserve the shading and stabilization effects of the vegetation. 
d.  Clearing of stabilizing vegetation shall be limited to that which is essential for construction of the channel. 
e.  Channel banks shall be constructed with a side slope no steeper than 3:1 horizontal to vertical, wherever practicable. Native vegetation and gradual side slopes are the preferred methods for bank stabilization. Where high velocities or sharp bends necessitate the use of alternative stabilization measures, soil bioengineering techniques, natural rock or rip-rap are preferred approaches. Artificial materials such as concrete, gabions, or construction rubble should be avoided unless there are no practicable alternatives. 
f.  All disturbed areas associated with the modification shall be seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon completion of construction. Erosion blanket or an equivalent material shall be required to stabilize disturbed channel banks prior to establishment of the vegetative cover. 
g.  If the existing channel contains considerable bottom diversity such as deep pools, riffles, and other similar features, such features shall be provided in the new channel. Spawning and nesting areas and flow characteristics compatible with fish habitat shall also be established, where appropriate. 
h.  A sediment basin shall be installed at the downstream end of the modification to reduce sedimentation and degradation of downstream water quality. 
i.  New or relocated channels should be built in the dry and all items of construction, including vegetation, should be completed prior to diversion of water into the new channel. 
j.  There shall be no increases in stage or velocity as the channel enters or leaves the project site for any frequency flood unless necessitated by a public flood control project or unless such an increase is justified as part of a habitat improvement or erosion control project. 
k.  Unless the modification is for a public flood control project, there shall be no reduction in the volume of floodwater storage outside the floodway as a result of the modification. 
l.  The provisions of sections 34-63(d) and 34-63(e) shall also be met. 
(f)  Dumping. 
(1)  No person, firm, corporation or governmental agency shall dispose of or dump grass clippings, brush, fill, trash, debris, or other material that may obstruct the flow or storage of water in any channel, swale, culvert, storm sewer, wetland, storage basin or other natural or manmade watercourse or water body. 
(2)  No person, firm, corporation or governmental agency shall dispose of or dump any petroleum products, chemicals, noxious liquids, animal waste or other materials that will pollute the water in any channel, swale, culvert, storm sewer, wetland, storage basin or other natural or manmade watercourse or water body. 
(Code 1980, § 8-12; Ord. No. 00-65, § 1, 10-12-2000; Ord. No. 08-57, § 2, 8-14-2008)  
Secs. 34-66—34-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 34-91. - Regulatory floodplain data. 
(a)  Special flood hazard area. 
(1)  All development within the special flood hazard area is subject to this chapter. 
(2)  The special flood hazard area (SFHA) is the area subject to flooding by the base flood and shown on the August 19, 2008, Cook County countywide flood insurance rate map as zone 5A, A1-30, AE, A0, and/or AH. 
(b)  Base flood elevation. 
(1)  The base flood elevation or 100-year frequency elevation for the SFHAs of the Little Calumet Rivers shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the Cook County county-wide flood insurance study prepared by FEMA and dated August 19, 2008, and such amendments to such study as may be prepared from time to time. 
(2)  The base flood elevation or 100-year frequency elevation for each SFHA delineated as zone AH or zone AO shall be that elevation (or depth) delineated on the August 19, 2008, Cook County countywide flood insurance rate map. 
(3)  The base flood elevation or 100-year frequency elevation for each of the remaining SFHAs delineated as an "A Zone" on the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of Cook County shall be according to the best existing data available from federal, state or other sources. Should no other data exist, an engineering study must be financed by the applicant to determine base flood elevations. 
a.  When no base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation exists, the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for a riverine SFHA shall be determined from a backwater model, such as HEC-II, HEC-RAS, or a dynamic model such as HIP. 
b.  The flood flows used in the hydraulic models shall be obtained from a hydrologic model, such as HEC-HMS, HEC-1, TR-20, or HIP, or by techniques presented in various publications prepared by the United States Geological Survey for estimating peak flood discharges. 
c.  For a non-riverine SFHA, the base flood elevation shall be the historic flood of record plus three (3) feet, unless calculated by a detailed engineering study. 
d.  For an unmapped extended SFHA (with a drainage area less than one (1) square mile) that has been identified by the director of inspectional services or the city engineer, pursuant to section 34-37 the base flood elevation shall be determined by the applicant utilizing a method as approved pursuant to this section herein. 
(4)  The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated Cook County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city or that may be annexed into the city shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the flood insurance study of Cook County prepared by FEMA and dated August 19, 2008, and such amendments or revisions to such study and maps as may be prepared from time to time. 
(5)  If a base flood elevation or 100-year frequency flood elevation is not available for a particular site, then the protection standard shall be according to the best existing data available from federal, state or other sources. 
(c)  SFHAs defined by elevation. Upon receipt of a development permit application, the director of inspectional services shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood elevation. Any development located on land that can be shown to be higher than the base flood elevation and which has not been filled since the date of the site's first flood insurance rate map as required by this chapter, is not in the SFHA and therefore not subject to the requirements of this chapter. 
(d)  Flood protection elevation (FPE). The flood protection elevation, or FPE, shall be the elevation of the base flood plus one (1) foot at any given location in the SFHA. 
(e)  Designated floodway. 
(1)  The floodways are designated for on the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of Cook County prepared by FEMA and dated August 19, 2008. When two (2) floodway maps exist for a waterway, the more restrictive floodway limit shall prevail. 
(2)  The floodways for those parts of unincorporated Cook County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city that may be annexed into the city are designated for the Little Calumet River on the countywide flood insurance rate map prepared by FEMA and dated August 19, 2008. 
To locate the designated floodway boundary on any site, the designated floodway boundary should be scaled off the designated floodway map and located on a site plan, using reference marks common to both maps. Where interpretation is needed to determine the exact location of the designated floodway boundary, IDNR/OWR should be contacted for the interpretation. 
(f)  Challenges to regulatory floodplain data. When a party disagrees with the regulatory floodplain data proscribed by this chapter, he/she may finance the detailed engineering study needed to replace existing data with better data and submit it to IDNR/OWR and FEMA. 
(Code 1980, § 8-13; Ord. No. 00-65, § 1, 10-12-2000; Ord. No. 08-57, § 2, 8-14-2008)  
Sec. 34-92. - Requirements in all special flood hazard areas. 
(a)  Jurisdiction. All development projects in all types of special flood hazard areas shall comply with this section. Development proposed in floodways and in SFHAs without regulatory floodplain data shall also comply with the additional requirements of sections 34-93 and 34-94. 
(b)  Public health protection. 
(1)  No development in the SFHA shall create a threat to public health or safety. 
(2)  No development in the SFHA shall include locating or storing chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, animal wastes, fertilizers, flammable liquids, pollutants, or other hazardous or toxic materials below the FPE, unless such materials are stored in a floodproofed and anchored storage tank and certified by a professional engineer or floodproofed building constructed according to the requirements of section 34-92 (e) of this chapter. 
(3)  New and replacement water supply systems, wells, and sanitary sewer lines may be permitted providing all manholes or other above ground openings located below the FPE are watertight. 
(4)  Septic systems and other on-site waste disposal systems are prohibited in the SFHA. 
(5)  Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas and electric shall be located and constricted to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(6)  Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters. 
(7)  All other activities defined as development shall be designed so as not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages 
(c)  Filling and grading. Whenever a development project proposes to fill or grade vacant land in order to remove a portion of it from the SFHA or to change the floodway boundary, 
(1)  The top of the resulting filled or graded area shall be at or above the FPE; 
(2)  The director of inspectional services shall not issue a development permit until the applicant has received a conditional letter of map revision from FEMA; and 
(3)  The director of inspectional services shall not issue a certificate of occupancy until the applicant has received a letter of map revision from FEMA. 
(d)  Compensatory storage. 
(1)  Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for use, the volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or building below the base flood elevation or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be compensated for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of excavation taken from below the base flood elevation or 100-year frequency flood elevation. 
(2)  The excavation volume shall be at least equal to one and one half (1.50) times the volume of storage lost due to the fill or building. 
(3)  In the case of streams and watercourses, such excavation shall be made opposite or adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied. 
(4)  All floodplain storage lost below the existing ten-year flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed ten-year flood elevation at least a 1:1 ratio. All floodplain storage lost above the existing ten-year flood elevation shall be replaced above the proposed ten (10) year flood elevation at least a 1:1 ratio. 
(5)  If the compensatory storage will not be placed at the location of the proposed construction, the applicant's engineer shall demonstrate through a determination of flood discharges and water surface elevations that the compensatory storage is hydraulically equivalent. 
(6)  All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse. 
(7)  This compensatory storage requirement does not apply to small temporary structures (such as aboveground swimming pools) where such projects are located on small lots with existing buildings where the site does not have sufficient space to provide compensating storage. 
(e)  Protecting buildings. 
(1)  All new buildings and improvements and repairs to buildings located within a 100-year floodplain, also known as the SFHA shall be protected from flood damage below the FPE. 
(2)  This building protection requirement applies to the following situations: 
a.  Construction or placement of a new building alteration or addition to an existing building valued at more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or seventy (70) square feet. 
b.  Remodeling or other activity that will result in a substantially improved building. 
c.  An addition that will result in a substantially improved building. 
d.  An existing building that has been substantially damaged. 
e.  Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured home on an existing site. This building protection requirement does not apply to returning a manufactured home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it was removed to avoid flood damage. 
f.  Installing a recreational vehicle or travel trailer on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days. 
g.  Construction of new buildings and substantial improvements in the 500-year floodplain. 
h.  Substantial improvements or structural alterations made to an existing building that increase the floor area by more than twenty (20) percent or equal or exceed the market value by fifty (50) percent. Alteration shall be figured cumulatively during a ten-year period. If substantially improved, the existing structure and the addition must meet the flood protection standards of this article. 
i.  Repairs made to a substantially damaged building. These repairs shall be figured cumulatively during a ten-year period. If substantially damaged the entire structure must meet the flood protection standards of this section. 
j.  Repetitive loss to an existing building as defined in Section 34-34. 
(3)  This building protection requirement may be met by the methods specified in subsections 34-92(f) through (i). Only nonresidential buildings may use the methods specified in subsection 34-92(i). Buildings are also subject to the other requirements of this chapter, including the floodway restrictions in section 34-93. 
(4)  A certification of occupancy shall not be issued for a building project until the permit applicant provides the director of inspectional services with a properly completed, signed and sealed as-built FEMA elevation or floodproofing certificate. 
(f)  Buildings on fill. A residential or nonresidential building, when allowed, may be constructed on permanent land fill in accordance with the following: 
(1)  The lowest floor (including basement) of the building or addition shall be at or above the FPE. 
(2)  The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than six (6) inches deep before compacting and should extend at least ten (10) feet beyond the foundation of the building before sloping below the base flood elevation. 
(3)  The top of the fill shall be above the base flood elevation. However, the ten-foot minimum may be waived if a structural engineer certifies an alternative method to protect the building from damage due to erosion, scour and other hydrodynamic pressures. 
(4)  The fill shall not adversely affect the flow or surface drainage from or onto neighboring properties, and when necessary, stormwater management techniques such as swales or basins shall be incorporated. 
(5)  The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during flooding by vegetative cover, riprap or other structural measure; and 
(6)  The fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not incorporate debris or refuse materials; and 
(g)  Elevated buildings. A residential or nonresidential building may be elevated in accordance with the following: 
(1)  The lowest floor (including basement) and all electrical, heating, ventilating, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall be located at or above the FPE. 
(2)  The building or improvements shall be elevated on crawlspace, stilts, piles, walls, or other foundation that is permanently open to floodwaters and not subject to damage by hydrostatic pressures of the base flood. 
(3)  Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines, submersible pumps, and other waterproofed service facilities may be located below the FPE provided they are waterproofed. 
(4)  The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored and aligned in relation to flood flows and adjoining buildings so as to minimize exposure to known hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces such as uplift, current, waves, ice and floating debris. 
(5)  All areas below the FPE shall be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage. 
(6)  The areas below the FPE may only be used for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage of nonfloatable and nonhazardous materials in an area other than a basement and not later modified or occupied as habitable space. The applicant shall be advised that equipment, machinery and fixtures not required for support of the building and contents located below the lowest floor are not covered by a flood insurance policy. 
(7)  If the building is on a crawlspace or other design where the walls below the FPE are enclosed, the following requirements apply: 
a.  The walls shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
1.  There shall be a minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade. 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
b.  The floor of the crawlspace shall not be lower than the lowest grade adjacent to the building's exterior. 
c.  Gravity storm and sanitary sewer connections are prohibited in the enclosed area. If there are facilities in the enclosed area connected to storm and sanitary sewers, the connections must be to sumps, pumps and overhead sewer lines. 
d.  The interior height of the crawlspace measured from the interior grade of the crawl to the top of the foundation wall must not exceed four (4) feet at any point. If, for any reason, the lowest floor is more than five (5) feet above the floor of the crawlspace, the owner shall sign a nonconversion agreement to assure that the enclosed lower area will not be improved, finished or converted to a use other than parking, building access or storage of materials. 
(8)  In lieu of the above criteria, the design methods to comply with these requirements may be certified by licensed professional engineer or architect. 
(h)  Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. 
(1)  In addition to the requirements of subsections 34-92(e) through 34-92(g), manufactured homes: 
a.  Shall have the lowest floor elevated to or above the FPE; and 
b.  Shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by being tied down in accordance with the rules and regulations for the Illinois Mobile Home Tie-Down Act (210 ILCS 120/1 et seq.) issued pursuant to 77 Ill. Adm. Code Part 870. 
c.  In the case of manufactured homes placed or substantially improved (1) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, (2) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, (3) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or (4) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage from a flood, the top of the lowest floor shall be elevated to or above the flood protection elevation. 
d.  In the case of manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, the manufactured home shall be elevated so that either the top of the lowest floor is above the base flood elevation or the chassis is at least thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade and supported by reinforced piers or other foundations of equivalent strength, whichever is less. 
(2)  Recreational vehicles or travel trailers shall be required to meet the above elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes unless: 
a.  They are on site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days; and 
b.  They are fully licensed and ready for highway use and used only for recreation, camping, travel or seasonal use rather than as a permanent dwelling. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utility and service devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
(i)  Floodproofed buildings. Only a nonresidential building may be structurally dry floodproofed (in lieu of elevation) provided that: 
(1)  A licensed professional engineer shall certify that the building has been structurally dry floodproofed below the FPE and that the building and attendant utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the base flood. 
(2)  The building design shall take into account flood velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and impacts from debris or ice. 
(3)  Floodproofing measures shall be operable without human intervention and without an outside source of electricity (levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered floodproofing for the purpose of this subsection). 
(j)  Accessory buildings. Tool sheds and detached garages on an existing single-family platted lot, may be constructed with the lowest floor below the FPE provided the building meets the following requirements: 
(1)  The building is not used for human habitation. 
(2)  The building shall meet the permanent opening criteria of subsection 34-92(g)(7). 
(3)  All areas below the FPE shall be constructed with waterproof material. 
(4)  Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed to the FPE. 
(5)  The building shall be anchored to prevent flotation. 
(6)  The building shall be less than five hundred (500) square feet in floor size. 
(7)  The building shall be less than seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00) in value. 
(8)  The building shall be used only for the storage of vehicles or tools and may not contain other rooms, workshops, greenhouses or similar uses and cannot be modified later into another use. 
(9)  All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint, insecticides, fertilizers, etc.,) shall be stored above the flood protection elevation. 
(10)  The lowest floor elevation should be documented and the owner advised of the flood insurance implications. 
(k)  Critical facilities definition. 
(1)  Buildings or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic and/or water-reactive materials; 
(2)  Hospitals, nursing homes, and housing likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid death or injury during a flood; 
(3)  Police stations, fire stations, vehicle and equipment storage facilities, and emergency operations centers that are needed for flood response activities before, during, and after a flood; 
(4)  Public and private utility facilities that are vital to maintaining or restoring normal services to flooded areas before, during, and after a flood. 
(l)  Known flood hazards. The city council shall take into account flood hazards, to the extent that they are known in all official actions related to land management, use and development. 
(m)  Major developments. 
(1)  New subdivisions, annexation agreements, planned unit developments (PUDs), manufactured home parks and other major developments within the SFHA shall be reviewed to assure that the proposed developments are consistent with the provisions of this chapter and the need to minimize flood damage. Plats or plans for new subdivisions, mobile home parks and planned unit developments (PUDs) shall include a signed statement by a licensed professional engineer that the plat or plans account for changes in the drainage of surface waters in accordance with the Plat Act (765 ILCS 205/2). 
(2)  Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located and laid out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and channels. Wherever possible, the floodplains shall be included within parks or other public grounds. 
(3)  The surface of all new arterial streets shall be at or above the base flood elevation. The surface of all new collector streets shall be at or above eight (8) inches below the base flood elevation. 
(4)  Proposals for new subdivisions, manufactured home parks, travel trailer parks, planned unit developments (PUDs) and additions to manufactured home parks and additions to subdivisions shall include base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation data and floodway delineations. Where this information is not available from an existing adopted study, the applicant's engineer shall be responsible for calculating the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation per this article and the floodway delineation per the definition in section 34-34. 
(5)  The city council shall not approve any planned unit development (PUD) or plat of subdivision located outside the corporate limits unless such agreement or plat is in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(6)  All other activities defined as development shall be designed so as not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages. 
(Code 1980, § 8-14; Ord. No. 00-65, § 1, 10-12-2000; Ord. No. 08-57, § 2, 8-14-2008)  
Sec. 34-93. - Requirements in floodways. 
(a)  Jurisdiction. This section applies to proposed development, redevelopment, site modification or building modification within a floodway. 
(1)  Only those uses and buildings, which meet the criteria in this section, shall be permitted. 
(2)  All floodway modifications shall be the minimum necessary to accomplish the purpose of the project. 
(3)  All development projects shall also meet the requirements of section 34-92 of this chapter. 
(b)  Terminology. 
(1)  The term "designated floodway" refers to floodways that have been mapped and designated by IDNR. These floodways are subject to the special requirements of 92 Ill. Adm. Code Part 3708. 
(2)  The term "regulatory floodway" refers to floodways that have not been mapped and designated by IDNR but are determined by the developer pursuant to section 34-94(c) of this chapter. 
(c)  Smaller development projects in designated floodways. The following development projects may be permitted by the director of inspectional services provided there is no increase in flood levels. All other projects in the designated floodway are subject to the requirements of sections 34-93(d) and 34-93(e). 
(1)  Underground and overhead utilities that meet the following requirements: 
a.  The utility shall not result in any increase in existing ground elevations. 
b.  The project shall not require the placement of above ground structures in the floodway. 
c.  In the case of underground stream crossings, the top of the pipe or encasement shall be buried a minimum of three (3) feet below the existing streambed. 
d.  Overhead utility lines shall be constructed above the FPE or attached above the low chord of an existing bridge (with the permission of the bridge owner). Supporting towers shall not be placed in the watercourse and shall be designed so as to not catch debris during a flood. 
e.  Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to minimum during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed floodway areas, including the stream banks shall be restored to their original contours and seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction. 
f.  A utility crossing carrying material which may cause water pollution as defined by the Environmental Protection Act (415 ILCS 5/1 et seq.) shall be provided with shut-off valves on each side of the body of water to be crossed. 
g.  All Illinois Commerce Commission, National Electric Safety Codes, and federal requirements for clearance must be met. 
(2)  Storm and sanitary sewer relief outfalls that: 
a.  Do not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent natural bank slope; 
b.  Do not result in an increase in ground elevation; and 
c.  Are designed so as not to cause stream erosion at the outfall location. 
(3)  Construction of sidewalks, athletic fields (excluding fences), properly anchored playground equipment and patios at grade. 
(4)  Construction of shoreline and stream bank protection that: 
a.  Does not exceed one thousand (1,000) feet in length; 
b.  Materials are not placed higher than the existing top of bank; and 
c.  Materials are placed so as not to reduce the cross-sectional area of the stream channel or bank of the lake. 
(5)  Temporary stream crossings that meet the following requirements: 
a.  The approach roads will be one-half (½) foot or less above natural grade. 
b.  The crossing will allow stream flow to pass without backing up the water above the stream bank vegetation line or above any drainage tile or outfall invert. 
c.  The top of the roadway fill in the channel will be at least two (2) feet below the top of the lowest bank. Any fill in the channel shall be nonerosive material, such as rip-rap or gravel. 
d.  All disturbed stream banks will be seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon installation and again upon removal of construction. 
e.  The access road and temporary crossings will be removed within one (1) year after authorization. 
(d)  Smaller development projects in regulatory floodways. Within all riverine SFHAs where the floodway has not been designated, the following standards shall apply: 
(1)  The developer shall have a licensed professional engineer state in writing and show through supporting plans, calculations, and data that the project meets the engineering requirements of subsection 34-93(g)(6) for the entire floodplain as calculated under the provisions of this article. 
a.  As an alternative, the developer should have an engineering study performed to determine a floodway and submit that engineering study to IDNR/OWR and FEMA for acceptance as a designated floodway. 
b.  Upon acceptance of the floodway by IDNR/OWR and FEMA, the developer shall then demonstrate that the project meets the requirements of section 34-93 for the designated floodway. The floodway shall be defined according to the definition in section 34-34 of this article. 
(2)  A development permit shall not be issued unless the applicant first obtains a IDNR/OWR permit or a determination has been made that an IDNR/OWR permit is not required. 
(3)  Within the regulatory floodway, the following activities may be permitted by the director of inspectional services. All other projects in the designated floodway are subject to the requirements of this article. 
a.  All activities listed in subsection 34-93(c). 
b.  The construction of light poles, signposts and similar structures. 
c.  The construction of properly anchored, unwalled, open structures such as playground equipment, pavilions, and carports built at or below existing grade that would not obstruct the flow of floodwaters. 
d.  The placement of properly anchored buildings not exceeding seventy (70) square feet in size, nor ten (10) feet in any one (1) dimension (e.g., animal shelters and tool sheds). 
e.  The construction of additions to existing buildings which do not increase the first floor area by more than twenty (20) percent, which are located on the upstream or downstream side of the existing building, and which do extend beyond the sides of the existing building that are parallel to the flow of flood waters. 
f.  Minor maintenance dredging of a stream channel where: 
1.  The affected length of stream is less than one thousand (1,000) feet; 
2.  The work is confined to reestablishing flows in natural stream channels; or 
3.  The cross-sectional area of the dredged channel conforms to that of the natural channel upstream and downstream of the site. 
(e)  The following activities may be permitted without a licensed professional engineer's review or calculation of base flood elevation and designated floodway. Such activities shall still meet the other requirements of this article. 
(1)  Bridge and culvert crossings of streams in rural areas meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 2; 
(2)  Barge fleeting facilities meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 3; 
(3)  Aerial utility crossings meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 4; 
(4)  Minor boat docks meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 5; 
(5)  Minor, non-obstructive activities meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 6; activities (not involving fill or positive change in grade) are covered by this permit; 
(6)  Outfall structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 7; 
(7)  Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 8; 
(8)  Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 9; 
(9)  Accessory structures and additions to existing residential buildings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 10; 
(10)  Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 11; 
(11)  Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge widenings meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 12; 
(12)  Temporary construction activities meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 13; 
(13)  Special uses of public waters meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 14; and 
(14)  Any development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located entirely within a flood fringe area shall be exempt from state floodway permit requirements. 
(f)  Work in channels. 
(1)  If the proposed project involves a channel modification, the applicant shall submit the following information: 
a.  A discussion of the purpose of and need for the proposed work; 
b.  A discussion of the feasibility of using alternative locations or methods to accomplish the purpose of the proposed work; 
c.  An analysis of the extent and permanence of the impacts each feasible would have on the physical and biological conditions of the body of water affected; and 
d.  An analysis of the impacts of the proposed project, considering cumulative effects on the physical and biological conditions of the body of water affected. 
(2)  Construction of shoreline and stream bank protection in the channel may be permitted by the director of inspectional services provided: 
a.  The project does not exceed one thousand (1,000) feet in length. 
b.  Materials are not placed higher than the existing top of bank. 
c.  Materials are placed so as not to reduce the cross-sectional area of the stream channel by more than ten (10) percent. 
(3)  The flood carrying capacity within any altered or relocated watercourse shall be maintained. 
(4)  The director of inspectional services shall notify the appropriate offices of adjacent communities at least thirty (30) days before issuing a permit on a project that will alter, relocate or modify a channel. 
(g)  Larger floodway projects. All development proposals other than those permitted under subsections 34-93(c) through 34-93(e) require a permit from IDNR/OWR. The director of inspectional services shall not issue a permit for a proposed project until the applicant first obtains a permit or written documentation that a permit is not required from IDNR/OWR, issued pursuant to the Rivers, Lakes and Streams Act (615 ILCS 5/4.9 et seq.) 
(1)  Application for an IDNR/OWR permit shall be submitted on a form according to procedures specified by IDNR/OWR. 
(2)  No development site shall be occupied, no certificate of occupancy shall be issued, and no subdivision or other development shall be accepted by the city council unless and until all provisions of the IDNR/OWR permit are met. 
(3)  Only those appropriate uses listed in 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part 3708 will be allowed in a floodway. Appropriate uses are activities which: 
a.  Will not cause a rise in the base flood elevation; 
b.  Will not create a damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood heights or velocity; 
c.  Will not be a threat to public health and safety and welfare; and 
d.  Will not impair the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of the floodway or channel, or permanently impair existing water quality or aquatic habitat. 
e.  Construction impacts shall be minimized by appropriate mitigation methods as called for in this article. 
(4)  The approved appropriate uses are as follows: 
a.  Flood control structures, dikes, dams and other public works or private improvements relating to the control of drainage, flooding, erosion, or water quality or habitat for fish and wildlife. 
b.  Buildings, structures or other facilities relating to the use of, or requiring access to, the water or shoreline, such as in-stream aeration and similar treatment facilities, and facilities and improvements related to recreational boating, commercial shipping and other functionally water dependent use; 
c.  Storm and sanitary sewer relief outfalls; 
d.  Underground and overhead utilities; 
e.  Open space and recreational facilities such as playing fields and trail systems, including any related fencing (at least fifty (50) percent open when viewed from any one (1) direction) built parallel to the direction of flood flows and including open air pavilions and toilet facilities (four (4) stall maximum) that will not block flood flows nor reduce foodway storage; 
f.  Detached garages, storage sheds, or other nonhabitable accessory buildings that will not block flood flows nor reduce floodway storage; 
g.  Bridges, culverts, roadways, sidewalks, railways, runways and taxiways and any modification thereto; 
h.  Parking lots built at or below existing grade where either the depth of flooding at the 100-year frequency flood event will not exceed one (1.0) foot or the applicant of a short-term recreational use facility parking lot formally agrees to restrict access during overbank flooding events and accepts liability for all damage caused by vehicular access during all overbank flooding events. 
i.  Designated floodway regrading, without fill, to create a positive nonerosive slope toward a watercourse. Regrading or other modifications of the floodway for the convenience of site design for a private development is not considered an appropriate use; 
j.  Floodproofing activities to protect previously existing lawful buildings including dry floodproofing a building, construction of water tight window wells, elevating structures, and the construction of floodwalls around residential, commercial or industrial principal structures where the outside toe of the floodwall shall be no more than ten (10) feet away from the exterior wall of the existing building and, which are not considered substantial improvements to the structure; 
k.  The replacement, reconstruction, or repair of a damaged building, provided that the outside dimensions are not increased, and if the building was damaged to fifty (50) percent or more of the market value before the damage occurred, the building will be protected from flooding to the flood protection elevation; and 
l.  Modifications to an existing building that will not increase the enclosed floor area of the building below the FPE and which will not block flood flows, including, but not limited to, fireplaces, bay windows, decks, patios and second story additions. If the building is improved to fifty (50) percent or more of the market value before the modification occurred (i.e., a substantial improvement), the building will be protected from flooding to the flood protection elevation. 
(5)  Appropriate uses do not include: 
a.  The construction or placement of any new buildings, fill, buildings on stilts or building additions; 
b.  Critical facilities or wastewater treatment plants; 
c.  Excavation or channel modifications done to accommodate otherwise nonappropriate uses in the floodway; 
d.  Fencing (including landscaping or planting designed to act as a fence); 
e.  Storage of materials except as specifically defined above as an appropriate use. 
(6)  Within the designated floodway, the construction of an appropriate use, will be considered permissible provided that the proposed project meets the following engineering and mitigation criteria and is so stated in writing with supporting plans, calculations and data by a licensed professional engineer and provided that any structure meets the protection requirements of subsection 34-92(e) of this article: 
a.  Preservation of flood conveyance, so as not to increase flood stages upstream. For appropriate uses other than bridge or culvert crossings, on-stream structures or dams, all effective designated floodway conveyance lost due to the project will be replaced for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency flood. In calculating effective designated floodway conveyance, the following factors shall be taken into consideration: 
1.  Designated floodway conveyance, "K" = (1.486/n)(AR 2/3 ) where "n" is Manning's roughness factor, "A" is the effective flow area of the cross-section, and "R" is the ratio of the area to the wetted perimeter. (See Ven Te Chow, Open Channel Hydraulics, (McGraw-Hill, New York 1959).) 
A.  The same Manning's "n" value shall be used for both existing and proposed conditions unless a recorded maintenance agreement with a federal, state, or local unit of government can assure the proposed conditions will be maintained or the land cover is changing from a vegetative to a non-vegetative land cover. 
B.  Transition sections shall be provided and used in calculations of effective designated floodway conveyance. The following expansion and contraction ratios shall be used unless an applicant's engineer can prove to IDNR/OWR through engineering calculations or model tests that more abrupt transitions may be used with the same efficiency: 
i.  When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider section, the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of one (1) foot horizontal for every four (4) feet of the flooded stream's length. 
ii.  When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow section, the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of one (1) foot horizontal for every one (1) foot of the flooded stream's length. 
iii.  When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical direction, a minimum of one (1) foot vertical transition for every ten (10) feet of stream length shall be used. 
iv.  Transition sections shall be provided between cross-sections with rapid expansions and contractions and when meeting the designated floodway delineation on adjacent properties. 
v.  All cross-sections used in the calculations shall be located perpendicular to flood flows. 
b.  Preservation of floodway storage so as not to increase downstream flooding. 
1.  Compensatory storage shall be provided for any designated floodway storage lost due to the proposed work from the volume of fill or structures placed and the impact of any related flood control projects. 
2.  Compensatory storage for fill or structures shall be equal to at least one and a half (1.5) times the volume of floodplain storage lost. 
3.  Artificially created storage lost due to a reduction in head loss behind a bridge shall not be required to be replaced. 
4.  The compensatory designated floodway storage shall be placed between the proposed normal water elevation and the proposed 100-year flood elevation. All designated floodway storage lost below the existing ten-year flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed ten-year flood elevation. All designated floodway storage lost above the existing ten-year flood elevation shall be replaced above the proposed ten-year flood elevation. All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse. 
5.  If the compensatory storage will not be placed at the location of the proposed construction, the applicant's engineer shall demonstrate through a determination of flood discharges and water surface elevations that the compensatory storage is hydraulically equivalent. 
6.  There shall be no reduction in floodway surface area as a result of a floodway modification, unless such modification is necessary to reduce flooding at existing structure. 
c.  Preservation of floodway velocities so as not to increase stream erosion or flood heights. 
1.  For all Appropriate Uses, except bridges or culverts or on-stream structures, the proposed work will not result in an increase in the average channel or designated floodway velocities or stage for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency event. 
2.  In the case of bridges or culverts or on-stream structures built for the purpose of backing up water in the stream during normal or flood flows, velocities may be increased at the structure site if scour, erosion and sedimentation will be avoided by the use of rip-rap or other design measures. 
d.  Construction of new bridges or culvert crossings and roadway approaches. 
1.  The proposed structure shall not result in an increase of upstream flood stages greater than one-tenth (0.1) foot when compared to the existing conditions for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency event; or the upstream flood stage increases will be contained within the channel banks (or within existing vertical extensions of the channel banks) such as within the design protection grade of existing levees or flood walls or within recorded flood easements. 
2.  If the proposed construction will increase upstream flood stages greater than one-tenth (0.1) foot, the developer must contact IDNR/OWR to obtain a permit for a dam or waiver. 
A.  The engineering analysis of upstream flood stages must be calculated using the flood study flows, and corresponding flood elevations for tailwater conditions for the flood study specified in this article. Bridges and culverts must be analyzed using any commonly accepted FEMA approved hydraulic models. 
B.  Lost floodway storage must be compensated for per subsection 34-93(g)(6)B. 
C.  Velocity increases must be mitigated per subsection 34-93(g)(6)C. 
D.  If the crossing is proposed over a public water that is used for recreational or commercial navigation, an IDNR/OWR permit must be received. 
E.  The hydraulic analysis for the backwater caused by the bridge showing the existing condition and proposed regulatory profile must be submitted to IDNR/OWR for concurrence that a CLOMR is not required by section 34-93. 
F.  All excavations for the construction of the crossing shall be designed per subsection 34-93(g)(6)H. 
e.  Reconstruction or modification of existing bridges, culverts, and approach roads. 
1.  The bridge or culvert and roadway approach reconstruction or modification shall be constructed with no more than one-tenth (0.1) foot increase in backwater over the existing flood profile for all flood frequencies up to and including the 100-year event, if the existing structure is not a source of flood damage. 
2.  If the existing bridge or culvert and roadway approach is a source of flood damage to buildings or structures in the upstream floodplain, the applicant's engineer shall evaluate the feasibility of redesigning the structure to reduce the existing backwater, taking into consideration the effects on flood stages on upstream and downstream properties. 
3.  The determination as to whether or not the existing crossing is a source of flood damage and should be redesigned must be prepared in accordance with 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part 3708 (floodway construction in northeastern Illinois) and submitted to IDNR/OWR for review and concurrence before a permit is issued. 
f.  On-stream structures built for the purpose of backing up water. 
1.  Any increase in upstream flood stages greater than 0.0 foot when compared to the existing conditions, for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency event shall be contained within the channel banks (or within existing vertical extensions of the channel banks) such as within the design protection grade of existing levees or flood walls or within recorded flood easements. 
2.  A permit or letter indicating a permit is not required must be obtained from IDNR/OWR for any structure built for the purpose of backing up water in the stream during normal or flood flow. 
3.  All dams and impoundment structures as defined in Section 34-34 shall meet the permitting requirements of 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part 3702 (construction and maintenance of dams). If the proposed activity involves a modification of the channel or floodway to accommodate an impoundment, it shall be demonstrated that: 
A.  The impoundment is determined to be in the public interest by providing flood control, public recreation, or regional stormwater detention; 
B.  The impoundment will not prevent the migration of indigenous fish species, which require access to upstream areas as part of their life cycle, such as for spawning; 
C.  The impoundment will not cause or contribute to degraded water quality or habitat conditions. Impoundment design should include gradual bank slopes, appropriate bank stabilization measures and a pre-sedimentation basin; 
D.  A non-point source control plan has been implemented in the upstream watershed to control the effects of sediment runoff as well as minimize the input of nutrients, oil and grease, metals, and other pollutants. If there is more than one municipality in the upstream watershed, the municipality in which the impoundment is constructed should coordinate with upstream municipalities to ensure comprehensive watershed control; 
E.  The project otherwise complies with the requirements of section 34-93. 
g.  Floodproofing of existing habitable, residential and commercial structures. 
1.  If construction is required beyond the outside dimensions of the existing building, the outside perimeter of the floodproofing construction shall be placed no further than ten (10) feet from the outside of the building. 
2.  Compensation of lost storage and conveyance will not be required for floodproofing activities. 
h.  Excavation in the floodway. 
1.  When excavation is proposed in the design of bridges and culvert openings, including the modifications to and replacement of existing bridge and culvert structures, or to compensate for lost conveyance or other appropriate uses, transition sections shall be provided for the excavation. 
2.  The following expansion and contraction ratios shall be used unless an applicant's engineer can prove to IDNR/OWR through engineering calculations or model tests that more abrupt transitions may be used with the same efficiency: 
A.  When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider section, the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of one (1) foot horizontal for every four (4) feet of the flooded stream's length; and 
B.  When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow section, the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of one (1) foot horizontal for every one (1) foot of the flooded stream's length; and 
C.  When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical direction, a minimum of one (1) foot vertical transition for every ten (10) feet of stream length shall be used; and 
D.  Erosion/scour protection shall be provided inland upstream and downstream of the transition sections. 
(7)  Seeding and stabilization plan. For all activities located in a floodway, a seeding and stabilization plan shall be submitted by the applicant. 
(8)  Soil erosion and sedimentation measures. For all activities in the floodway, including grading, filling, and excavation, in which there is potential for erosion of exposed soil, soil erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be employed consistent with the following criteria: 
a.  The construction area shall be minimized to preserve the maximum vegetation possible. Construction shall be scheduled to minimize the time soil is exposed and unprotected. In no case shall the existing natural vegetation be destroyed, removed, or disturbed more than 15 days prior to the initiation of improvements. 
b.  Temporary and/or permanent soil stabilization shall be applied to denuded areas as soon as possible. As a minimum, soil stabilization shall be provided within fifteen (15) days after final grade is reached on any portion of the site, and within fifteen (15) days to denuded areas which may not be at final grade but will remain undisturbed for longer than sixty (60) days. 
c.  Sedimentation control measures shall be installed before any significant grading or filling is initiated on the site to prevent the movement of eroded sediments off-site or into the channel. Potential sediment control devices include filter fences, straw bale fences, check dams, diversion ditches, and sediment traps and basins. 
d.  A vegetated buffer strip of at least 25 feet in width shall be preserved and/or re-established, where possible, along existing channels (see subsection 34-93(g)(13)). Construction vehicle use of channels shall be minimized. Temporary stream crossings shall be constructed, where necessary, to minimize erosion. Necessary construction in or along channels shall be restabilized immediately. 
e.  Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be designed and implemented consistent with "Procedures and Standards for Urban Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control in Illinois" (1988) also known as the "Green Book" and "The Illinois Urban Manual" (NRCS, 1995). 
(9)  Public flood control projects. For public flood control projects, the permitting requirements of this section will be considered met if the applicant can demonstrate to IDNR/OWR through hydraulic and hydrologic calculations that the proposed project will not singularly or cumulatively result in increased flood heights outside the project right-of-way or easements for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency event. 
(10)  General criteria for analysis of flood elevations. 
a.  The flood profiles, flows and floodway data in the designated floodway study, referenced in this article, must be used for analysis of the base conditions. If the study data appears to be in error or conditions have changed, IDNR/OWR shall be contacted for approval and concurrence on the appropriate base conditions data to use. 
b.  If the 100-year designated floodway elevation at the site of the proposed construction is affected by backwater from a downstream receiving stream with a larger drainage area, the proposed construction shall be shown to meet: 
1.  The requirements of this section for the 100-year frequency flood elevations of the designated floodway conditions; and 
2.  Conditions with the receiving stream at normal water elevations; and 
3.  If the applicant learns from IDNR/OWR, local governments, or a private owner that a downstream restrictive bridge or culvert is scheduled to be removed, reconstructed, modified, or a regional flood control project is scheduled to be built, removed, constructed or modified within the next five (5) years, the proposed construction shall be analyzed and shown to meet the requirements of this section for both the existing conditions and the expected flood profile conditions when the bridge, culvert or flood control project is built. 
(11)  Conditional letter of map revision. 
a.  If the appropriate use would result in a change in the designated floodway location or the 100-year frequency flood elevation, the applicant shall submit to IDNR/OWR and FEMA all information, calculations and documents necessary to be issued a conditional designated floodway map revision and receive from IDNR/OWR a conditional concurrence of the designated floodway change before a permit is issued. 
b.  The final designated floodway map will not be changed by FEMA until as-built plans or record drawings of initial filling, grading, dredging, or excavating activities are submitted and accepted by FEMA and IDNR/OWR. 
c.  In the case of nongovernment projects, the municipality in incorporated areas and the county in unincorporated areas shall concur with the proposed conditional designated floodway map revision before IDNR/OWR approval can be given. 
d.  No filling, grading, dredging or excavating shall take place until a conditional approval is issued. 
e.  After initial filling, grading, dredging or excavating, no activities shall take place until a final letter of map revision (LOMR) is issued by FEMA with concurrence from IDNR/OWR. 
(12)  Professional engineer's supervision. All engineering analyses shall be performed by or under the supervision of a licensed professional engineer. 
(13)  For all activities in the floodway involving construction within twenty-five (25) feet of the channel, the following criteria shall be met: 
a.  A natural vegetation buffer strip shall be preserved within at least twenty-five (25) feet of the ordinary high water mark of the channel. 
b.  Where it is impossible to protect this buffer strip during the construction of an appropriate use, a vegetated buffer strip shall be established upon completion of construction. 
(14)  After receipt of conditional approval of the designated floodway change and issuance of a permit and a conditional letter of map revision, construction as necessary to change the floodway designation may proceed but no buildings or structures or other construction that is not an appropriate use may be placed in that area until the designated floodway map is changed and a final letter of map revision is received. The designated floodway map will be revised upon acceptance and concurrence by IDNR/OWR and FEMA of the "as-built" plans. 
(Code 1980, § 8-15; Ord. No. 00-65, § 1, 10-12-2000; Ord. No. 08-57, § 2, 8-14-2008)  
Sec. 34-94. - Areas without regulatory floodplain data. 
(a)  Jurisdiction. In SFHA or floodplains, (including AE, AH, AO and unnumbered A Zones) where no floodways have been identified and no base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevations have been established by FEMA, and draining more than a square mile, no development shall be permitted unless the cumulative effect of the proposals, when combined with all other existing and anticipated uses and structures, shall not significantly impede or increase the flow and passage of the floodwaters nor significantly increase the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. 
No development in the SFHA where a floodway has not been determined shall create a damaging of potentially damaging increase in flood heights or velocity or thereat to public health, safety and welfare or impair the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of the floodway or channel, or impair existing water quality or aquatic habitat. Construction impacts shall be minimized by appropriate mitigation methods as called for in this article. 
(b)  Base flood elevations. The base flood elevation shall be the best data available in the Illinois State Water Survey's Floodplain Information Repository. If the state water survey does not have data sufficient for regulatory purposes, the following procedures shall be used to obtain the base flood elevation for a site: 
(1)  If the base flood elevation is needed for a level 2 or 3 development in a riverine SFHA, then the base flood elevation shall be determined using the "Quick-2 Computer Program" or similar method described in Managing Floodplain Development in Approximate Zone A Areas, FEMA publication 265, and accepted by the state water survey. 
(2)  If the base flood elevation is needed for a level 1 development project within a riverine SFHA, then: 
a.  The base flood elevation shall be determined from a backwater model, such as HEC-II, WSP-2, or a dynamic model such as HIP. 
b.  The flood flows used in the hydraulic models shall be obtained from a hydrologic model that meets the requirements of section 7.9 design methods. 
c.  Along any watercourses draining more than one (1) square mile, the analyses shall be submitted to IDNR/OWR for approval. Once approved it must be submitted to the Illinois State Water Survey Floodplain Information Repository for filing. 
(3)  For a nonriverine SFHA: 
a.  The base flood elevation shall be the highest historic flood recorded plus three (3) feet, unless calculated by a detailed engineering study. 
b.  In drainage areas greater than one (1) square mile, the calculations shall be approved by IDNR/OWR. 
(c)  Designated floodway. An applicant for a permit in an SFHA without a designated floodway may: 
(1)  Treat the entire SFHA as the designated floodway. 
(2)  Have an engineering study performed by a licensed professional engineer to determine a regulatory floodway. The regulatory floodway may be submitted to IDNR/OWR for inclusion on IDNR/OWR's designated floodway list. 
(3)  If the application is for a level 2 or 3 development project, treat the ninety (90) percent of the floodplain closest to the channel as the regulatory floodway and the ten (10) percent of the floodplain farthest from the channel as fringe. 
(d)  Level 1 developments. Proposals for new level 1 developments: 
(1)  Shall include base flood elevation data and floodway delineations. The applicant's engineer shall be responsible for calculating the needed data. 
(2)  The applicant's engineer shall submit the data to IDNR/OWR for review and approval as best available regulatory data and then send it to the state water survey. 
(Code 1980, § 8-16; Ord. No. 00-65, § 1, 10-12-2000; Ord. No. 08-57, § 2, 8-14-2008)  
Sec. 34-95. - Dam requirements. 
Dams are classified as to their size and their hazard/damage potential in the event of failure. The construction or major modification of all Class I (high hazard) and Class II (moderate hazard) dams require an IDNR/OWR dam safety permit. 
Some Class III (low hazard) dams require an IDNR/OWR dam safety permit, depending on the drainage area to the dam, the height of the dam and the impounding capacity behind the dam. Most off-channel detention basins that have an embankment are non-jurisdictional Class III dam. It is not required that IDNR/OWR "sign off" on all non-jurisdictional Class III dams. 
A consulting engineer with dam safety knowledge can estimate a hazard classification and determine if an IDNR/OWR dam safety permit is required. 
A permit application submittal must be made to IDNR/OWR for the construction or major modification of jurisdictional dams. 
Regulated dams may include weirs, restrictive culverts or impoundment structures. 
(Ord. No. 08-57, § 2, 8-14-2008)  
Sec. 34-96. - Occupation and use in flood fringe areas. 
(a)  [Protection against flood.] Development in and/or filling of the flood fringe will be permitted if protection is provided against the base flood or 100-year frequency flood by proper elevation, and compensatory storage, and other applicable provisions of this article. No use will be permitted which adversely affects the capacity of drainage facilities or systems. Developments located within the flood fringe shall meet the requirements of this section, along with the requirements of section 34-92. 
(b)  Preventing increased damages. No development in the flood fringe shall create a threat to public health and safety. 
(1)  If fill is being used to elevate the site above the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation, the applicant shall submit sufficient data and obtain a letter of map revision (LOMR) from FEMA for the purpose of removing the site from the floodplain. 
(c)  Construction of the lowest floor below the base flood elevation (BFE). A person who has obtained a letter of map revision based on fill that removes a site in the flood fringe from the floodplain due to the use of fill to elevate the site above the BFE, may apply for a permit from the city to construct the lowest floor of a residential building below the BFE in the flood fringe. The director shall not issue such a permit unless the applicant has complied with all the criteria set forth in the following subsection. 
(1)  Compensatory storage shall be provided per subsection 34-92(d). 
(2)  The elevation of the lowest opening in the basement wall (i.e., window wells, access ways) shall be at or above the flood protection elevation (FPE). 
(3)  The lowest adjacent grade to the foundation shall be at or above the FPE, for a minimum distance of ten (10) feet beyond the outside face of the structure. However, if site conditions are such that this requirement cannot be met, the director may waive the ten (10) foot minimum setback if an Illinois Licensed Professional Engineer certifies that an alternative method to protect the building from damage due to hydrostatic pressures has been met. The certifications shall be in the form of a detailed soils and structural design analysis, which shall be submitted to the director for review. The director may require such additional documentation as necessary to prove that the proposed shorter setback distance will keep the structure reasonably safe. In no case shall the setback distance be less than four (4) feet. 
(4)  The grade around the perimeter of the structure, measured at a distance of twenty (20) feet from the structure, shall be above the BFE. However, if site conditions are such that this requirement cannot be obtained, the Director may waive the twenty (20) foot minimum setback distance if an Illinois Licensed Professional Engineer certifies that an alternative method to protect the building from damages due to hydrostatic pressures have been met. A detailed soils analysis and structural design proving that a shorter setback distance will keep the structure reasonably safe from flooding, shall be submitted to the city for review. In no case shall the setback distance be less than four (4) feet. 
(5)  The ground around the building shall be compacted fill that meets all requirements of this subsection and is at least five (5) feet thick under the basement floor slab. Nothing in this subsection shall be interpreted to require the removal or replacement of fill that was placed as part of a LOMR-F, if such fill consists of material, including soils of similar classification and degree permeability, such as those classified as CH, CL, SC or ML according to ASTM standard D-2487, classification of soils for engineering purposes. 
(6)  The fill material must be homogeneous and isotropic; that is, the soil must be all of one (1) material, and the engineering priorities must be in the same direction. 
(7)  All fill material and compaction shall be designed, certified and inspected by an Illinois Licensed Professional Engineer, as warranted by the site conditions. 
(8)  The basement floor shall be at an elevation that is no more than five (5) below the BFE. 
(9)  There shall be a granular drainage layer beneath the floor slab, and minimum of one-quarter (¼) horsepower sump pump with a backup power supply shall be provided to remove seepage flow. The pump shall be rated at four (4) times the estimated seepage rate and shall discharge above the BFE and away from the building in order to prevent flooding of the basement or uplift of the floor under the effect of the seepage pressure. 
(10)  The drainage system shall be equipped with a positive means of preventing backflow. 
(11)  All foundation elements shall be designed to withstand hydrostatic pressure in accordance with accepted engineering practices. 
(12)  If the applicant is unable to meet all of the requirements set forth in the preceding paragraphs of this subsection, the director may allow the construction of a basement below the BFE only if the applicant demonstrates that the proposed fill and structure meet the guidelines and requirements set forth in FEMA Technical Bulletin 10-01 and are reasonably safe from flooding. In order to demonstrate that the proposed structure is reasonably safe from flooding, the applicant shall submit a detailed engineering analysis of the proposed fill and foundation wall. The engineered basement study shall be completed in accordance with the latest edition of FEMA Technical Bulletin 10-01, with the analysis of the fill being prepared by an Illinois Licensed Professional Engineer. 
(13)  In order to provide the required compensatory storage on site, in no case shall the depth of excavation in the front and side yards of the lot exceed eighteen (18) inches, as measured from the previously existing natural grade. The rear yard shall be permitted to have a greater depth of excavation, if necessary. All such excavation shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse or storm sewer system. The use of mechanical means to drain the compensatory storage area will not be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 08-57, § 2, 8-14-2008)  
Chapter 38 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Commissioner of health, § 2-744 et seq.; animals, ch. 10; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 26; floods, ch. 34; solid waste, ch. 74; utilities, ch. 94. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 38-1. - Use of groundwater as a potable water supply is prohibited. 
(a)  Prohibited. The use or attempt to use groundwater as a potable water supply source from within the corporate limits of the City of Calumet City by the installation of or drilling of a well or by any other method is hereby prohibited, including at points of withdrawal by the City of Calumet City. 
(b)  Penalties. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine of up to five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for each violation. 
(c)  Definitions. 
Person is any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, limited liability company, corporation, joint stock company, trust, estate, political subdivision, or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. 
Potable water is any water used for human or domestic consumption, including, but not limited to, water used for drinking, bathing, swimming, washing dishes, or preparing food. 
(Ord. No. 06-37, §§ 1—3, 6-8-2006)  
Secs. 38-2—38-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED 
 
Secs. 38-31—38-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PRIVATE AMBULANCES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 38-91. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall mean as indicated below: 
Ambulance means any motor vehicle that is specifically designed or constructed, and equipped, and is intended to be used for and is maintained or operated for the transportation of patients, including dual-purpose police patrol cars and funeral coaches or hearses which otherwise comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
Attendant means a trained and/or qualified individual responsible for the operation of an ambulance and the care of the patients, whether or not the attendant also serves as driver. 
Attendant-driver means an individual who is qualified as an attendant and a driver. 
Driver means an individual who drives an ambulance. 
Dual-purpose police patrol car means a vehicle, operated by a police department, which is equipped as an ambulance, even though it is also used for patrol or other police purposes. 
(Code 1980, § 4-1)  
Sec. 38-92. - Ambulance equipment. 
(a)  Required equipment in each ambulance shall include at all times when the ambulance is in use as such, equipment adequate in the judgment of the health officer for dressing wounds, splinting fractures, controlling hemorrhage, and providing oxygen. 
(b)  The health commissioner is authorized and directed, after public notice and opportunity for public hearing, to certify to the license officer standards for ambulance equipment to implement the standards provided herein as to required equipment in ambulances. In determining the adequacy of equipment, the health officer shall take into consideration the current list of minimal equipment for ambulances, adopted by the American College of Surgeons or its duly authorized committee on trauma. 
(Code 1980, § 4-9)  
Sec. 38-93. - Operation. 
No person shall operate an ambulance, which shall include any motor vehicle primarily designed and used for conveyance of sick or injured persons, in a manner not conforming to a provision of the motor vehicle laws and regulations of this state or of this city as such provision applies to motor vehicles in general, except in compliance with the following conditions: 
(1)  The person operating the ambulance shall be either responding to a bona fide emergency call or specifically directed by a licensed physician to disregard traffic laws in operating the ambulance during and for the purpose of the specific trip or journey that is involved; 
(2)  The ambulance shall be equipped with a siren producing an audible signal of an intensity of one hundred (100) decibels at a distance of fifty (50) feet from said siren, and with a lamp emitting an oscillating, rotating or flashing red beam directed in part toward the front of the vehicle and containing a power rating of at least one hundred (100) amperes; 
(3)  The aforesaid siren and lamp shall be in full operation at all times during such trip or journey; and 
(4)  Whenever the ambulance is operated at a speed in excess of forty (40) miles per hour, the ambulance shall be operated in complete conformance with every other motor vehicle law and regulation of this state and of the city in which the ambulance is operated, relating to the operation of motor vehicles, as such provision applies to motor vehicles in general, except laws and regulations pertaining to compliance with official traffic-control devices or to vehicular operation upon the right half of the roadway. 
(Code 1980, § 4-16) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/11-1421.  
Secs. 38-94—38-110. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES  
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 38-111. - Required licenses. 
(a)  No person, either as owner, agent or otherwise, shall furnish, operate, conduct, maintain, advertise, or otherwise be engaged in or profess to be engaged in the business or service of the transportation of patients upon the streets, alleys, or any public way or place of the city unless he holds a valid ambulance license; provided, however, that an ambulance operated by an agency of the United States shall not be required to be so licensed. 
(b)  No ambulance shall be operated, and no individual shall drive, attend or permit it to be operated on the streets, alleys or any public way or place of the city unless it shall be under the immediate supervision and direction of a person who is holding a currently valid license as an attendant-driver or attendant. 
(c)  No such licenses shall be required for an ambulance, or for the driver, attendant or attendant-driver of an ambulance which is: 
(1)  Rendering assistance to licensed ambulances in the case of a major catastrophe or emergency with which the licensed ambulances of the city are insufficient or unable to cope; or 
(2)  Operated from a location or headquarters outside of the city in order to transport patients who are picked up beyond the limits of the city to locations within the city, or to transport patients who are picked up within the city to locations beyond the limits of the city; provided, however, that no such outside ambulance shall be used to pick up patients within the city for transportation to locations within the city unless the driver, attendant and attendant-driver and the person subject to the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, all hold currently valid licenses issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(Code 1980, § 4-2)  
Sec. 38-112. - Renewal of licenses. 
Renewal of any license required by this chapter upon expiration for any reason, or after revocation, shall require conformance with all the requirements of this chapter as upon original licensing. 
(Code 1980, § 4-13)  
Sec. 38-113. - License revocations. 
(a)  The mayor may, and is hereby authorized to suspend or revoke a license issued under this chapter for failure of a licensee to comply and to maintain compliance with, or for his violation of, any applicable provisions, standards, requirements, or regulations of this chapter, or of any other applicable laws, ordinances or regulations. Within ten (10) days after a suspension, the licensee shall be offered a hearing, after reasonable notice. The mayor shall, within twenty (20) days after conclusion of such hearing, issue a written decision (which shall include written findings) as to the suspension of said license. Such written decision shall be promptly transmitted to the licensee to whom it refers. 
(b)  The initial, semiannual or other ambulance, equipment and premises inspection reports of the chief of police and the health officer herein provided for shall be prima facie evidence of compliance or noncompliance with, or violation of, the provisions, standards and requirements provided herein, and of the regulations promulgated hereunder, for the licensing of ambulances. 
(c)  Upon suspension, revocation or termination of an ambulance license hereunder, operations as such shall cease with such ambulance and no person shall permit continued operation with such ambulance as such. Upon suspension, revocation or termination of a driver's, attendant's or attendant-driver's license hereunder, such driver, attendant or attendant-driver shall cease to drive or attend an ambulance and no person shall employ or permit such individual to drive or attend an ambulance. 
(Code 1980, § 4-14)  
Sec. 38-114. - Reports. 
(a)  Each licensee of an ambulance under this chapter shall maintain accurate records, upon such forms as may be provided or prescribed by and containing such information as may be required by the city clerk concerning the transportation of each patient within the city or from one (1) place herein to another place within or beyond its limits. Such records shall be available for inspection by the mayor and chief of police at any reasonable time and copies thereof shall be filed by the licensee within twenty-four (24) hours upon request by the mayor and chief of police. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall apply with equal force in case the patient shall die before being transported in such ambulance or dies while being transported therein or at any time prior to the acceptance of the patient into the responsibility of the hospital or medical or other authority if the patient is still under the care or responsibility of the ambulance licensee. 
(Code 1980, § 4-15)  
Secs. 38-115—38-130. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Ambulance License[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses and permits and miscellaneous business regulations, ch. 54. 
 
Sec. 38-131. - Application. 
Applications for ambulance licenses shall be made upon such forms as may be prescribed or offered by the city council and shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant and the owner of the ambulance. 
(2)  The trade or other name, if any, under which the applicant does business and proposes to do business. 
(3)  The training and experience of the applicant in the transportation and care of patients. 
(4)  A description of each ambulance, including the make, model, year of manufacture, motor and chassis number; current state license number; the length of time the ambulance has been in use; and the color scheme, insignia, name, monogram or other distinguishing characteristics to be used to designate the applicant's ambulance. 
(5)  The location and descriptions of the place or places from which it is intended to operate. 
(6)  Such other information as the city council shall deem reasonably necessary to a fair determination of compliance with this chapter. 
(Code 1980, § 4-3)  
Sec. 38-132. - Fee. 
The fee for an ambulance license shall be one hundred thirty-five dollars ($135.00); such fee shall be paid when the license application is made. 
(Code 1980, § 4-4; Ord. of 12-27-1973, § 26; Ord. No. 05-87, § 2, 12-8-2005)  
Sec. 38-133. - Standards. 
(a)  Each ambulance shall, at all times when in use as such: 
(1)  Conform with the standards, requirements and regulations provided for in this chapter for the transportation of patients, from the standpoint of health, sanitation and safety, and the nature of the premises in which it is maintained; 
(2)  Contain equipment conforming with the standards, requirements and regulations provided for herein, which equipment shall be in proper and good condition for such use; 
(3)  Currently comply with all applicable laws and provisions of this Code relating to health, sanitation and safety; and 
(4)  Be equipped with such lights, sirens and special markings to designate it as an ambulance as may be prescribed in reasonable regulations provided for by the city council. 
(b)  Any change of ownership of a licensed ambulance shall terminate the license and shall require a new application and a new license and conformance with all the requirements of this chapter as upon original licensing. 
(c)  Application for transfer of any ambulance license to another or substitute vehicle shall require conformance with all the requirements of this chapter as upon original licensing. No ambulance license may be sold, assigned, mortgaged or otherwise transferred without the approval of the city council and a finding of conformance with all the requirements of this chapter as upon original licensing. 
(d)  Each licensed ambulance, its equipment and the premises designated in the application and all records relating to its maintenance and operation as such, shall be open to inspection by the chief of police during usual hours of operation. 
(e)  No official entry made upon a license may be defaced, removed or obliterated. 
(Code 1980, § 4-5)  
Sec. 38-134. - Liability insurance. 
(a)  No ambulance license shall be issued under this chapter, nor shall such license be valid after issuance, nor shall any ambulance be operated in the city, unless there is at all times in force and effect insurance coverage, issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state, for each and every ambulance owned and/or operated by or for the applicant or licensee, providing: 
(1)  For injury to or death of individuals in accidents resulting from any cause for which the owner of the ambulance would be liable on account of liability imposed on him by law, regardless of whether the ambulance was being driven by the owner or his agent, in the amounts of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per person and two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) per occurrence; and 
(2)  Against damage to the property of another, including personal property, under like circumstances, in the amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). 
(b)  Every insurance policy required hereunder shall contain a provision for a continuing liability thereunder to the full amount thereof, notwithstanding any recovery thereon, that the liability of the insurer shall not be affected by the insolvency or the bankruptcy of the assured, and that until the policy is revoked the insurance company will not be relieved from liability on account of nonpayment of premium, failure to renew license at the end of the year, or any act or omission of the named assured. 
(c)  Every insurance policy required hereunder shall extend for the period to be covered by the license applied for and the insurer shall be obliged to give not less than ten (10) days' written notice to the city clerk and to the assured before any cancellation or termination of the policy earlier than its expiration date and the cancellation or other termination of any such policy shall automatically revoke and terminate the licenses issued for the ambulances covered by such policy, unless another insurance policy complying with the provisions of this section shall be provided and be in effect at the time of such cancellation or termination. 
(Code 1980, § 4-6)  
Sec. 38-135. - Issuance. 
(a)  The clerk shall, within ten (10) days after receipt of an application for an ambulance license, cause such investigation as he deems necessary to be made of the applicant and of his proposed operations. 
(b)  The city clerk shall issue a license hereunder for a specified ambulance, to be valid for a period of one year unless earlier suspended, revoked or terminated, when he finds that: 
(1)  Each such ambulance, its required equipment and the premises designated in the application, comply with the standards prescribed in sections 38-133(a) and 38-134 of this Code, and with the regulations promulgated under such sections; 
(2)  The applicant is a responsible and proper person to conduct or work in the proposed business; 
(3)  Only duly licensed drivers, attendants and attendant-drivers are employed in such capacities; and 
(4)  All the requirements of this chapter and all other applicable laws and provisions of this Code have been met. 
(Code 1980, § 4-7)  
Sec. 38-136. - Inspections prior to issuance. 
(a)  Prior to the issuance of any ambulance license hereunder, the chief of police shall inspect or cause to be inspected the vehicles, equipment and premises designated in each application hereunder, to determine compliance with the standards prescribed in sections 38-133(a) and 38-134 of this Code, and with the regulations explained in such sections. 
(b)  Subsequent to issuance of any ambulance license under this chapter, the chief of police shall cause to be inspected each such licensed vehicle and its equipment and premises whenever he deems such inspection to be necessary, but in any event no less frequently than twice each year. The periodic inspection required hereunder shall be in addition to any other safety or motor vehicle inspection required to be made for ambulances or other motor vehicles, or other inspections required to be made under general law or ordinances, and shall not excuse compliance with any requirement of law or ordinance to display any official certificate of motor vehicle inspection and approval nor excuse compliance with the requirements of any other applicable general law or ordinance. 
(c)  A copy of each initial, semiannual or other ambulance, equipment and premises inspection report by the license officer under the provisions of this section shall be promptly transmitted to the applicant or licensee to whom it refers. 
(Code 1980, § 4-8)  
Secs. 38-137—38-150. - Reserved.  
Subdivision III. - Driver's and Attendant's Licenses 
 
Sec. 38-151. - Driver's, etc., license—Application. 
Applications for driver's, attendant's and attendant-driver's licenses hereunder shall be made upon such forms as may be prepared or prescribed by the city clerk and shall contain: 
(1)  The applicant's full name, current residence, places of residence for five (5) years previous to moving to his present address, and length of time he has resided in the city. 
(2)  The applicant's age, marital status, height, color of eyes and hair. 
(3)  Whether he has ever been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor, and if so, when and where and for what cause. 
(4)  The applicant's training and experience in the transportation and care of patients, and whether he has previously been licensed as a driver, chauffeur, attendant or attendant-driver, and if so, when and where, and whether his license has ever been revoked or suspended in any jurisdiction and for what cause. 
(5)  Affidavits of good character from two (2) reputable citizens of the United States and residents of the city who have personally known such applicant and observed his conduct during five (5) years next preceding the date of his application. 
(6)  Two (2) recent photographs of the applicant, of a size designated by the city clerk, one (1) of which shall be attached by the city clerk to the license. 
(7)  Such other information as the city clerk shall deem reasonably necessary to a fair determination of compliance with this chapter. 
(Code 1980, § 4-10)  
Sec. 38-152. - Same—Fee. 
The fee for a license for an ambulance driver's, attendant's and attendant-driver's license shall be thirty dollars ($30.00). Said fee shall be submitted when the license application is made. 
(Code 1980, § 4-11; Ord. No. 05-87, § 2, 12-8-2005)  
Sec. 38-153. - Same—Issuance. 
(a)  The city clerk shall, within a reasonable time after receipt of an application as provided for in this chapter, cause such investigation as he deems necessary to be made of the applicant for a driver's, attendant's or attendant-driver's license. 
(b)  The city clerk shall issue a license to a driver, attendant or attendant-driver hereunder, valid for a period of one (1) year, unless earlier suspended, revoked or terminated, when he finds that: 
(1)  The applicant is not addicted to the use of intoxicating liquors or narcotics, and is morally fit for the position; 
(2)  The applicant is able to speak, read and write the English language; 
(3)  The applicant has been found by a duly licensed physician, upon examination attested to on a form provided by the health officer, to be of sound physique, possessing eyesight corrected to at least 20/40 in the better eye, and free of physical defects or diseases which might impair the ability to drive or attend an ambulance; and 
(4)  For each applicant for attendant or attendant-driver's license, that such applicant has a currently valid certificate evidencing successful completion of a course of training equivalent to the advanced course in first aid given by the American Red Cross or the United States Bureau of Mines. 
No one shall be licensed as a driver or attendant-driver unless he holds a currently valid permit from the state to drive an ambulance. 
(c)  A license as driver, attendant or attendant-driver issued hereunder shall not be assignable or transferable. 
(d)  No official entry made upon a license may be defaced, removed or obliterated. 
(Code 1980, § 4-12)  
Secs. 38-154—38-180. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - FOOD AND FOOD DEALERS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 38-181. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall mean as follows: 
Certified person means one who has obtained a food service sanitation manager certificate issued by the state department of public health after completion of a fifteen-hour training course. 
Food dealer means every person engaged in the sale of food, including beverages other than intoxicating liquor, intended for human consumption. 
Owner means any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity having sufficient proprietary interest in a commercial establishment to maintain and manage its operation. 
Retail, wholesale or manufacturing dealer means a building or premises, or portion thereof, the principal use of which is the sale, manufacture or distribution of material goods or chattels not included with or related to the sale of material goods or chattels or the provisions of services of food establishments or service establishments. 
Service dealer means a building or premises or a portion thereof the principal use of which is the rendering of personal or material services for profit; the wholesale distribution or storage of material goods or chattels; the sale, servicing or storage of motor equipment; the washing, cleaning, dyeing or repair of fabrics, wearing apparel or footwear on the premises; the storage, assembly, distribution, servicing or repair of building materials, electrical equipment or mechanical equipment; the storage or distribution of fuels or petroleum products; the services of printing, blueprinting, photocopying, multilithing, publishing, duplicating or similar reproduction services; the providing of facilities for instruction, training or participating in or presentation of the fine arts, athletic skills or dexterity, or physical skills or dexterity. 
(Code 1980, § 11-1; Ord. of 12-3-1963, § 17; Ord. No. 96-25, § 1, 5-9-1996; Ord. No. 98-6, § 1, 2-17-1998)  
Sec. 38-182. - Penalties. 
(a)  Citations and fines. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter may be cited in any amount of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than that amount which is prescribed and permitted by law. The citing authority (health commissioner or his designee of the city) may consider each citation a cause for the issuance of fines as provided herein. Such fine or fines shall be payable to the city clerk within a period of time specified in such citations, not more than seven (7) days after the issuance of any citation. 
(b)  Revocation of license. Upon the conclusion of a hearing as provided in section 38-190 and a finding that any food service establishment is not in compliance with this chapter, the provisions of section 38-190 providing for revocation of license, shall be invoked and the establishment shall not be permitted to operate a food service establishment unless and until the establishment reapplies for such license and demonstrates the ability to comply with the terms of this chapter. 
(Code 1980, § 11-16; Ord. No. 96-25, § 3, 5-9-1996; Ord. No. 97-43, § 1, 8-14-1997)  
Sec. 38-183. - License inspector. 
The license inspector of the city is hereby authorized to enforce business license regulations and to issue tickets or citations to said violators. Each day any violation of any provision of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1980, § 11-14; Ord. No. 94-17, § 1, 5-12-1994)  
Sec. 38-184. - Sanitation. 
Premises used for the sale or storage of food intended for human consumption must be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. It shall be unlawful to permit any accumulation of refuse or waste of any kind to remain therein for more than twenty-four (24) hours, and it shall be unlawful to permit any decaying animal or plant material to remain on such premises. No dogs, cats or other animals shall be permitted on such premises, except for guide, hearing and support dogs accompanying blind, hearing impaired or physically handicapped persons. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 410 ILCS 650/0.01 et seq. 
(Code 1980, § 11-6)  
Sec. 38-185. - Unwholesome food. 
No person shall offer for sale, or keep for the purpose of selling or offering for sale, any food of any kind intended for human consumption which is spoiled or tainted or is unwholesome and unfit for human consumption for any reason. 
(Code 1980, § 11-7)  
Sec. 38-186. - Adulteration. 
It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale, or keep for such purpose, any food or drink intended for human consumption which has been adulterated by any material harmful in any way, or which does not comply with the statutes governing the same. 
(Code 1980, § 11-8) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 410 ILCS 620/1 et seq.  
Sec. 38-187. - Flies and vermin. 
Premises used for the storage, preparation or sale of food intended for human consumption shall be kept free from flies, vermin and rodents. 
(Code 1980, § 11-9)  
Sec. 38-188. - Employees. 
(a)  All persons engaged in handling or coming in contact with food intended for sale for human consumption shall keep themselves clean, both as to person and clothing. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person who is afflicted with or is a carrier of any infectious or contagious disease to handle or to be engaged in the care of or preparation of any such food. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to permit any such person to be employed in or about any premises where food is stored, prepared or sold, or to deliver such food. 
(Code 1980, § 11-10) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 410 ILCS 650/10.  
Sec. 38-189. - Rules and regulations adopted for food service and food store sanitation. 
The issuance, suspension and revocation of permits to operate retail food establishments, the prohibiting of sale of unsound or mislabeled food or drink and the enforcement of this section, shall be regulated in accordance with chapter 10, compliance procedures of the 1976 and subsequent editions of the Food and Drug Administration "Food Service Sanitation Ordinance." The inspection of food service establishments shall be regulated in accordance with the current and subsequent state department of public health "Food Service Sanitation Rules and Regulations," on file with the secretary of state. The inspection of retail food stores shall be regulated in accordance with the state department of public health "Retail Food Store Sanitation Rules and Regulations," on file with the secretary of state. Three (3) certified copies of the Food and Drug Administration "Food Service Sanitation Ordinance," state department of public health "Food Service Sanitation Rules and Regulations," and the Illinois Department of Public Health "Retail Food Store Sanitation Rules and Regulations," shall be on file at the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1980, § 11-11; Ord. No. 84-19, § 1, 6-14-1984)  
Sec. 38-190. - Certified supervision requirement. 
(a)  All food service establishments, whether retail or active suppliers to retail establishments where fresh food is prepared for immediate or nearly immediate consumption by the public, shall be under the operational supervision of a certified person as defined in this article. A certified person must be present at all times of operation. Food service establishments as defined herein who cease to be qualified due to the loss or severance of a certified person must notify the health commissioner or his designee within seventy-two (72) hours after the severance or loss of a certified person. Food service establishments seeking a business license to operate in the city shall not be granted such license and/or authority to operate within the city limits until a certified person, as required herein, is available on the premises and such notice of availability of certified person has been made known to the health commissioner or his designee. Food service establishments which are not in compliance because of employee turnover or other loss of certified personnel or some other reason acceptable to the health commissioner or his designee shall have one (1) month from the date of loss of the certified personnel to comply with the terms and provisions of this section. 
(b)  Original certificates of certified managers shall be maintained at the place of business and shall be made available for inspection. 
(c)  Any food service establishment which is found to not have the proper certification must show proof of proper certification to the health commissioner or his designee within thirty (30) days of written notice. Failure to show proof of proper certification shall result in a citation by the health commissioner or his designee indicating a violation of this section. The health commissioner or his designee at his discretion, may issue up to three (3) citations citing the facility which shall result in the assessment of penalties as hereinafter defined. In the event any food service establishment fails to comply with the terms of this section after the third citation, the health commissioner or his designee shall schedule a hearing to show cause why the establishment's license should not be revoked. Upon the holding of a hearing as provided herein which results in a determination that the establishment is not in compliance with the provisions of this section, the establishment's license shall be revoked. 
(Code 1980, § 11-12; Ord. No. 96-25, § 2, 5-9-1996)  
Sec. 38-191. - Sale of food from mobile carts. 
(a)  The custom among merchants dealing in ice cream, ices, soda waters and other soft drinks, hot dogs, peanuts, and any other food item intended for human consumption, of delivering at the curb, in the street, or upon the sidewalks or roadways, their merchandise in paper cups, cartons, plates, napkins, or other containers, has become a nuisance and a menace to pedestrians traveling upon the roadway by reason of depositing of such cups, cartons, plates, or other containers on the sidewalks and streets, and the delivery of such commodities in containers upon the public streets anywhere is hereby declared to be a nuisance and a menace. 
(b)  The sale of food, food items or any food products from mobile carts is declared to violate the terms of this ordinance and not meet the food sanitation, food handling, food preparation, food processing and food equipment sanitation standards of the laws of the City of Calumet City. 
(c)  Any person who engages in the sale of food, food items, or food products for human consumption from a mobile cart of this section or without a license shall upon conviction be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). 
(d)  In addition to any fines levied in subsection (3) of this section, the mobile cart from which the food, food items, food products is illegally sold shall be impounded and towed and any food or beverage products that are perishable shall be disposed of and said cart shall not be reclaimed until the owner has paid the costs of towing and storage. 
(Ord. No. 04-16, §§ 1—4, 4-22-2004)  
Secs. 38-192—38-210. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - FOOD DEALER'S LICENSE 
 
Sec. 38-211. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any food dealer to engage in or do business in the city without a license. 
(Code 1980, § 11-2)  
Sec. 38-212. - License application; processing. 
Applications for the license required by this article shall be made in compliance with the general provisions of this Code relating thereto, shall state the kind of food intended to be sold or handled, and shall be referred to the health commissioner who shall make or cause to be made an investigation of the premises to be used, and report his findings thereon, recommending or advising against the issuance of the license. 
(Code 1980, § 11-3)  
Sec. 38-213. - License fee. 
The annual license fee shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for each business licensed under this article. 
(Code 1980, § 11-4; Ord. of 12-27-1973, § 10; Ord. No. 05-87, § 2, 12-8-2005)  
Sec. 38-214. - License revocation. 
Any food dealer's license may be revoked by the mayor and council for repeated violation of the provisions of this article, or for any violation of any other ordinance provisions, relating to the conduct of the business, the condition of the premises, the articles sold, or to the license required. 
(Code 1980, § 11-5)  
Sec. 38-215. - Display of license. 
Any person issued a business license or decal by the city shall place said license or decal in a frame and place it on public display on the licensed premises. 
(Code 1980, § 11-13; Ord. No. 94-17, § 1, 5-12-1994)  
Sec. 38-216. - Machine locations, list required. 
All distributors issued a license by the city shall furnish the city clerk (within sixty (60) days from the passage of Ordinance No. 94-17) a list of all locations and premises to which they furnish any machines requiring a license under the ordinances of the city. Thereafter such list shall be furnished at the time of license application. Any locations or premises which were added after such list is furnished shall be amended within thirty (30) days of placement of said machine. 
(Code 1980, § 11-15; Ord. No. 94-17, § 1, 5-12-1994)  
Secs. 38-217—38-240. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - DRIVE-IN REFRESHMENT STANDS 
 
Sec. 38-241. - License. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate any drive-in refreshment stand in the city without a license. 
(b)  Application. Any person desiring a license for a drive-in refreshment stand shall file an application in writing with the city clerk. Such application shall state thereon the type of refreshment or refreshments intended to be sold, the proposed location showing compliance with the zoning ordinance and the applicable building regulations, and provision for the number of parking places required by the zoning or building regulations. 
(c)  Signatures. Such application shall be signed by the person, or by the authorized agent of a firm or corporation, applying for the license. 
(d)  Fee. The annual fee for the license required by this article shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(e)  Approval, generally. The application for the license required by this article shall be turned over to the building commissioner who shall ascertain whether or not all of the regulations imposed by this article are being complied with. If it appears that such regulations are being complied with, he shall approve such application and return it to the city clerk. 
(f)  Approval procedures. Provided, that notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, no license may be issued without compliance with the following procedure: The application for license shall be referred to the permits and license committee, which committee shall conduct a public hearing regarding said application. The committee shall publish notice of said public hearing stating the time, place and purpose of said hearing. Notice shall be published at least fifteen (15) days, but not more than thirty (30) days, in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The permits and license committee shall, within fifteen (15) days after the public hearing, render its recommendation in writing to the city council. The city council shall then grant or deny the license application, taking into consideration, the impact on the surrounding property, and any detriment to the public welfare or injury to other property or improvements to the neighborhood in which said property is located. The city council may establish reasonable terms and conditions of operation as condition of issuance of the license. 
(g)  Issuance. The city clerk shall issue the license after payment of the required fee. 
(Code 1980, §§ 11-22, 11-23, 11-24, 11-25; Ord. of 12-27-1973, § 11; Ord. No. 88-18, § 1, 7-14-1988; Ord. No. 05-87, § 2, 12-8-2005)  
Sec. 38-242. - Sanitation. 
(a)  The premises on which a drive-in refreshment stand is located shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary manner, and the person in charge thereof shall see to it that all debris is cleaned up at least once a day. Adequate waste containers shall be provided so that the customer may dispose of any containers or other waste material. 
(b)  Any such refuse, whether windblown or otherwise deposited on adjoining property, shall be removed at the same time that the refuse from such drive-in refreshment stand is removed, unless the owner of such adjoining property objects. 
(Code 1980, § 11-26) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 410 ILCS 650/1 et seq.  
Sec. 38-243. - Additional regulations. 
In addition to the provisions of this article the applicable provisions of articles I and VIII of this chapter shall be applicable to businesses licensed under this article. 
(Code 1980, § 11-27)  
Secs. 38-244—38-260. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - FOOD DELIVERY VEHICLES 
 
Sec. 38-261. - Food defined. 
The term "food" as used in this article shall include all nonalcoholic liquors and milk. 
(Code 1980, § 11-39)  
Sec. 38-262. - Exemption. 
The licensing provisions of this article shall not apply to ice cream trucks licensed by section 54-881 of this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 11-40)  
Sec. 38-263. - Inspections. 
The mayor is hereby authorized and directed to make such inspections as may be necessary to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1980, § 11-46)  
Sec. 38-264. - License. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful to use any vehicle for the delivery or sale of food intended for human consumption in the city at retail without a license. If the sale of food from a vehicle is intended, it shall only be sold from a vehicle licensed, inspected and maintained in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Application. Applications for the license required by this article shall comply with the general provisions of this Code relating to applications for license. 
(c)  Fee. 
(1)  The annual fee for the license required by this article shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for each vehicle used as such. 
(2)  No license fee shall be required for any vehicle used to deliver foodstuffs from any establishment which is licensed and inspected as a food-dealing establishment which is in the city; but all provisions of this article other than this section shall be complied with in connection with such vehicles. 
(d)  Revocation. In addition to any penalty provided by law, any license issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked by the mayor and council for any violation of this article. 
(Code 1980, §§ 11-41, 11-42, 11-43, 11-44; Ord. of 12-27-1973, § 12; Ord. No. 95-46, § 1, 9-14-1995; Ord. No. 05-87, § 2, 12-8-2005; Ord. No. 18-11, § 2, 4-12-2018)  
Sec. 38-265. - Sanitation. 
(a)  All vehicles for which a license is required by the provisions of this article shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be thoroughly cleaned each day they are so used. It shall be unlawful to permit stale food, decaying matter, or any other waste material or product to accumulate in or on any such vehicle while it is so used. 
(b)  If unwrapped foodstuffs are transported in any such vehicle such goods shall be carried in a portion or compartment of the vehicle which is screened and protected against dust and insects. 
(Code 1980, § 11-45)  
Sec. 38-266. - Mobile food service unit operations. 
(a)  A mobile food service unit is defined as a food dispensing operation on wheels with its own source of electrical and motive power being one hundred (100) percent self-contained and able to perform its intended function while in compliance with all local, state, and federal statutes. Mobile food service units must not operate at a fixed location and must be moved on a daily basis. The same sanitation standards shall apply to mobile food service dispensing units as to stationary restaurants or other retail food handling establishments. 
(b)  All mobile food service units must be owned and operated by a restaurant, commissary, or other fixed service establishment located within the corporate limits of the city and must report at least daily to such location for all supplies and for all cleaning and servicing operations. Each mobile food service unit must initially and annually provide the location of their base of operation, along with the base's appropriate permits to operate and a letter of permission to utilize that facility. 
(c)  The base of operation must have a service area provided with overhead protection for supplying, cleaning and servicing the mobile food service unit and with a location for flushing and drainage of liquid waste to the sanitary sewer. The service area must be constructed of smooth, non-absorbent materials. 
(d)  All mobile food service unit food and drink service establishments are required to display the license from Calumet City prior to starting operation within Calumet City. Licenses granted by the city shall be issued on an individual basis as a result of an inspection of each unit to determine the function it is intended to perform and to determine if it complies with the requirements set forth herein. 
(e)  The Calumet City mobile food service unit permit license must be displayed on the rear right bumper and is not transferable to a different operator or a different vehicle. All mobile food service unit permits are linked to the vehicle identification number (VIN). 
(Ord. No. 18-11, § 2, 4-12-2018; Ord. No. 18-46, § 2, 8-9-2018)  
Sec. 38-267. - General requirements for mobile food service units. 
(a)  All mobile food service units must have certified food handlers or have employees enrolled in an Illinois Department of Public Health (IDPH) approved fifteen-hour course from the initial day of operation. Mobile units not complying with this requirement will not be permitted to operate. By Illinois law, certified management is required at all times food is being prepared. 
(b)  Ceilings must be smooth, easily cleanable, light in color, durable, continuous, and uniform. Raw wood surfaces are not permitted anywhere in the mobile unit, including under counters and inside cabinets. Floor surfaces must be smooth, easily cleanable, light in color, and durable. Vinyl commercial floor tile (?-inch thick and light in color), quarry tile and ceramic tile are approved floor coverings. The appropriate toe base coving must also be installed. Wall surfaces must be smooth, easily cleanable, durable light in color, continuous, and uniform. Finished drywall painted with a light-colored washable paint, FRP type materials, and stainless steel are approved wall surfaces. 
(c)  All equipment must bear the seal of the National Sanitation Foundation (NSF), ETL, UL Sanitation Standard or equivalent and be approved by the Department of Inspectional Services. All cooling/freezing equipment must be mechanically operated and have built in or hanging thermometers. Home style equipment is not approved. All potentially hazardous food must be stored or displayed at a temperature of 41°F or below or 135°F or above at all times. 
(d)  Two (2) drain boards are required at all three (3) compartment sinks along with an appropriately sized faucet, lockable drain plugs, and an indirect connection to the holding tank. 
(e)  Hand sinks must be provided with mixing faucets, hot and cold water and approved disposable (paper) hand towels and soap. 
(f)  All grease or smoke-producing cooking units must be provided with an approved exhaust system as outlined in BOCA, NFPA 96, UL and NSF. All exhaust systems must be designed per manufacturer's recommendations and based upon the grease and heat load. All hood systems must be approved by the fire department prior to installation. 
(g)  At least fifty-foot candles of light shall be provided on all working surfaces. Shielding to protect against broken glass falling in food shall be provided for all lighting fixtures. Teflon coating is required on exposed bulbs. 
(h)  All openings to the outside must be screened or provided with air curtains and all doors must be self-closing and tight fitting. 
(i)  Licensee must provide dial stem thermometers with a range of 0°F to 220°F, a chemical test kit for the sanitizer type along with hair restraints and disposable gloves or other barrier for handling ready to eat foods. 
(j)  Only single service disposable utensils shall be used for the service of food and drink. 
(k)  All beverages, ice, bakery products, sandwiches and all other food items must be obtained from an approved and permitted commissary or base of operations and must be labeled in accordance with IDPH's Section 750.110.g)1—5. Reselling food from a retail establishment is prohibited. 
(l)  A mobile food service unit requiring a water system must have a potable water system under pressure and of sufficient capacity to furnish enough hot and cold water for food preparation, utensil cleaning, sanitizing, and hand washing. 
(m)  If liquid waste results from the operation, the waste must be stored in a permanently installed retention tank which is at least fifty (50) percent larger than the water supply tank. 
(n)  In addition, all mobile food service units and pushcarts shall comply with the requirements of Section 750.100 through 750.1570 except as otherwise provided in this Section 750.1500 and in Section 750.1510 of Illinois Department of Public Food Service Sanitation Code (October 1998). 
(Ord. No. 18-11, § 2, 4-12-2018)  
Sec. 38-268. - Inspections of mobile food service units. 
Every mobile food service unit licensed to operate will be submitted by the licensee for quarterly inspections by the Calumet City Department of Inspectional Services. The time period for quarterly inspections will begin on the date the license is issued to the licensee and will take place on a quarterly basis thereafter. Failure by licensee to submit the mobile food service unit for a quarterly inspection will result in revocation of the license for the unit. 
(Ord. No. 18-11, § 2, 4-12-2018)  
Sec. 38-269. - Designation of location of operation in Calumet City. 
If the licensee intends to operate the mobile food service unit at locations within the corporate limits of Calumet City, the licensee must designate in writing in its license application, or any renewal thereof, the specific locations in Calumet City at which it intends to operate. 
(Ord. No. 18-11, § 2, 4-12-2018)  
Secs. 38-270—38-290. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - ICE CREAM PARLORS 
 
Sec. 38-291. - License. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or conduct an ice cream parlor without a license. 
(b)  Application. All applications for the license required by this article shall be made in writing to the clerk, in conformity with the provisions of this Code relating to licenses. 
(c)  Fee. The annual fee for the license required by this article shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(Code 1980, §§ 11-59, 11-60, 11-61; Ord. of 12-27-1973, § 14; Ord. No. 05-87, § 2, 12-8-2005)  
Sec. 38-292. - Inspections. 
It shall be the duty of the health commissioner to inspect or cause to be inspected any ice cream parlor in the city to insure compliance with the provisions of this article and with all provisions of this Code relating to the storage, handling or sale of food. 
(Code 1980, § 11-63)  
Sec. 38-293. - Sanitation. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every person operating or conducting an ice cream parlor to maintain the premises used therefor in a clean and sanitary condition; it shall be unlawful to permit any waste material of any kind to accumulate thereon, and the premises shall be kept free from flies, rodents and vermin. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to employ in any such establishment any person afflicted with or who is a carrier of any contagious or venereal disease. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to serve or keep in any ice cream parlor any unwholesome, spoiled or stale food or ice cream. 
(Code 1980, § 11-62) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 410 ILCS 650/1 et seq.  
Secs. 38-294—38-310. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - ICE DEALERS 
 
Sec. 38-311. - License. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful to engage in the business of the retail sale of ice in the city without a license. 
(b)  Application. An application for the license required by this article shall be made in writing to the city clerk and shall contain the number of vehicles to be used for the delivery of ice in the city, together with the other information required in such application. 
(c)  Notice of number of vehicles. Whenever the number of vehicles is increased, notice of this fact shall be given to the clerk, and the fee provided herein shall be paid. 
(d)  Fee. The annual fee for an ice dealer's license shall be one hundred five dollars ($105.00). 
(Code 1980, §§ 11-75, 11-76, 11-77; Ord. of 12-27-1973, § 22; Ord. No. 05-87, § 2, 12-8-2005)  
Sec. 38-312. - Health standards. 
All ice sold or offered for sale in the city shall be free from harmful materials, if such ice is sold or offered for sale for domestic use. 
(Code 1980, § 11-78)  
Sec. 38-313. - Scales. 
Every vehicle used for the delivery of ice shall be equipped with an accurate scale for the weighing of the ice as delivered. 
(Code 1980, § 11-79)  
Secs. 38-314—38-330. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - LOCKER PLANTS 
 
Sec. 38-331. - Definitions. 
As used in this article the following terms shall have the meanings indicated below: 
Food means any edible substance or beverage used or intended for human consumption. 
Locker plant means any establishment wherein compartments are rented, leased or made available to other than the owner of the establishment for the refrigerated storage of food. 
(Code 1980, § 11-91)  
Sec. 38-332. - License. 
(a)  Required. No person shall operate a locker plant without a license. 
(b)  Application. An application for the license required by the provisions of this article shall be made to the city clerk and shall conform to the provisions of this Code relative to license applications. In addition to all other information contained in such application, it shall state the number of units maintained on the premises, and the size of each unit; each application shall also state whether a unit is maintained in which will be stored food belonging to various individuals in addition to the separate units rented to other than the owner of the premises. 
(c)  Fee. The annual fee for the license required by this article shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(d)  Restriction on issuance. No license shall be issued for any locker plant which does not comply with applicable state law. 
(Code 1980, §§ 11-92, 11-93, 11-94, 11-95; Ord. of 12-27-1973, § 13; Ord. No. 05-87, § 2, 12-8-2005)  
Sec. 38-333. - Sanitation. 
All premises used for the operation of a refrigeration locker plant shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, and shall be thoroughly cleaned of all refuse, dust and debris at least once in every twenty-four (24) hours. It shall be unlawful to store or keep in such plant unwholesome, spoiled, contaminated or adulterated food. 
(Code 1980, § 11-96)  
Sec. 38-334. - Construction of premises. 
(a)  No locker plant shall be operated or conducted in a building which is not constructed in full compliance with all ordinances. 
(b)  No such plant shall be operated in a frame building, nor in any building other than one where the floors are so constructed as to bear a live load of one hundred (100) pounds per square foot. 
(Code 1980, § 11-97)  
Sec. 38-335. - Electrical wiring. 
The wiring and refrigeration plant shall conform to all ordinances relative to electric wiring and to the installation of refrigeration units. 
(Code 1980, § 11-98)  
Sec. 38-336. - Temperatures. 
No food shall be stored in any locker plant unless such food has been frozen to a temperature of zero degrees Fahrenheit or below before being so stored; the lockers or compartments used for the refrigerated storage of food must be kept at all times at a temperature below fifteen (15) degrees Fahrenheit. 
(Code 1980, § 11-99)  
Secs. 38-337—38-360. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - MILK AND MILK PRODUCTS 
 
Sec. 38-361. - Inspections and tests. 
The health commissioner shall conduct inspections at least quarterly of all milk distribution plants, dairies, vehicles and equipment used in the sale or distribution of milk as well as of the milk itself. The health commissioner may, in his discretion in lieu of inspection, accept the certificate of inspection of any other city or village having requirements equal to or more rigid than those provided by this article. The licensee shall pay the cost of all bacteriological inspections and tests necessary. 
(Code 1980, § 11-125)  
Sec. 38-362. - License. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful to engage in the sale or distribution of milk or cream in the city without a license. 
(b)  Application. All applications for the license required by this article shall be made in writing to the city clerk and shall comply with the provisions of this Code governing licenses, and shall state, in addition to the other information required, the source of supply of the milk to be sold, the ownership of the cattle from whom the milk is produced, and a certificate from the health commissioner stating that this article has been complied with. 
(c)  Fee. The annual fee for the license required by this article shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(Code 1980, §§ 11-111, 11-112, 11-113; Ord. of 12-27-1973, § 15; Ord. No. 05-87, § 2, 12-8-2005)  
Sec. 38-363. - Compliance with state law. 
All skim milk, buttermilk and cream shall conform to the standards required by the state and no person shall sell or offer for sale any milk or milk products which are not in conformity with same. 
(Code 1980, § 11-116)  
Sec. 38-364. - Pasteurization required. 
It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale for human consumption any milk or milk products which have not been produced and pasteurized in the manner required by state statute. 
(Code 1980, § 11-118)  
Sec. 38-365. - Milk. 
Milk, as the term is used herein, shall mean the whole, fresh, clean lacteal secretion obtained by the complete milking of one (1) or more healthy cows, properly fed and kept clean, excluding that obtained within fifteen (15) days before and five (5) days after calving, or such longer period as may be necessary to render the milk practically colostrum free, and shall contain not less than three and one-fourth (3¼) percent of milk fat and not less than eight (8) percent of milk solids not fat. No milk not conforming to this section shall be sold or offered for sale in the city. 
(Code 1980, § 11-114)  
Sec. 38-366. - Cream. 
No cream shall be sold, offered for sale, exchanged or delivered or kept for the purpose of sale that contains less than eighteen (18) percent of butter fat, or that is obtained from any impure, diseased, adulterated or unwholesome milk or from milk to which any foreign substance has been added, or from milk containing less than three (3) percent of butterfat or from cows fed on refuse or slop, mash or food which has been subject to fermentation, or any food other than good, wholesome food. 
(Code 1980, § 11-115)  
Sec. 38-367. - Grade A milk; sale required. 
It shall be unlawful to offer for sale any milk except "grade A milk" which has been produced and transported in compliance with applicable state law. 
(Code 1980, § 11-117)  
Sec. 38-368. - Animals; production conditions; disease control. 
(a)  All milk offered for sale or sold must come from animals under state and federal supervision and proven free from all contagious and infectious diseases, and shall contain not more than fifty thousand (50,000) bacteria per cubic centimeter and no pathogenic bacteria. 
(b)  All such milk shall be produced under the following conditions: 
(1)  All persons, living upon farms, employed thereon or coming in contact with milk in dairies or other places shall be free from contagious or infectious diseases and shall not have been exposed to anyone having such a disease within a period of one (1) week prior to the exercise of such duties. 
(2)  No person who is a paratyphoid, typhoid, diphtheria or septic sore throat carrier or a carrier of another such contagious disease, or who has any such disease, shall be employed in the production or handling of such milk. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of every person with a knowledge of the facts to notify the health commissioner or other legally constituted authority at once of the occurrence of any of the above afflictions in persons living or employed in or about a place where milk is produced, handled or sold. 
(d)  Milk and milk derivatives that have been so exposed shall not be shipped into or sold or offered for sale in the city. 
(Code 1980, § 11-119)  
Sec. 38-369. - Dairy buildings. 
Every building, room or basement enclosure or premises occupied or used as a dairy or milk depot shall be properly and adequately lighted, drained and ventilated, and shall have adequate plumbing facilities. 
(Code 1980, § 11-120)  
Sec. 38-370. - Vehicles. 
Every vehicle used for the delivery of milk or cream to consumers shall have marked plainly thereon the name of the vendor of such milk with his address. All such vehicles shall be kept in a clean and sanitary manner and condition. 
(Code 1980, § 11-121)  
Sec. 38-371. - Containers. 
No milk, except skimmed milk, buttermilk or sour milk, shall be peddled or sold at retail in quantities of less than one (1) gallon except in containers bearing the true name of the article, the name and address of the producer, dealer or distributor and the net volume of the contents in accordance with state law; and no person shall sell milk or cream in any bottle or container other than one bearing the seller's name or to which he has acquired title as required by law. 
(Code 1980, § 11-122)  
Sec. 38-372. - Artificial coloring. 
It shall be unlawful to sell any milk or cream containing any artificial coloring or preservative, or to which water or any foreign substance has been added or which has been handled or transported in unclean or unsanitary containers or vessels. 
(Code 1980, § 11-123)  
Sec. 38-373. - Deliveries to quarantined premises. 
(a)  Milk may be delivered to quarantined premises, provided that there is no contact of any kind between the inmates and contents of the quarantined premises and the delivery agent. 
(b)  No milk receptacles shall be taken from such premises during the period of quarantine; before being taken away for use such receptacles shall be thoroughly scalded and sterilized. 
(Code 1980, § 11-124)  
Secs. 38-374—38-400. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - RESTAURANTS 
 
Sec. 38-401. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the term "restaurant" shall be construed to include any place where food or drink other than alcoholic liquor is prepared and served to the public for consumption on the premises; the term "food" shall include beverages other than alcoholic liquor. 
(Code 1980, § 11-137)  
Sec. 38-402. - License. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a restaurant without a license. 
(b)  Application: 
(1)  An application for the license required by this article shall be made in writing to the city clerk on a form to be furnished by him and shall comply with the general provisions of this Code relating to licenses. 
(2)  All applications for a license to conduct a restaurant shall be referred to the health commissioner who shall make or cause to be made an investigation of the premises to be used and report his findings thereon recommending or advising against the issuance of the license. 
(c)  Fee. The fee for the license required by this article shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(d)  Revocation. Any restaurant license may be revoked by the mayor for repeated violation of the provisions of this article or for any violation of any other Code or ordinance provision, relating to the conduct of the business, the condition of the premises, the article sold or the license required. 
(Ord. of 12-27-1973, § 16; Ord. No. 05-87, § 2, 12-8-2005)  
Sec. 38-403. - Inspections. 
(a)  At least once every six (6) months, the health commissioner shall inspect every food service establishment located within the city. Upon inspection, a copy of the inspection report with the sanitation score shall be presented to the proprietor of the establishment or his representative. When in the course of an inspection, any item is found that poses a significant risk to the health or safety of the patrons and/or employees, the inspector may require the proprietor to take immediate action to remedy the situation. Failure to take immediate action shall result in the issuance of a citation by the health commissioner or his designee in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00). In addition, the health commissioner or his designee may take those steps needed to mitigate the hazard if the proprietor or his representative does not. This may include, but not be limited to, ordering the cessation of operation of the establishment until the hazard is removed and a reinspection is completed. 
(b)  All sanitation scores below eighty (80) or a violation of any "critical item" will require a reinspection. In addition, reinspections may be required at the discretion of the health commissioner or his designee. A reinspection fee is fifty dollars ($50.00), payable to the city clerk within three (3) business days of the initial inspection. Each reinspection shall require a separate fee. The fee for the first reinspection in any calendar year shall be waived. Failure to pay any required reinspection fee shall result in the issuance of a citation in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00). Upon reinspection, establishments scoring eighty (80) and above, but below ninety (90) shall be issued a citation in the amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) in addition to any reinspection fees. Scores below eighty (80) shall be issued a citation in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) in addition to any reinspection fees. 
(c)  Upon any reinspection where the health commissioner or his designee determines that conditions represent a serious hazard to the health and safety of the patrons and employees of the establishment, operation of the establishment may be ordered ceased until such time as the violations are corrected, in addition to any citations issued. 
(d)  All citations issued shall be processed through the code hearing department and subject to the applicable provisions of Ordinance No. 96-42. Pursuant to any such citation, the proprietor so accused of such violation(s) may settle and compromise the violation claim by paying to the municipality the applicable amount as set forth in subsections (a) and (b) of this section, within a period of time to be specified in such citation, not more than seven (7) days after the time the alleged offense was committed. Such payment shall be made in accordance with the instructions contained in the aforesaid citation, at the office of the city clerk who shall issue a receipt for the money so received and promptly remit such amount to the city treasurer to be credited to the proper municipal fund. 
(e)  One (1) copy of the inspection report shall be posted by the health commission upon an inside wall of the establishment, and the inspection report shall not be defaced or removed by any person except the health commissioners. A copy of the inspection report shall also be filed with the county health department. 
(f)  The proprietor of the establishment shall, upon request of the health commissioner, permit access to all areas of the establishment and shall permit copying of any or all records of food purchases. 
(Code 1980, § 11-154; Ord. No. 96-68, § 1, 11-14-1996)  
Sec. 38-404. - Unwholesome food. 
No person shall offer for sale or keep for the purpose of selling or offering for sale any food of any kind intended for human consumption which is spoiled or tainted or is unwholesome or unfit for human consumption for any reason. 
(Code 1980, § 11-142)  
Sec. 38-405. - Wholesomeness of food and drink. 
All food and drink shall be clean, wholesome, free from spoilage and so prepared as to be safe for human consumption. All milk, fluid milk products, ice cream and other frozen desserts served shall be from approved sources. Milk and fluid milk products shall be served in the individual original containers in which they were received from the distributor or from a bulk container equipped with an approved dispensing device; provided, that this requirement shall not apply to cream, which may be served from the original bottle or from a dispenser approved for such service. All oysters, clams and mussels shall be from approved sources and if shucked shall be kept until used in the containers in which they were placed at the shucking plant. 
(Code 1980, § 11-143)  
Sec. 38-406. - Examination and condemnation of unwholesome or adulterated food or drink. 
Samples of food, drink and other substances may be taken and extended by the commissioner of health as often as may be necessary for the detection of unwholesomeness or adulteration. The health commissioner may condemn and forbid the sale of or cause to be removed or destroyed any food or drink which is unwholesome or adulterated. 
(Code 1980, § 11-144)  
Sec. 38-407. - Construction of utensils and equipment. 
All multiuse utensils and all show and display cases or windows, counters, shelves, tables, refrigerating equipment, sinks and other equipment or utensils used in connection with the operation of a restaurant shall be kept in good repair. Utensils containing or plated with cadmium or lead shall not be used; provided, that solder containing lead may be used for jointing. 
(Code 1980, § 11-145)  
Sec. 38-408. - Cleaning and bactericidal treatment of utensils and equipment. 
(a)  All equipment, including display cases or windows, counters, shelves, tables, refrigerators, stoves, hoods and sinks shall be kept clean and free from dust, dirt, insects and other contaminating materials. All cloths used by waiters, chefs and other employees shall be clean. Single-service containers shall be used only once. 
(b)  All multiuse eating and drinking utensils shall be thoroughly cleaned and effectively subjected to any approved bactericidal process after each usage. All multiuse utensils used in the preparation or serving of food and drink shall be thoroughly cleaned and effectively subjected to an approved bactericidal process immediately following the day's operation. Drying cloths, if used, shall be clean and shall be used for no other purpose. 
(c)  No article, polish or other substance containing any cyanide preparation or other poisonous material shall be used for the cleansing or polishing of utensils. 
(Code 1980, § 11-146)  
Sec. 38-409. - Storage and handling of utensils and equipment. 
After bactericidal treatment, utensils shall be stored in a clean, dry place until used and shall be handled in a sanitary manner. 
(Code 1980, § 11-147)  
Sec. 38-410. - Disposal of wastes. 
All wastes shall be properly disposed of, and all garbage and trash shall be kept in suitable receptacles in such manner as not to become a nuisance. 
(Code 1980, § 11-148)  
Sec. 38-411. - Lavatory facilities. 
Adequate and convenient hand-washing facilities shall be provided, including hot and cold running water, soap and approved sanitary towels. The use of a common towel is prohibited. No employee shall resume work after using the toilet room without first having washed his hands. 
(Code 1980, § 11-150)  
Sec. 38-412. - Toilet facilities. 
Every restaurant shall be provided with adequate and conveniently located toilet facilities for its employees, conforming with this Code. In restaurants hereafter constructed, toilet rooms shall not open directly into any room in which food, drink or utensils are handled or stored. The doors of all toilet rooms shall be self closing. Toilet rooms shall be kept in a clean condition, in good repair, and well lighted and ventilated. Hand-washing signs shall be posted in each toilet room used by employees. 
(Code 1980, § 11-151)  
Sec. 38-413. - Water supply. 
Running water under pressure shall be easily accessible to all rooms in which food is prepared or utensils are washed and the water supply shall be adequate, and of a safe, sanitary quality. 
(Code 1980, § 11-152)  
Secs. 38-414—38-440. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 10. - VENDING MACHINES 
 
Sec. 38-441. - License. 
(a)  Required. No person shall operate or maintain in the city for business or the use of the public, any automatic vending machines for the sale of candy, peanuts, soft drinks, coffee, milk, ice cream, popcorn, gum or any other items without a license for each such machine. 
(b)  Application. Applications for the licenses required by this article shall comply with the general provisions covering license applications, and in addition shall state thereon the product to be vended by each machine. 
(c)  Fee. The license fees for vending machines shall be as follows: 
$0.01—$0.25 ..... $ 35.00 
$0.26—$0.50 ..... 60.00 
$0.51—$0.75 ..... 85.00 
$0.76—$1.00 ..... 110.00 
For vending machine dispensing multiple commodities the annual license fee shall be ..... 160.00 
(d)  Expiration. All licenses issued hereunder shall expire on December 31 of the year of issuance, and all licenses shall be due and payable on or before January 31 of each year. 
(e)  Identification sticker. All vending machines licensed hereunder shall have a sticker affixed to said machine designating the name, address and telephone number of the company distributing or owning said machine. 
(Code 1980, §§ 11-166, 11-167, 11-168, 11-170; Ord. No. 78-56, § 1, 12-14-1978; Ord. No. 94-12, §§ 1, 2, 4-14-1994; Ord. No. 05-87, § 2, 12-8-2005; Ord. No. 06-09, § 1, 1-26-2006)  
Sec. 38-442. - Inspection and analysis. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the health commissioner to inspect and examine all food or drink being offered for sale by means of an automatic vending machine for the purpose of ascertaining whether the laws of the state and the ordinances of the city in relation to sales from said vending machine are complied with and that said food and drink as offered for sale has been kept fresh, clean and wholesome. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of all persons operating said vending machine upon demand of the commissioner to furnish to him for his inspection, samples of all said food and drink, which samples may be analyzed and a record of such analysis shall be made and kept. 
(Code 1980, § 11-169)  
Secs. 38-443—38-500. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - CITY OF CALUMET CITY SMOKE-FREE ACT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 08-8, adopted February 14, 2008, amended art. VI in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. VI consisted of §§ 38-501—38-513, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 06-67, adopted August 24, 2006. 
 
Sec. 38-501. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "City of Calumet City Smoke-Free Act." 
(Ord. No. 08-8, § 2, 2-14-2008)  
Sec. 38-502. - Interpretation with other laws. 
This article is meant to act concurrently with state law and contains such higher standard, as authorized by the Act. Nothing in this article overrides any existing elimination of smoking that is already covered by fire code restrictions. 
(Ord. No. 08-8, § 2, 2-14-2008)  
Sec. 38-503. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, and the interpretation and application thereof, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein, unless the context in which they are used shall indicate otherwise. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the singular number include the plural number and words in the plural number include the singular number. Words or phrases not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Act means Public Act 95-17 of the Illinois General Assembly, 410 ILCS 82/1 et seq. 
Bar means an establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and that derives no more than ten (10) percent of its gross revenue from the sale of food consumed on the premises. "Bar" includes, but is not limited to, taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges, adult entertainment facilities, and cabarets. 
Department means the Illinois Department of Public Health. 
City means the City of Calumet City, Cook County, Illinois. 
Employee means a person who is employed by an employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profits, or a person who volunteers his or her services for a nonprofit entity. 
Employer means a person, business, partnership, association, or corporation, including a municipal corporation, trust, or nonprofit entity that employs the services of one (1) or more individual persons. 
Enclosed area means all space between a floor and a ceiling that is enclosed or partially enclosed with (i) solid walls or windows, exclusive of doorways, or (ii) solid walls with partitions and no windows, exclusive of doorways, that extend from the floor to the ceiling, including, without limitation, lobbies and corridors. 
Enclosed or partially enclosed sports arena means any sports pavilion, stadium, gymnasium, health spa, boxing arena, swimming pool, roller rink, ice rink, bowling alley, or other similar place where members of the general public assemble to engage in physical exercise or participate in athletic competitions or recreational activities or to witness sports, cultural, recreational, or other events. 
Gaming equipment or supplies means gaming equipment/supplies as defined in the Illinois Gaming Board Rules of the Illinois Administrative Code. 
Gaming facility means an establishment utilized primarily for the purposes of gaming and where gaming equipment or supplies are operated for the purposes of accruing business revenue. 
Healthcare facility means an office or institution providing care or treatment of diseases, whether physical, mental, or emotional, or other medical, physiological, or psychological conditions, including, but not limited to, hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals, weight control clinics, nursing homes, homes for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories, and offices of surgeons, chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians, dentists, and all specialists within these professions. "Healthcare facility" includes all waiting rooms, hallways, private rooms, semiprivate rooms, and wards within healthcare facilities. 
Place of employment means any area under the control of a public or private employer that employees are required to enter, leave, or pass through during the course of employment, including, but not limited to, entrances and exits to places of employment, including a minimum distance, as set forth in section 38-513 of this article, of fifteen (15) feet from entrances, exits, windows that open, and ventilation intakes that serve an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited; offices and work areas; restrooms; conference and classrooms; break rooms and cafeterias; and other common areas. A private residence or home-based business, unless used to provide licensed child care, foster care, adult care, or other similar social service care on the premises, is not a place of employment. 
Private club means a not-for-profit association that 1) has been in active and continuous existence for at least three (3) years prior to the effective date of P.A. 95-17 (410 ILCS 82/1 et seq.), whether incorporated or not, 2) is the owner, lessee, or occupant of a building or portion thereof used exclusively for club purposes at all times, 3) is operated solely for recreational, fraternal, social, patriotic, political, benevolent, or athletic purposes, but not for pecuniary gain, and 4) only sells alcoholic beverages incidental to its operation. For purposes of this definition, "private club" means an organization that is managed by a board of directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members at an annual meeting, has established bylaws, a constitution or both to govern its activities, and has been granted an exemption from the payment of federal income tax as a club under 26 U.S.C. 501. 
Private residence means the part of a structure used as a dwelling, including, without limitation: a private home, townhouse, condominium, apartment, mobile home, vacation home, cabin, or cottage. For the purposes of this definition, a hotel, motel, inn, resort, lodge, bed and breakfast or other similar public accommodation, hospital, nursing home, or assisted living facility shall not be considered a private residence. 
Public place means that portion of any building or vehicle used by and open to the public, regardless of whether the building or vehicle is owned in whole or in part by private persons or entities, the State of Illinois, or any other public entity and regardless of whether a fee is charged for admission, including a minimum distance, as set forth in section 38-513 of this article, of fifteen (15) feet from entrances, exits, windows that open, and ventilation intakes that serve an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited. A public place does not include a private residence unless the private residence is used to provide licensed child care, foster care or other similar social service care on the premises. A "public place" includes, but is not limited to, hospitals, restaurants, retail stores, offices, commercial establishments, elevators, indoor theaters, libraries, museums, concert halls, public conveyances, educational facilities, nursing homes, auditoriums, enclosed or partially enclosed sports arenas, meeting rooms, schools, exhibition halls, convention facilities, polling places, private clubs, gaming facilities, all government-owned vehicles and facilities, including buildings and vehicles owned, leased, or operated by the state or state subcontract, healthcare facilities or clinics, enclosed shopping centers, retail service establishments, financial institutions, educational facilities, ticket areas, public hearing facilities, public restrooms, waiting areas, lobbies, bars, taverns, bowling alleys, skating rinks, reception areas, and no less than seventy-five (75) percent of the sleeping quarters within a hotel, motel, resort, inn, lodge, bed and breakfast, or other similar public accommodations that are rented to guests, but excludes private residences. 
Restaurant means (i) an eating establishment, including, but not limited to, coffee shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands, and private and public school cafeterias, that gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or employees, and (ii) a kitchen or catering facility in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere. "Restaurant" includes a bar area within the restaurant. 
Retail tobacco store means a retail establishment that derives more than eighty (80) percent of its gross revenue from the sale of loose tobacco, plants, or herbs and cigars, cigarettes, pipes, and other smoking devices for burning tobacco and related smoking accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental. Retail tobacco store does not include a tobacco department or section of a larger commercial establishment or any establishment with any type of liquor, food, or restaurant license. 
Smoke or smoking means the carrying, smoking, burning, inhaling, or exhaling of any kind of lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette, hookah, weed, herbs, or any other lighted smoking equipment. 
State agency has the meaning formerly ascribed to it in subsection (a) of Section 3 of the Illinois Purchasing Act (now repealed). 
Unit of local government has the meaning ascribed to it in Section 1 of Article VII of the Illinois Constitution of 1970. 
(Ord. No. 08-8, § 2, 2-14-2008)  
Sec. 38-504. - Smoking in public places of employment and governmental vehicles prohibited. 
No person shall smoke in a public place or in any place of employment or within fifteen (15) feet of any entrance to a public place or place of employment. No person may smoke in any vehicle owned, leased, or operated by the state, city or a political subdivision of the state. Smoking is prohibited in indoor public places and workplaces unless specifically exempted by section 38-508 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 08-8, § 2, 2-14-2008)  
Sec. 38-505. - Posting of signs; removal of ashtrays. 
(1)  "No Smoking" signs or the international no smoking symbol, consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it, shall be clearly and conspicuously posted in each public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this article by the owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of that place. 
(2)  Each public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this article shall have posted at every entrance a conspicuous sign clearly stating that smoking is prohibited. 
(3)  All ashtrays shall be removed from any area where smoking is prohibited by this article by the owner, operator, manager, or other person having control of the area. 
(Ord. No. 08-8, § 2, 2-14-2008)  
Sec. 38-506. - Smoking prohibited in student dormitories. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, smoking is prohibited in any portion of the living quarters, including, but not limited to, sleeping rooms, dining areas, restrooms, laundry areas, lobbies, and hallways of a building used in whole or in part as a student dormitory that is owned and operated or otherwise utilized by a public or private institution of higher education. 
(Ord. No. 08-8, § 2, 2-14-2008)  
Sec. 38-507. - Designation of other nonsmoking areas. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, any employer, owner, occupant, lessee, operator, manager, or other person in control of any public place or place of employment may designate a nonenclosed area of a public place or place of employment, including outdoor areas, as an area where smoking is also prohibited provided that such employer, owner, lessee or occupant shall conspicuously post signs prohibiting smoking in the manner described in subsections (1) and (2) of section 38-505 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 08-8, § 2, 2-14-2008)  
Sec. 38-508. - Exemptions. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, smoking is allowed in the following areas: 
(1)  Private residences or dwelling places, except when used as a child care, adult day care, or healthcare facility or any other home-based business open to the public. 
(2)  Retail tobacco stores as defined in section 38-503 of this article in operation prior to the effective date of P.A. 95-17 (410 ILCS 82/1 et seq.). The retail tobacco store shall annually file with the department by January 31 an affidavit stating the percentage of its gross income during the prior calendar year that was derived from the sale of loose tobacco, plants, or herbs and cigars, cigarettes, pipes, or other smoking devices for smoking tobacco and related smoking accessories. Any retail tobacco store that begins operation after the effective date of P.A. 95-17 (410 ILCS 82/1 et seq.) may only qualify for an exemption if located in a freestanding structure occupied solely by the business and smoke from the business does not migrate into an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited. 
(3)  Private and semiprivate rooms in nursing homes and long-term care facilities that are occupied by one (1) or more persons, all of whom are smokers and have requested in writing to be placed or to remain in a room where smoking is permitted and the smoke shall not infiltrate other areas of the nursing home. 
(4)  Hotel and motel sleeping rooms that are rented to guests and are designated as smoking rooms, provided that all smoking rooms on the same floor must be contiguous and smoke from these rooms must not infiltrate into nonsmoking rooms or other areas where smoking is prohibited. Not more than twenty-five (25) percent of the rooms rented to guests in a hotel or motel may be designated as rooms where smoking is allowed. The status of rooms as smoking or nonsmoking may not be changed, except to permanently add additional nonsmoking rooms. 
(Ord. No. 08-8, § 2, 2-14-2008)  
Sec. 38-509. - Enforcement; complaints. 
(1)  The Calumet City Police Department shall enforce the provisions of this article and may assess fines pursuant to section 38-510 of this article. 
(2)  Any person may register a complaint with the Calumet City Police Department for a violation of this article. In addition any person may register a complaint with the department of public health or a state-certified local public health department for a violation of the Smoke Free Illinois Act, 410 ILCS 82/1 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 08-8, § 2, 2-14-2008)  
Sec. 38-510. - Violations. 
A person, corporation, partnership, association or other entity who violates section 38-504 of this article shall be fined pursuant to this section. Each day that a violation occurs is a separate violation. All fines herein shall be subject to article IX of chapter 2 of the Municipal Code of the city, as follows: 
(1)  A person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited under section 38-504 of this article shall be fined in an amount that is not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(2)  A person who owns, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or place of employment that violates section 38-504 of this article shall be guilty of a violation, punishable by: 
a.  A fine not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the first violation; 
b.  A fine not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for the second violation within one (1) year after the first violation; and 
c.  A fine not less than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each additional violation within one (1) year after the first violation or a fine not less than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) and the suspension of any permit or license issued to the person for the premises on which the violation occurred. 
(3)  Proceedings to enforce violations of this article may be initiated and conducted in accordance with and pursuant to the provisions of the Municipal Code of the city providing for administrative adjudication of code violations or by any other means provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 08-8, § 2, 2-14-2008)  
Sec. 38-511. - Injunctions. 
The City of Calumet City through its corporation counsel or any individual personally affected by repeated violations may institute, in a circuit court, an action to enjoin violations of this article or the Act. 
(Ord. No. 08-8, § 2, 2-14-2008)  
Sec. 38-512. - Discrimination prohibited. 
No individual may be discriminated against in any manner because of the exercise of any rights afforded by this article or the act. 
(Ord. No. 08-8, § 2, 2-14-2008)  
Sec. 38-513. - Entrances, exits, windows, and ventilation intakes. 
Smoking is prohibited within a minimum distance of fifteen (15) feet from entrances, exits, windows that open, and ventilation intakes that serve an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited under this article so as to ensure that tobacco smoke does not enter the area through entrances, exits, open windows, or other means. 
(Ord. No. 08-8, § 2, 2-14-2008)  
Sec. 38-514. - Severability. 
If any provision, clause or paragraph of the article shall be held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such validity shall not affect the other provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 08-8, § 2, 2-14-2008)  
Chapter 42 - HOUSING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 07-126, adopted Dec. 13, 2007, changed the title of Ch. 42 from Human Relations to Housing. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 42-1. - Transitional living residences. 
(a)  Defintion. A transitional living residence or facility shall be defined as a state or federally licensed group care home for juvenile delinquents, half-way houses providing residences, rehabilitation and counseling to persons on release from a more restrictive custodial confinement, and residential rehabilitation treatment centers or residences, which also may provide out-patient rehabilitation for alcohol and other drug abuse. The TLR is similar to a community residence as defined in the Calumet City subdivision and zoning ordinances [appendixes A and B of this volume]. 
(b)  Standards and regulations. 
(1)  All requirements for a community residence as found in the Calumet City subdivision and zoning ordinances [appendixes A and B of this volume] shall apply to TLRs. 
(2)  No more than ten (10) persons, including staff, shall reside in the TLR at one time. 
(3)  No TLR shall be located within two thousand five hundred (2,500) feet of any other TLR, substance abuse treatment facility, or similar facility, nor shall a TLR be located within two thousand five hundred (2,500) feet of any religious assembly, school, or other educational institution. 
(4)  Any sex offender as defined by state law who is a temporary or permanent resident of the TLR must report his residence to the police department within one (1) day of obtaining residency in the TLR. If the sex offender cannot or will not report to the police department, then it shall be the responsibility of the director or any other staff member of the TLR to report the sex offender's presence within twenty-four hours of residency. 
(5)  Prior to taking possession of the structure, the sponsoring agency, director or other staff must comply with all requirements concerning occupancy and zoning as specified in the subdivision and zoning ordinances including meeting all requirements for an administrative occupancy permit. 
(6)  All applicants for the occupancy permt must show proof of a required local, federal or state license to operate the facility. 
(7)  All off-street parking requirements must be complied with pursuant to the subdivision and zoning ordinances of the City of Calumet City. 
(8)  It shall be a requirement of the TLR that it be compatible with the other land uses in the appropriate zoning district, and that the structure and occupancy requirements as specified in the Calumet City subdivision and zoning ordinances shall be applicable. 
(9)  Any structure housing TLRs shall have a minimum of two-hour fire rated separation walls and floor/ceiling assemblies between dwelling units unless protected by an automatic sprinkler system compliant with NFPA 13 or 13(r) as allowed. 
(Ord. No. 04-08, §§ 1, 2, 3-11-2004)  
Secs. 42-2—42-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - HOUSING AUTHORITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Section 3 of Ord. No. 07-126, adopted Dec. 13, 2007, amended art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. II pertained to community/human relations department and derived from the 1980 Code; Ord. No. 87-28, adopted Dec. 21, 1987; Ord. No. 88-5, adopted Mar. 10, 1988; and Ord. No. 95-15, adopted Apr. 27, 1995. 
 
Sec. 42-31. - Board created; composition; term. 
(a)  There has heretofore been created a housing authority board of the city. Said housing authority board shall be composed of five (5) members with initial terms of one (1), two (2), three (3), four (4) and five (5) years, who shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council. At the expiration of the term of each commissioner, and of each succeeding commissioner, or in the event of a vacancy, the mayor shall appoint a commissioner, subject to the approval of the city council to hold office, in the case of a vacancy, for the unexpired term, or in the case of expiration, for a term of five (5) years, or until his successor shall have been appointed and qualified. Each appointment shall be effective upon the filing by the mayor of a certificate of appointment in the office of the county recorder of deeds. 
(b)  Each commissioner shall be a resident of the city. Any public officer shall be eligible to serve as a commissioner, and the acceptance of appointment as such shall not impair his public office. No more than two (2) public officers shall be commissioners of the authority at one (1) time. The term "public officer" as herein used means a person holding a state or local government office required to be filled by the vote of electors and for which provision is made by lay for the payment of annual compensation from public funds. 
(c)  The housing authority board shall exercise those duties and responsibility as provided by the ordinances of the city and the laws of the state in such case made and provided. 
(d)  The housing authority board, with assistance from the housing administrator, shall annually give a report to the mayor and the members of the city council of their activities for the prior fiscal year and at such other times as directed by the city council. 
(e)  The housing administrator shall report to and serve the housing authority board in the performance of all aspects of its administrative operations and duties. The housing administrator shall address real estate problems, tenant services and tenant-landlord relations; conduct periodic informational seminars and programs for rental property owners and tenants and perform such other duties as from time to time assigned by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 07-126, § 3, 12-13-2007)  
Secs. 42-32—41-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FAIR HOUSING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Section 4 of Ord. No. 07-126, adopted Dec. 13, 2007, deleted art. III, §§ 42-71—42-73, which pertained to the community/human relations commission and derived from the 1980 Code; and Ord. No. 88-4, adopted Mar. 10, 1988. Section 5 of said ordinance redesignated art. IV, §§ 42-101—42-113 as art. III, §§ 42-71—42-83. 
 
Sec. 42-71. - Declaration of policy; administration. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to provide within constitutional limitations, for fair housing throughout the city, to assure that all persons have full and equal opportunity to consider all available housing and obtain fair and adequate housing for themselves and their families within the city without discrimination because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, ancestry, age, marital status, disability, parental status, sexual orientation, source of income, military discharge status, gender identity, retaliation or housing status or by aiding abetting or willful interference thereof and to promote a stable community. 
(b)  It is hereby further declared to be the policy of the city to undertake all actions necessary and proper to achieve the policy expressed in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  It shall be the responsibility of the housing administrator to receive and investigate complaints charging unlawful discriminatory and unfair housing practices and to endeavor, by conciliation, to resolve any such complaints by acting as a bridge between the parties to the dispute. 
(Code 1980, § 2-436; Ord. No. 88-4, § 1, 3-10-1988; Ord. No. 07-126, § 5, 12-13-2007; Ord. No. 09-45, § 2, 8-27-2009; Ord. No. 11-29, § 2, 6-29-2011)  
Sec. 42-72. - Construction. 
This article shall be liberally construed to further the purposes and policies stated herein. 
(Code 1980, § 2-437; Ord. No. 88-4, § 1, 3-10-1988; Ord. No. 07-126, § 5, 12-13-2007; Ord. No. 09-45, § 2, 8-27-2009)  
Sec. 42-73. - Severability. 
If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any section, subsection, or provision of this article to be unconstitutional, void, or ineffective, such judgment shall not affect any other section, subsection or provision of this article not specifically included in said judgment. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge the application of any section, subsection, or provision of this article to any person or circumstance to be unconstitutional, void, or ineffective, such judgment shall not affect the application of said section, subsection, or provision to any other person or circumstance not specifically included in said judgment. 
(Code 1980, § 2-438; Ord. No. 88-4, § 1, 3-10-1988; Ord. No. 07-126, § 5, 12-13-2007; Ord. No. 09-45, § 2, 8-27-2009)  
Sec. 42-74. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, and the interpretation and application thereof, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein, unless the context in which they are used shall indicate otherwise. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the singular number include the plural number and words in the plural number include the singular number. Words or phrases not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Dwelling means any building, structure, or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one (1) or more persons, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or rental and on which any such building, structure, or portion thereof may be constructed or located. 
Lending institution means any bank, savings and loan association, insurance company, or other organization regularly engaged in the business of lending money or guaranteeing loans for profit. 
Multifamily residential development means any building or structure, or group of buildings or structures, which contains two (2) or more dwellings under common management or ownership. 
Owner means any person who holds legal or equitable title to, or shares of, or holds any beneficial interest in, a dwelling or who holds legal or equitable title to, or shares of, or holds any beneficial interest in, any organization or person which owns a dwelling; and his agent. 
Person means one (1) or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint-stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers or fiduciaries. 
Purchase means to obtain a dwelling through a sale. 
Rent or rental means to lease, sublease, assign or otherwise grant or obtain in right to occupy a dwelling not owned by the occupant in return for consideration, or a contract or option to do any of the foregoing. 
Sale or sell means to convey, exchange, transfer or assign legal or equitable title to, or a beneficial interest in, a dwelling in return for consideration, or a contract or option to do any of the foregoing. 
(Code 1980, § 2-439; Ord. No. 88-4, § 1, 3-10-1988; Ord. No. 07-126, § 5, 12-13-2007; Ord. No. 09-45, § 2, 8-27-2009)  
Sec. 42-75. - Exemptions. 
Nothing in this article shall apply to: 
(1)  The rental of a room or rooms in an owner-occupied single-family dwelling; 
(2)  A religious organization, or any nonprofit organization operated, supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, with respect to its limitation of the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or with respect to preference given to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, sex, national origin, or handicap; and 
(3)  A private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purposes provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, with respect to its limitation of the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members and their guests, or with respect to preference given to such persons. 
(Code 1980, § 2-440; Ord. No. 88-4, § 1, 3-10-1988; Ord. No. 07-126, § 5, 12-13-2007; Ord. No. 09-45, § 2, 8-27-2009)  
Sec. 42-76. - Discriminatory terms. 
In order to effectuate the policies set forth in section 42-71 as far as legislatively possible, it is hereby declared to be a discriminatory act, an unfair housing practice and unlawful for any lending institution or other person to discriminate against any person in the price, terms, conditions, or privileges relating to the sale or rental of any dwelling, or in the provision of facilities, repairs, improvements, or services in connection therewith. 
(Code 1980, § 2-441; Ord. No. 88-4, § 1, 3-10-1988; Ord. No. 07-126, § 5, 12-13-2007; Ord. No. 09-45, § 2, 8-27-2009)  
Sec. 42-77. - Advertisements, signs, notices. 
In order to effectuate the policies set forth in section 42-71 as far as legislatively possible, it is hereby declared to be a discriminatory act, an unfair housing practice and unlawful for any lending institution or other person to make, publish, print, circulate, issue or display, or cause to be made, published, printed, circulated, issued, or displayed, any communication, notice, advertisement, sign, symbol, listing or other writing of any kind, in connection with the sale or rental of any dwelling, or the financing thereof, that indicates or expresses any preference, limitation, reliance, or discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, national origin, ancestry, age, marital status, disability, parental status, sexual orientation, source of income, military discharge status, gender identity, retaliation or housing status or by aiding/abetting or willful interference thereof, or an intention to make such preference, limitation, reliance, or discrimination. 
(Code 1980, § 2-442; Ord. No. 88-4, § 1, 3-10-1988; Ord. No. 07-126, § 5, 12-13-2007; Ord. No. 09-45, § 2, 8-27-2009; Ord. No. 11-29, § 2, 6-29-2011)  
Sec. 42-78. - Multiple-listing services. 
In order to effectuate the policies set forth in section 42-71 as far as legislatively possible, it is hereby declared to be a discriminatory act, an unfair housing practice and unlawful for any lending institution or other person to discriminate against any person by denying access to, or membership or participation in, any multiple-listing service, real estate agents' organization, or other service, organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings; or discriminate against any person in the terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation. 
(Code 1980, § 2-443; Ord. No. 88-4, § 1, 3-10-1988; Ord. No. 07-126, § 5, 12-13-2007; Ord. No. 09-45, § 2, 8-27-2009)  
Sec. 42-79. - Steering. 
In order to effectuate the policies set forth in section 42-71 as far as legislatively possible, it is hereby declared to be a discriminatory act, an unfair housing practice and unlawful for any lending institution or other person to, for profit, use any word, phrase or action in connection with the sale or rental of a dwelling which influences or is intended to influence the choice of a prospective purchaser or renter solely or in part because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, ancestry, age, marital status, disability, parental status, sexual orientation, source of income, military discharge status, gender identity, retaliation or housing status or by aiding/abetting or willful interference thereof; or for profit, otherwise induce or attempt to induce, or deter or attempt to deter, the inspection, purchase or rental of any dwelling by representations regarding the presence in, proximity to, or entry or prospective entry into, the block, neighborhood or area of a person or persons of a particular race, color, religion, sex, national origin, ancestry, age, marital status, disability, parental status, sexual orientation, source of income, military discharge status, gender identity, retaliation or housing status or by aiding/abetting or willful interference thereof. 
(Code 1980, § 2-444; Ord. No. 88-4, § 1, 3-10-1988; Ord. No. 07-126, § 5, 12-13-2007; Ord. No. 09-45, § 2, 8-27-2009; Ord. No. 11-29, § 2, 6-29-2011)  
Sec. 42-80. - Panic peddling. 
In order to effectuate the policies set forth in section 42-71 as far as legislatively possible, it is hereby declared to be a discriminatory act, an unfair housing practice and unlawful for any lending institution or other person to, for profit, induce or attempt to induce the sale, rental or listing for sale or rental of any dwelling by representations regarding the presence in, proximity to, or entry or prospective entry into, the block, neighborhood or area of a person or persons of a particular race, color, religion, sex, national origin, ancestry, age, marital status, disability, parental status, sexual orientation, source of income, military discharge status, gender identity, retaliation or housing status or by aiding/abetting or willful interference thereof. 
(Code 1980, § 2-445; Ord. No. 88-4, § 1, 3-10-1988; Ord. No. 07-126, § 5, 12-13-2007; Ord. No. 09-45, § 2, 8-27-2009; Ord. No. 11-29, § 2, 6-29-2011)  
Sec. 42-81. - Aiding or obstructing. 
In order to effectuate the policies set forth in section 42-71 as far as legislatively possible, it is hereby declared to be a discriminatory act, an unfair housing practice and unlawful for any lending institution or other person to aid, abet, compel, coerce, or attempt the commission of any act declared to be unlawful under this article; or obstruct or prevent enforcement of, or compliance with this article. 
(Code 1980, § 2-446; Ord. No. 88-4, § 1, 3-10-1988; Ord. No. 07-126, § 5, 12-13-2007; Ord. No. 09-45, § 2, 8-27-2009)  
Sec. 42-82. - Other discriminatory acts. 
In order to effectuate the policies set forth in section 42-71 as far as legislatively possible, it is hereby declared to be a discriminatory act, an unfair housing practice and unlawful for any lending institution or other person to discriminate by engaging in any other action which makes unavailable, or restricts consideration of, the inspection, purchase, sale or rental of any dwelling. 
(Code 1980, § 2-447; Ord. No. 88-4, § 1, 3-10-1988; Ord. No. 07-126, § 5, 12-13-2007; Ord. No. 09-45, § 2, 8-27-2009)  
Sec. 42-83. - Lending. 
It is also hereby declared to be a discriminatory act, an unfair housing practice and unlawful for any lending institution to discriminate against any person in connection with borrowing or lending money, guaranteeing loans, accepting a deed in trust or mortgage, or otherwise obtaining or making available funds for the purchase, construction, improvement, repair, or maintenance of any dwelling; or discriminate by delaying the processing of or denying such loan or other financial assistance; or discriminate the fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration, or other terms or conditions of such loan or other financial assistance; or discriminate on the basis that a dwelling is located in a particular geographic area. 
(Code 1980, § 2-448; Ord. No. 88-4, § 1, 3-10-1988; Ord. No. 07-126, § 5, 12-13-2007; Ord. No. 09-45, § 2, 8-27-2009)  
Chapter 46 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; board of fire and police commissioners, § 2-811 et seq.; emergency services, ch. 22; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 62; traffic and vehicles, ch. 90. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 46-1—46-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Departments, § 2-566 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 46-31. - Department established; composition. 
There is hereby created a police department, an executive department of the city. The police department shall consist of the chief of police, assistant chief of police, three (3) captains, four (4) lieutenants, eleven (11) sergeants, and such number of police officers as may be provided from time to time by the mayor and city council. Provided, however, that any person holding rank in the police department upon the adoption of this section shall continue to hold said rank, but no person may be appointed to said rank if the appointment would increase the number of captains, lieutenants or sergeants above the number herein provided, except as modified or currently contained in any executed collective bargaining agreement. 
(Code 1980, § 20-1; Ord. No. 76-1, § 1, 1-22-1976; Ord. No. 84-33, § 1, 9-13-1984; Ord. No. 87-25, § 1, 12-21-1987; Ord. No. 90-4, § 1, 1-25-1990; Ord. No. 90-35, § 1, 7-26-1990; Ord. No. 01-30, § 1, 7-12-2001)  
Sec. 46-32. - Members of police department declared to be city employees; residency required. 
The members of the police department are hereby classified as employees of the city and are entitled to all the rights and privileges of an employee. All policemen of the city shall be residents of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 20-2; Ord. No. 6-13-1968, § 1; Ord. No. 84-47, § 2, 12-27-1984)  
Sec. 46-33. - Selection of members. 
(a)  All appointments to and promotions within the police department, except that of the chief of police, shall be made by the board of fire and police commissioners as provided by statute. 
{b)  Hereinafter, the board of fire and police commissioners shall not hire any new or additional policemen without prior authorization of the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 20-3; Ord. No. 79-17, § 1, 5-10-1979; Ord. No. 89-12, § 1, 3-9-1989; Ord. No. 93-34, § 1, 12-9-1993) 
State Law reference— Appointment of police, 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-4.  
Sec. 46-34. - Discharges. 
No policeman shall be discharged from the department excepting after a hearing before the board of fire and police commissioners, as provided by state law. 
(Code 1980, § 20-4) 
State Law reference— Discharge of police, 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-6.  
Sec. 46-35. - Chief of police—Generally. 
There is hereby established the position of chief of police who shall be appointed by the mayor, by and with the advice and consent of the city council; no authority is granted to the board of fire and police commissioners in regard to the chief of police. The chief shall, before entering upon the duties of his office, execute a bond to the city in such sum and with such sureties as the city council shall approve, conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of his office as prescribed by law and ordinance. Provided, however, that when there is a vacancy in the office of chief of police, and no person has been appointed by the mayor to fill the vacancy on or before the third regular city council meeting following the vacancy, then the police officer holding the highest rank shall act as chief of police until a person shall be appointed as herein provided. In the event the person holding the highest rank declines to accept the office, then the person next holding the highest rank shall so act as chief of police. When there is more than one (1) officer holding said rank, the officer having the longest time in grade shall act as chief of police. 
(Code 1980, § 20-5; Ord. of 8-22-1974, § 1; Ord. No. 79-25, § 1, 5-24-1979; Ord. No. 79-34, § 1, 7-12-1979) 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-231 et seq. 
State Law reference— Appointment of chief, 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-4.  
Sec. 46-36. - Same—Duties. 
It shall be the duty of the chief of police to: 
(1)  Have the management of all matters relating to the police department, its officers and members. 
(2)  Devote his entire time to the discharge of the duties of his office. 
(3)  Be charged with the preservation of the peace, order, safety and cleanliness of the city, and with the duty of protecting the rights of persons and property; and he shall execute and enforce all ordinances and orders of the city council, the mayor and other officers, in accordance with the ordinance. 
(4)  Have the care, custody and control of the public property of the department, including all firearms and other equipment, and the books and records of the department. 
(5)  Provide adequate police at every fire and give aid to the fire department by giving alarms in case of fire and in clearing streets or grounds in the immediate vicinity of fire so that the members of the fire department shall not be hindered or obstructed in the performance of their duties. 
(6)  Take notice of all nuisances, and at all times render necessary assistance to the city officer charged with the duty of the abatement of same, and take notice of all impediments, obstructions and defects in the streets, avenues, alleys and public places and cause the same to be removed, or cause immediate notice thereof to be given to the proper city officer whose duty it may be to take measures in relation thereto according to the ordinance. 
(7)  Cause to be executed all orders directed to him by the county board of health insofar as they relate to the preservation of the health of the city. 
(8)  Serve as ex officio marshal and superintendent of police. 
(9)  To enforce all ordinances containing provisions relating to animals. 
(Code 1980, § 20-6; Ord. of 1-11-1968, § 3; Ord. No. 78-14, § 1, 4-27-1978)  
Sec. 46-37. - Process service. 
No member of the police department except the chief shall serve any process except on command of his superior. 
(Code 1980, § 20-7)  
Sec. 46-38. - Witness fees. 
Any member of the police department shall appear as witness whenever this is necessary in a prosecution for a violation of an ordinance or of any state or federal law. No such member shall retain any witness fee for service as witness in any action or suit to which the city is a party; and fees paid for such services shall be turned over to the chief of police, who shall deposit the same with the city treasurer. 
(Code 1980, § 20-8)  
Sec. 46-39. - Members—Conduct. 
It shall be the duty of every member of the police department to conduct himself in a proper and law-abiding manner at all times, and to avoid the use of unnecessary force. Each member of the department shall obey the orders and directions of his superior. 
(Code 1980, § 20-9)  
Sec. 46-40. - Same—Duties. 
It shall be the duty of the members of the police department to see to the enforcement of all of the ordinances of the city and all statutes applicable herein; and to preserve order and prevent infractions of the law, and arrest violators thereof. 
(Code 1980, § 20-10)  
Sec. 46-41. - Stolen property. 
(a)  If the identity or location of the owner or other person entitled to possession of stolen property has not been ascertained within six (6) months after the police department obtains possession of said property, the chief of police shall effectuate the sale of the property for cash to the highest bidder at a public auction, notice of which (including time, place and a brief description of said property) shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city wherein the police chief has authority at least ten (10) days prior to such auction. Property offered but not sold at such public auction may be offered and sold at a subsequent public auction without such notice. 
(b)  Proceeds of the sale of the property at public auction, less reimbursement to the police department of the reasonable expenses of custody thereof, shall be deposited in the treasury of the city. 
(c)  The owner or other person entitled to possession of such property may claim and recover possession of the property at any time before its sale at public auction upon providing reasonable and satisfactory proof of ownership or right to possession and reimbursing the police department for all reasonable expenses of custody thereof. 
(d)  No person shall be responsible for consequent damages to another occasioned by an act or omission in compliance with this section. 
(Code 1980, § 20-11; Ord. No. 77-38, § 1, 9-22-1977)  
Sec. 46-42. - Special police. 
Any person of good character having duties which require it, may be appointed a special policeman by the mayor or chief of police, provided that, except upon authorization by the council, no such special policeman shall be entitled to any compensation from the city by reason of such appointment. Special policemen shall obey all rules of the police department applicable to them, and may be deprived of their appointment by the mayor or chief at any time. 
(Code 1980, § 20-12) 
State Law reference— Auxiliary policemen, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-30-20.  
Sec. 46-43. - Reserve or part-time police. 
(a)  A reserve police division is hereby authorized which shall be required to comply with all federal, state, county and local laws relative to qualifications of reserve police officers. 
(b)  Applicants for the reserve police force shall be appointed by the chief of police, subject to budgetary city council approval. 
(c)  Members of the reserve police division shall serve when called upon by the mayor or chief of police under the supervision of the regular police department. They shall be conservators of the peace with the power to make arrest, as provided by statute. 
(d)  Applicants must be twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(e)  Applicants must submit to a polygraph and personnel screening test. 
(f)  Applicants must be of good character without previous police record. 
(g)  Applicants must submit to a thorough background investigation. 
(h)  Reserve police officers, also known as reserve officers or part-time officers, must successfully complete all training required by statute, ordinance or departmental regulation. 
(i)  Reserve police officers shall be paid at a rate set from time to time by the city council. Reserve police officers shall be paid at said rate only for actual hours worked. 
(j)  Reserve police officers shall report to the regular police officer in charge of the shift both when they begin and end their tour of duty. 
(k)  It shall be the duty of the chief of police or his designee to set the requirements, qualifications and duties to be performed by reserve police officers, consistent with applicable federal, state, county and local law, which requirements, qualifications and duties shall be written and published. 
(l)  Any reserve police officer may be terminated by the chief of police, with notice to the mayor, city council and appropriate payroll personnel. 
(m)  Residence requirements. 
(1)  All employees covered by this agreement must reside in a city, township, or other municipality where some part of said city, township, or other municipality is within a twenty-mile radius from the city limits of the City of Calumet City as determined by Microsoft 2002 Streets and Trips. 
(2)  The Illinois cities, towns or municipalities include: Alsip, Bedford Park, Beecher, Berwyn, Blue Island, Bridgeview, Broadview, Brookfield, Burbank, Burnham, Burr Ridge, Calumet City, Calumet Park, Chicago, Chicago Heights, Chicago Ridge, Cicero, Country Club Hills, Countryside, Crestwood, Crete, Dixmoor, Dolton, East Hazel Crest, Evergreen Park, Flossmoor, Ford Heights, Forest Park, Forest View, Frankfort, Glenwood, Goodenow, Grant Park, Harvey, Hazel Crest, Hickory Hills, Hinsdale, Hodgkins, Holbrook, Homer-Glen, Hometown, Homewood, Indian Head Park, Justice, LaGrange, LaGrange Park, Lemont, Lynwood, Lyons, Manhattan, Matteson, McCook, Merrionette Park, Midlothian, Mokena, Monee, New Lenox, North Riverside, Oak Forest, Oak Lawn, Oak Park, Olympia Fields, Orland Hills, Orland Park, Palos Park, Park Forest, Phoenix, Posen, Richton Park, Riverdale, Robbins, Sauk Village, South Chicago Heights, South Holland, Steger, Stickney, Summit, Thornton, Tinley Park, University Park, Western Springs, Willow Springs, Willowbrook, Worth. 
(3)  The unincorporated Illinois townships include: Crete Township, Frankfort Township, Green Garden Township, Homer Township, Lemont Township, Manhattan Township, Monee Township, New Lenox Township, Orland Township, Peotone Township, Washington Township and Yellowhead Township. 
(4)  The Indiana cities, towns or municipalities include: Burns Harbor, Cedar Lake, Creston, Crown Point, Dyer, East Chicago, Gary, Griffith, Hammond, Highland, Hobart, Klassville, Lake Station, Leroy, Lowell, Merrillville, Munster, New Chicago, Ogden Dunes, Portage, Schereville, South Haven, St. John, Whiting, Winfield. 
(5)  The unincorporated Indiana townships include: Cedar Creek Township, Center Township, Eagle Creek Township, Hanover Township, St. John Township, West Creek Township, Winfield Township, Union Township, Porter Township. 
(n)  Reserve police officers shall submit to physical examinations at such times and places as directed by the chief of police. 
(o)  The physical standards of a reserve police officer shall be the same as the requirements for a regular police officer. 
(p)  All new appointees shall submit to an initial physical examination at their expense by a medical doctor designated by the chief of police. 
(q)  Reserve police officers shall submit to polygraph tests at such times and places as directed by the chief of police. 
(r)  No reserve police officer shall work more than one thousand five hundred sixty (1,560) hours annually or as may be regulated by the state. 
(s)  Reserve police officers are at-will employees and serve at the will of the city and acquire no rights or benefits not conferred by statute. 
(Code 1980, § 20-13; Ord. of 8-28-1975, § 1; Ord. No. 78-43, § 1, 9-28-1978; Ord. No. 82-11, § 1, 6-10-1982; Ord. No. 85-28, § 1, 8-8-1985; Ord. No. 85-34, § 1, 10-10-1985; Ord. No. 99-5, § 1, 1-14-1999; Ord. No. 04-71, §§ 1, 4, 10-14-2004) 
State Law reference— Auxiliary policemen, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-30-20.  
Sec. 46-44. - Rules, regulations and orders. 
The chief of police may make or prescribe such rules and regulations for the hours of duty, vacations, uniforms and conduct of the members of the police department as he shall deem advisable, and such rules when approved by the mayor or council shall be binding on such members. All rules, orders and regulations shall be promulgated through the chief of police. 
(Code 1980, § 20-14)  
Sec. 46-45. - Preference for original appointments to police department for persons having prior qualified training. 
Persons whose names appear on any register of eligibles resulting from an examination for original entrance in the classified service of the police department shall be given preference for original appointment if they have satisfactorily completed the Basic Law Enforcement Police Training Institute course given by the University of Illinois or the certified course and curriculum of the state law enforcement commission conducted by the county sheriff's police academy or other qualified institute, by adding to the final grade average which they receive or will receive as a result of any examination held for original entrance, five (5) points; provided, however, that the additional five (5) points shall not be added to the final grade average if said person has also requested and been granted five (5) points to be added to the final grade average and given preference for appointment as a police cadet. 
(Code 1980, § 20-15; Ord. No. 83-5, § 1, 2-24-1983)  
Sec. 46-46. - Assistant chiefs. 
Two assistant chiefs of police shall be appointed by the police chief from the ranks of captain or lieutenant. The assistant chiefs shall serve at the police chief's pleasure, and shall hereby be second in command of the police department, and perform duties assigned by the police chief. 
(Code 1980, § 20-16; Ord. No. 90-35, § 3, 7-26-1990; Ord. No. 01-30, § 2, 7-12-2001; Ord. No. 11-4, § 2, 1-27-2011)  
Sec. 46-47. - Civil service rank. 
Any person filling the position of chief of police or assistant chief shall retain their civil service rank while serving in such position, but there shall not be a vacancy in the rank that they are holding. 
(Code 1980, § 20-17; Ord. No. 90-35, § 4, 7-26-1990)  
Sec. 46-48. - Supervisor of records and communications. 
There is hereby created the position of supervisor of records and communications, which shall be an exempt, nonbargaining unit command position. 
(Code 1980, § 20-18; Ord. No. 01-30, § 3, 7-12-2001) 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-231 et seq.  
Sec. 46-49. - Lateral transfers of police officers. 
(a)  The Calumet City Police Department may accept lateral transfers without the necessity of participating in the competitive hiring process as long as the lateral transfer meets the requirements of being a full- or part-time member in good standing of a regular police department; has completed any applicable probationary period of employment; is a certified police officer pursuant to the Illinois Police Training Act, 50 ILCS 705/1, et seq.; and has documentation that he or she has fulfilled the requirements of their respective training boards and be eligible to receive certification through the Illinois Training Board. If the officer is from out of state and is fully trained as required above, he or she may be laterally transferred and is on additional probation until fully certified in the State of Illinois, but shall only have ninety (90) days to complete all requirements for certification. Employees so appointed shall be given the rank of probationary patrolman and will be the last person on the seniority list and receive probationary patrolman salary. 
(b)  The city council, from time to time, may authorize the police chief and board of police and fire commissioners to advertise for qualified officers. The police chief shall interview and otherwise assess each applicant for an available position and shall forward such recommendation to the board of police and fire commissioners. The board of police and fire commissioners may hire an officer recommended by the police chief as long as previously receiving authorization from the city council to fill an open position. Every applicant must pass a polygraph and psychological exam and any other applicable requirements as set forth by the board of police and fire commissioner. 
(c)  Upon hiring, such officers shall be under the authority of the board of police and fire commissioner for purposes of promotion and discipline as well as under the terms of any collective bargaining agreement between the union and the city. 
(Ord. No. 07-59, §§ 1—3, 5-17-2007; Ord. No. 08-5, § 2, 1-24-2008)  
Secs. 46-50—46-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PENSION FUND 
 
Sec. 46-71. - Established. 
There is hereby established a police pension fund. 
(Code 1980, § 20-26) 
State Law reference— Police pension fund required, 40 ILCS 5/3-101.  
Sec. 46-72. - Police pension board. 
(a)  Created; membership. There shall be a police pension board consisting of five (5) members. Of these members, two (2) shall be appointed by the mayor, serving a term of two (2) years each; two (2) shall be elected from the regular police force of the city, and one (1) shall be elected from the beneficiaries of the police pension. Each member shall serve for two (2) years and the elected members shall be selected in the manner provided by law. 
(b)  Duties. It shall be the duty of the members of the police pension board to manage, invest and control the police pension fund and all moneys pertaining thereto in the manner provided by statute and to pay beneficiaries as is provided by statute. 
(Code 1980, §§ 20-34, 20-35) 
State Law reference— Duties of board, 40 ILCS 5/3-126 et seq.; similar provisions, 40 ILCS 5/3-126.  
Chapter 50 - LIBRARY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 50-1. - Established. 
There is hereby established a public library and reading room for the use and benefit of the inhabitants of the city under the provisions of The Illinois Local Library Act (75 ILCS 5/1-0.1 et seq.). 
(Code 1980, § 21-1; Ord. of 12-22-1927, §§ 1, 2) 
State Law reference— The Illinois Local Library Act, 75 ILCS 5/1-0.1 et seq.  
Secs. 50-2—50-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF LIBRARY DIRECTORS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Boards and commissions, § 2-799 et seq. 
 
Sec. 50-21. - Established. 
There is hereby established a board of library directors for the management and control of the city library. 
(Code 1980, § 21-16; Ord. of 12-22-1927, § 3)  
Sec. 50-22. - Composition. 
The board of library directors shall consist of nine (9) members. 
(Code 1980, § 21-17; Ord. of 12-22-1927, § 3) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 75 ILCS 5/4-1.  
Sec. 50-23. - Appointment. 
The members of the board of library directors shall be appointed by the mayor, with the approval of the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 21-18; Ord. of 12-22-1927, § 3) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 75 ILCS 5/4-1.  
Sec. 50-24. - Term. 
The board of library directors shall serve for terms of three (3) years. The term of each director shall commence with the first day of July following his appointment. Three (3) shall be appointed annually. 
(Code 1980, § 21-19) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 75 ILCS 5/4-1.  
Sec. 50-25. - Vacancies. 
Vacancies occurring in the membership of the board of library directors shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointments were made. 
(Code 1980, § 21-20) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 75 ILCS 5/4-4.  
Sec. 50-26. - Powers and duties. 
The board of library directors shall have the powers and duties provided by law. 
(Code 1980, § 21-21; Ord. of 12-22-1927, § 3) 
State Law reference— Powers of board, 75 ILCS 5/4-7 et seq.  
Chapter 54 - LICENSES AND PERMITS AND MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic liquor, ch. 6; ambulance license, § 38-131 et seq.; commercial districts, § 70-201 et seq.; taxation, ch. 82; telecommunications, ch. 86. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 54-1. - Conflicts with certain Home Rule county ordinances. 
(a)  Employers located within the city shall comply with all applicable federal and/or state laws and regulations as such laws and regulations may exist from time to time with regard to both the payment of minimum hourly wages and paid sick leave. Employee eligibility for paid sick leave and minimum hourly wages shall also be in compliance with all applicable federal and/or state laws and regulations as such laws and regulations may exist from time to time. 
(b)  No additional obligations with regard to paid sick leave, or minimum hourly wages, including without limitation, any additional obligations by ordinance adopted by the Cook County Board of Commissioners, shall apply to employers located within the city, except those required by federal and/or state laws and regulations as such laws and regulations may exist from time to time. The city opts out of any such ordinance(s) adopted by the Cook County Board of Commissioners, and the ordinance codified in this section of the city, conflicts with any such ordinance(s) adopted by the Cook County Board of Commissioners that imposes additional obligations with regard to paid sick leave or minimum hourly wages. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, the term "employee" means an individual permitted to work by an employer regardless of the number of persons the employer employs, and the term "employer" means any person employing one (1) or more employees, or seeking to employ one (1) or more employees, if the person has its principal place of business within the city or does business within the city. 
(d)  For the purposes of this section, the term "employer" does not mean: 
(1)  The government of the United States or a corporation wholly owned by the government of the United States; 
(2)  An Indian tribe or a corporation wholly owned by an Indian tribe; 
(3)  The government of the state or any agency or department thereof; or 
(4)  The government of any municipality. 
(Ord. No. 17-23, § 2, 6-22-2017)  
Secs. 54-2—54-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BUSINESS LICENSES 
 
Sec. 54-31. - Scope; effect. 
The provisions of this article are hereby declared to be of a regulatory nature because each commercial establishment located in the city is a basic part of and affects the physical and economic well-being of the city, necessitating services from the city in the form of fire, health, police and other services. Such commercial establishments shall be in all respects in full compliance with the provisions hereinafter contained in this article. This article is designed to promote, protect and safeguard the public safety, health and welfare of the citizens of the city, and to enable the effecting of an accurate record of commercial establishments located and carrying on commercial activities or commerce within the city. 
(Code 1980, § 15-1; Ord. of 12-3-1963, § 1)  
Sec. 54-32. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall mean as follows: 
Owner means any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity having sufficient proprietary interest in a commercial establishment to maintain and manage its operation. 
Retail, wholesale or manufacturing dealer means a building or premises or portion thereof the principal use of which is the sale, manufacture or distribution of material goods or chattels not included with or related to the sale of material goods or chattels or the providing of services of food establishments or service establishments. 
Service dealer means a building or premises or a portion thereof the principal use of which is the rendering of personal or material services for profit, the wholesale distribution or storage of material goods or chattels, the sale or servicing or storage of motor equipment, the washing or cleaning or dyeing or repair of fabrics or wearing apparel or footwear on the premises, the storage or assembly or distribution or servicing or repair of building materials or electrical equipment or mechanical equipment, the storage of or distribution of fuels or petroleum products, the services of printing or blueprinting or photocopying or multilithing or publishing or duplicating or similar reproduction services, the provisions of facilities for instruction or training or participating in or presentation of the fine arts, or athletic skills or dexterity, or physical skills or dexterity. 
(Code 1980, § 15-2; Ord. of 12-3-1963, § 17)  
Sec. 54-33. - License applications. 
Applications for all licenses and permits shall be made in writing on forms to be provided by the city clerk and shall be submitted to the city clerk unless express provision to the contrary is made. A new application shall be necessary to renew any license at its expiration. 
(Code 1980, § 15-3; Ord. of 12-3-1963, § 2)  
Sec. 54-34. - License issuance. 
All licenses or permits, except as may otherwise be specifically provided, shall be granted and signed by the mayor and issued by the city clerk. Any application may be ordered by the mayor to be presented to and approved by the city council before issuance of a permit or license, and the city council may overrule the decision of the mayor in reference to any application for license. Forms of licenses and permits shall be prescribed and furnished by the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 15-4; Ord. of 12-3-1963, § 3)  
Sec. 54-35. - Investigations and inspections. 
(a)  In case any provision of this Code requires an investigation into the character of any applicant, or into the premises to be used, the mayor shall cause such investigation to be made, and whenever inspections of the premises used for or in connection with the operation of a licensed business or occupation are provided for or required by ordinance, or are reasonably necessary thereto to secure compliance with any code provision or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee, or the person in charge of the premises to be inspected, to admit thereto for the purpose of making the inspection any officer or employee of the city who is authorized and qualified to make such inspection at any reasonable time that admission is requested. 
(b)  Whenever inspections of premises are reasonably necessary to secure compliance with any ordinance or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the person in charge of the premises to be inspected, to permit thereto for the purpose of making the inspection, any official or employee of the city who is authorized to make such inspection at any reasonable time that admission is requested. 
(Code 1980, § 15-5; Ord. of 12-3-1963, § 4; Ord. No. 78-39, § 1, 9-28-1978)  
Sec. 54-36. - Bond. 
In case a bond is required for the issuance of any license or permit, such bond shall be a surety company bond to be approved by the city council and must be filed with the city clerk before the license or permit is issued. The mayor or city council may in any case require a bond from a licensee where deemed necessary to protect the city. Said bond shall in no event be less than the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Code 1980, § 15-6; Ord. of 12-3-1963, § 5)  
Sec. 54-37. - Payment of fees. 
The fees required for licenses and permits must be paid at the time that application is made. In no event shall any rebate be made of any license fee, or part thereof, by reason of the death of the licensee, or by reason of nonuse of the license or by reason of a change of location or occupation of such licensee. Provided, however, that any fee required for licenses pursuant to the City Municipal Code which is due January first and is not paid on or before January thirty-first of the current year shall be subject to a late charge of an additional fifty (50) percent of the license fee. 
(Code 1980, § 15-7; Ord. of 12-3-1963, §§ 6, 7; Ord. No. 93-45, § 1, 12-20-1993)  
Sec. 54-38. - License expiration; fee proration; expiration notice. 
(a)  Except where otherwise provided, all licenses or permits shall expire on the last day of December of each year, unless such license or permit is issued for a period of time less than a year. No license shall be issued at the yearly rate of license fees except for the full license year; provided, however, that where such license is issued on or after the first day of July, the license fee shall be one-half (½) of the yearly license fee for the unexpired term of the license year. 
(b)  If a license is issued for a period in excess of one (1) month, it shall be the duty of the city clerk, at least ten (10) days prior to the termination of license period, to cause a written notice to be mailed to each licensee, stating that a new license will be required on the day following the expiration of his existing license, and stating also the amount of the license fee, and the penalty for failure to procure a license in accordance with the provisions of this Code; provided, however, that failure on the part of the city clerk to cause such notice to be mailed to any such licensee shall not waive the requirements that a license be procured. 
(Code 1980, § 15-8; Ord. of 12-3-1963, §§ 8, 9)  
Sec. 54-39. - Waiving license fees. 
Whenever, in the opinion of the city council, it is to the best interests of public welfare, and the permit sought is for charitable purposes for the interests of a department of the city or sponsored by some association or group of persons not for profit, the license fee provided for by this Code may be waived. In any other cases which might arise, the license fee shall be waived only upon a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) vote of the city council and in no case shall the filing of an application be waived. 
(Code 1980, § 15-9; Ord. of 12-3-1963, § 16)  
Sec. 54-40. - Transferability; unlawful use. 
(a)  No license or permit issued hereunder shall be subject to attachment, garnishment or execution, nor shall it be alienable, transferable or assignable, voluntary or involuntary, or subject to being encumbered or hypothecated, which shall include, but not be limited to, the giving, selling or conveyance of a license or permit or of fifty (50) percent or more of the total number of shares of stock, or securities convertible into stock, of a corporation or entity that holds a license or permit. 
(b)  No licensee shall assign, sell or transfer a license or permit to any other person or entity, even if such other person or entity intends to conduct the same business, occupation or activity as the licensee at the location used by the licensee. Such other person or entity shall apply and pay the fee for a new license or permit in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(c)  No license or permit shall authorize any person or entity to do business or act under such license or permit other than the person or entity named in such license or permit. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to transfer, loan or give away any license or permit issued to such licensee. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to transfer any license or permit to a location different than the location identified on the license or permit. It shall also be unlawful for any person or entity to use or display any license or permit which has been unlawfully acquired. No person or entity shall alter, deface, forge, or counterfeit any license or permit issued by the city. 
(Code 1980, § 15-10; Ord. of 12-3-1963, § 10; Ord. No. 08-43, § 2, 7-10-2008)  
Sec. 54-41. - Posting license. 
Every license granted for the purpose of conducting any business or occupation required to be licensed, and which designates the particular room, store, office or place in which such business so licensed is to be conducted, shall be posted at all times in a conspicuous place, so that the same may be easily seen, upon the wall of the principal room or office of the store or place in which such licensed business or occupation is carried on. When such license shall have expired, it shall be removed from such place in which it has been posted, and no license which is not in force and effect shall be permitted to remain posted upon the wall or upon any part of any room, store, office or place of business after the license has expired. 
(Code 1980, § 15-11; Ord. of 12-3-1963, § 11)  
Sec. 54-42. - Record of licenses. 
The city clerk shall cause to be kept a record showing every license and every permit issued, showing the amount of fee paid, and the purpose for which such license or permit was issued, the location where the licensed or permitted privilege is to be exercised, and the name of the licensee or person receiving the permit. 
(Code 1980, § 15-12; Ord. of 12-3-1963, § 12)  
Sec. 54-43. - Compliance with ordinances. 
No license for carrying on any business or occupation shall be issued when it appears that the premises of the building on or in which the business or occupation licensed is to be conducted does not comply with any ordinance. 
(Code 1980, § 15-13; Ord. of 12-3-1963, § 13)  
Sec. 54-44. - Licenses not specified by Code. 
Whenever a person desires to conduct a business or occupation within the city not specifically covered in this Code, unless no license is required under law, an application shall be made to the city clerk; and the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council, shall grant or refuse a license or permit, fix a fee therefor and amount of bond, if one is required. 
(Code 1980, § 15-14; Ord. of 12-3-1963, § 15)  
Sec. 54-45. - License revocation. 
Any license or permit may be revoked by the officer authorized to issue such license or permit for any violation of the terms or conditions upon which the license was issued, or of any ordinance relating to the license or the subject matter thereof, and it shall be unlawful to continue to exercise any privilege or authority granted by any license or permit issued by the city or any of its duly authorized officers or employees, after such license or permit has been so revoked. 
(Code 1980, § 15-15; Ord. of 12-3-1963, § 14)  
Sec. 54-46. - Additional prerequisites to license issuance. 
All licenses required in accordance with ordinances of the city shall be processed under the following procedure: 
(1)  All applications for licenses shall be submitted along with the required fee. 
(2)  A copy of the license application shall be sent to all members of the permits and license committee and the alderman of the ward in which the business is located. 
(3)  The alderman of said ward shall inform the permits and license committee within five (5) working days thereafter of the alderman's approval or disapproval. The permits and license committee shall interview all applicants when deemed necessary. If said license cannot be issued the committee will advise the applicant as soon as possible and return the fee previously tendered. 
(4)  No building permit may be issued until the business license application has received preliminary approval of the permits and license committee. Upon the chairman of the permits and license committee granting preliminary approval the license application shall then be forwarded to the respective departments for inspections and approval, such as the building department, police department, fire department, and health department when applicable. The inspections shall be made within forty-eight (48) hours of receipt by the respective department. 
(5)  Upon satisfactory completion of the required departmental inspections, the permits and license committee shall sign the application indicating approval. 
(6)  No certificate of occupancy for said premises shall be issued until a business license has been issued. 
(7)  The license application shall then be submitted to the mayor for his signature and upon execution thereof said license shall be issued. 
(8)  No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business if the premises and building to be used for the licensed purpose do not fully comply with the requirements of the city, including a lack of any indebtedness owed to the city as the result of the existence, use or operation of said premises. No such license shall be issued for the conduct of any business or performance of any act which would involve a violation of the zoning ordinance of the city. No new or renewal license shall be issued to a license applicant, and the validity of any license granted under this chapter shall terminate if the licensee, license applicant, or business entity operating under the license issued hereunder shall owe a debt to the city for in excess of thirty (30) days beyond its due date. Such debt shall include but is not limited to debts, fines, fees, water bills, code enforcement citation fines or costs, traffic or red light photo enforcement citation fines, or any other indebtedness due the city. The city shall not reinstate a business license or service of a city provided utility until such overdue indebtedness has been paid in full, or other assurances that the debt will be paid, have been approved in writing by the mayor or mayor's designee. No new or renewal license shall be issued to a license applicant if the premises to be used for the licensed activity is delinquent in its Cook County property tax bills for in excess of two (2) years from said bills initial due date. 
(Code 1980, § 15-16; Ord. No. 82-10, § 1, 5-27-1982; Ord. No. 18-14, § 2, 4-23-2018)  
Secs. 54-47—54-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - AMUSEMENTS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 54-81. - Scope; application. 
The provisions of this division, except as to licensing and fees, shall apply to all public shows, theatricals, circuses and other amusements in the city, whether specifically licensed in another division in this article or not. 
(Code 1980, § 15-27)  
Sec. 54-82. - Licenses. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to conduct or operate any amusement which is open to the public and for admittance to which a fee is charged, without having first obtained a license therefor; provided that the provisions of this section shall not be held to apply to those amusements which are specifically licensed elsewhere. 
(b)  Applications for such license shall be made to the city clerk and shall comply with all of the general provisions of this Code relating to such application. 
(c)  For such licenses the following fees shall be paid: 
Menageries, per day ..... $75.00 
Other amusements, per day ..... 75.00 
(Code 1980, § 15-28; Ord. No. 05-50, § 1, 7-28-2005; Ord. No. 05-87, § 1, 12-8-2005)  
Sec. 54-83. - Street shows. 
No permit shall be granted or given for any exhibition, show or other amusement to be given on any public street or sidewalk or in such place that the only main accommodation for the public or the audience will be in a public place, except on order of the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 15-29) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78.  
Sec. 54-84. - Athletic exhibitions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for conduct, operate or exhibit any race between persons, animals or vehicles, or any baseball game, boxing or wrestling matches or any other athletic contest or exhibition for admission to which a fee is charged without having first procured a license therefor. 
(b)  The proprietor of such exhibition shall submit to the city clerk a statement verified under oath of the gross receipts of each such game, contest or race, within one (1) week after such exhibition. At the same time, the proprietor or person exhibiting or operating such exhibition shall pay to the clerk a sum equal to three (3) percent of the gross receipts. 
(c)  Sufficient members of the police department shall be admitted free of charge, to all such exhibitions for the purpose of preserving and maintaining order, and the city clerk may post any number of persons at the box office of each such performance, and may examine all the books pertaining to such performance showing or tending to show the gross receipts. 
(Code 1980, § 15-30) 
State Law reference— Power of city to license, tax and regulate athletic exhibitions, 65 ILCS 5/11-54-1.  
Sec. 54-85. - Order; crowding. 
(a)  The audience of any amusement, show or theatrical must be orderly and quiet at all times, and it shall be unlawful for any person attending such amusement, show or theatrical to create a disturbance in the audience. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to permit or gather such a crowd to witness any amusement or show as to create a dangerous condition because of fire or other risks. 
(Code 1980, § 15-31)  
Sec. 54-86. - Indecent shows. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to present, exhibit, conduct or take part in any indecent show, theatrical, play, motion picture, exhibition or other form of public amusement or show. 
(Code 1980, § 15-32)  
Sec. 54-87. - Exhibitions of criminals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit any criminal or the body of any criminal or any person who shall have become notorious because of the commission of a crime, in any theatrical, exhibition or other public place. 
(Code 1980, § 15-33)  
Sec. 54-88. - Creation of riot. 
It shall be unlawful to present any public amusement or show of any kind which tends to or is calculated to cause or promote any riot or disturbance. 
(Code 1980, § 15-34)  
Sec. 54-89. - Smoking. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to smoke or carry a lighted cigar, cigarette or pipe on or beneath the stage or in a dressing room of any building used as an assembly hall with seating accommodations for more than one hundred (100) persons or in which theatricals, shows, amusements, lectures or other entertainments are offered, presented, operated or exhibited. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the owner of such premises or of the occupant in charge, to provide and place printed signs on which the words "NO SMOKING" shall appear in letters at least four (4) inches high in conspicuous places, at least two (2) signs being upon the stage or in the wings thereof and one (1) sign in each dressing room. 
(Code 1980, § 15-35)  
Sec. 54-90. - Exit lights. 
It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant in charge of any building or hall used as an assembly hall with accommodations for one hundred (100) persons or more in which theatricals, shows, amusements, lectures and other entertainment is offered, operated or presented to provide and place a sign on which the word "EXIT" shall appear in letters at least six (6) inches high, over every door or other opening from such hall to every means of egress therefrom; and a light shall be provided with a red globe and placed at or over such sign, which light shall be kept burning during the entire period that the hall is open to the public and until the audience has left the hall. 
(Code 1980, § 15-36)  
Sec. 54-91. - Premises. 
It shall be unlawful to operate or permit the operation of any amusement licensed in this article unless the premises on which such amusement is operated or permitted to be operated conforms with all the provisions or requirements in this Code relating to public buildings and public gatherings. 
(Code 1980, § 15-37)  
Sec. 54-92. - Inspections. 
It shall be the duty of the chief of police and fire marshal to see that every exhibition, amusement, theatrical or other public show or amusement is inspected by a member of both the police and fire departments, and to ensure conformity with all provisions of this Code concerning such amusements. 
(Code 1980, § 15-38)  
Secs. 54-93—54-110. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - AUTOMATIC AMUSEMENT DEVICES GENERALLY  
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 54-111. - Exception. 
No license shall be required under the provisions of this division for coin-operated or rented radios or television receivers located in hotel rooms, hospital rooms or other rooms rented for living quarters. 
(Code 1980, § 15-52)  
Sec. 54-112. - Identification sticker required. 
All automatic amusement devices, pinball machines, or any other automatic machine or device for which a fee is charged, for the purpose of amusement, and licensed hereunder, shall have a sticker affixed to said machine designating the name, address and telephone number of the company distributing, owning and/or servicing the machine. 
(Code 1980, § 15-52.1; Ord. No. 97-74, § 1, 12-23-1997)  
Secs. 54-113—54-130. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - License 
 
Sec. 54-131. - License required. 
No person shall operate or maintain in the city any automatic amusement devices, pinball machines, or any other automatic machine or device for which a fee is charged, for the purpose of amusement, without first having obtained a license for each of said devices so operated and maintained. Amusement devices as used in this division shall include all automatic coin-operated amusement devices and all other nonautomatic amusement devices for the use of which a fee is charged, excepting however, amusement devices specifically licensed and regulated by some other provision of this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 15-46)  
Sec. 54-132. - Inspections. 
All devices licensed pursuant to this division shall be available for inspection by the proper city authorities for the purpose of ascertaining and declaring whether state law and this Code are being complied with. 
(Code 1980, § 15-51)  
Sec. 54-133. - License applications. 
Any person desiring to operate or maintain in the city any amusement device shall make application for a license for each such device to the city clerk in which application the applicant shall set forth the full name and address of the applicant, the description of the device for which a license is requested, the location of said device and such other pertinent information as may be required by said city clerk. Upon receipt of proper application and upon payment of the license hereinafter set forth, the city clerk shall issue a license for each said amusement device. 
(Code 1980, § 15-47)  
Sec. 54-134. - License fees. 
The following annual license fees shall be paid by each applicant for each of the following devices: 
Bowling machine ..... $75.00 
Target machine ..... 75.00 
Shuffleboard ..... 75.00 
Pool table machine ..... 75.00 
Penny arcade with one (1) machine (limited) ..... 360.00 
Each additional machine ..... 75.00 
Amusement arcades and amusement centers. A flat one thousand five hundred dollar ($1,500.00) annual license fee will apply for amusement arcades and amusement centers with not more than fifty (50) machines. An additional license fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per machine will apply for all machines in excess of fifty (50). 
(Code 1980, § 15-48; Ord. of 12-27-1973, § 1; Ord. No. 05-50, § 1, 7-28-2005; Ord. No. 05-87, § 1, 12-8-2005; Ord. No. 17-5, § 2, 2-23-2017)  
Sec. 54-135. - Illegal machines. 
No license shall be issued for any amusement device which violates any law or provision of this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 15-50)  
Sec. 54-136. - License sticker. 
The licenses provided for in this division shall be in the form of a gummed sticker, which shall be serially numbered. Said license shall be affixed in plain view to the device for which it is issued and shall not be transferrable. 
(Code 1980, § 15-49)  
Secs. 54-137—54-160. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - ELECTRONIC AMUSEMENT DEVICES AND CENTERS  
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 54-161. - Conditions under which an amusement license or amusement arcade license shall be conducted. 
(a)  The operation of any amusement center having been issued a license as herein provided shall be conducted only where no other retail business is located on the premises or no food or beverages are sold or consumed on the premises. 
(b)  The operation of any amusement arcade having been issued a license as herein provided shall be conducted only when it is a part of a commercial operation in excess of one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet and such operation provides such security. 
(c)  In each amusement center or amusement arcade having been issued a license as herein provided the following conditions shall be required: 
(1)  No smoking shall be permitted on the premises; 
(2)  Said amusement center or amusement arcade shall not be located within five hundred (500) feet from any school or church; 
(3)  An alarm system shall be installed on the premises to be connected to the police department and fire department of the city in a manner prescribed by the chief of police and the chief of fire; 
(4)  No person shall be allowed on a license premises in violation of section 62-484 of this Code (curfew for minors); and, 
(5)  No person who is enrolled in a school and is eighteen (18) years of age or younger shall be allowed on the license premises during the respective school hours unless accompanied by a parent, guardian or an adult member of the immediate family. 
(Code 1980, § 15-58; Ord. No. 82-8, § 1, 4-22-1982; Ord. No. 02-62, § III, 11-25-2002)  
Sec. 54-162. - Suspension or revocation of licenses. 
If the permits and license committee of the city council has reason to believe that the licensee has failed or refused to comply with the terms of this division, a hearing may be held in regard to suspension, revocation or denial of issuance of said license. The permits and license committee shall give due notice to the licensee of the time and place and said licensee may be represented by counsel. If after the public hearing the permits and license committee determines that the licensee has failed or refused to comply with the terms of this division, or has failed or refused to comply with other law applicable to the business of keeping or providing electronic or electric amusement devices, or has been convicted by a court of competent jurisdiction of a violation of any provision of this division, the committee may recommend to the city council to suspend or revoke the license, or deny the issuance of said license. Based upon the recommendation, the city council may suspend or revoke or deny the issuance of said license issued hereunder. That annually the permits and license committee shall review each licensee prior to issuance of an amusement center license. 
(Code 1980, § 15-59; Ord. No. 82-8, § 1, 4-22-1982)  
Sec. 54-163. - License fee. 
The following annual license fees for the period January first to December thirty-first shall be paid by each applicant for each of the following devices: 
Electronic or electric machine ..... $75.00 
Amusement center with one (1) machine (limited) ..... 360.00 
Each additional machine ..... 75.00 
(Code 1980, § 15-60; Ord. No. 82-8, § 1, 4-22-1982; Ord. No. 82-25, § 1, 9-23-1982; Ord. No. 05-50, § 1, 7-28-2005; Ord. No. 05-87, § 1, 12-8-2005)  
Sec. 54-164. - Video gaming. 
(a)  Definitions. 
Video gaming means the ownership, placement, maintenance, operation or use of a video gaming terminal in a public place or in a fraternal or veterans' establishment within the city. 
Video gaming terminal means any electronic video game machine that, upon insertion or payment of cash, is available to play or simulate the play of a video game, including, but not limited to, video poker, line up and blackjack, as authorized by the Illinois Gaming Board, utilizing a video display and microprocessors in which the player may receive free games or credits that can be redeemed for cash. The term does not include a machine that directly dispenses coins, cash, or tokens, or is for amusement purposes only. 
(b)  Video gaming license required. No person, partnership, corporation, limited liability company or other business entity shall have or keep a video gaming terminal or device in any public place or place of public resort unless the city license fees as set forth herein are paid and a valid license is issued and maintained in force by the State of Illinois. 
(c)  Annual fee. The first annual license fee, as set forth in subsection (j), for each video gaming terminal or device will be due not later than August 1, 2018. In all subsequent years beginning January 1, 2019, the annual license fee, as set forth in subsection (j), for each video gaming terminal or device will be due not later than January 31 of each year. All issued licenses, unless paid on or before January 31 shall expire on the 31st day of January of that year. This fee is not in lieu of any fee or payment payable to the state or the Illinois Gaming Board. No license may issue where the license applicant owes a debt, fine, fee, tax or penalty to the city. 
(d)  Application requirements. Applications for a video gaming license shall be made to the city clerk upon a form to be supplied by the city and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of the applicant, age, place of birth, and date of incorporation or establishment as a business entity, if applicable; 
(2)  Prior convictions, if any, of applicant; 
(3)  Place where the video gaming terminal is to be displayed or operated, and the business conducted at the place; 
(4)  Number of video gaming terminals to be displayed or operated; 
(5)  Description of video gaming terminal to be covered by the license, mechanical features and serial number; 
(6)  Copy of valid Illinois Gaming Board License; 
(7)  Copy of valid Illinois Liquor License; 
(8)  Copy of valid City of Calumet City Liquor License; and 
(9)  Such other information as the city may determine as necessary as set forth in the application form. 
(e)  Issuance. The applicant must obtain proper state licenses and exhibit proof of said licenses prior to the issuance of a license pursuant to this subsection. Upon approval of the application and payment of the annual license fee as set forth in subsection (j), the city shall issue a City of Calumet City Video Gaming License and it will be included on the business license issued to the licensee. One (1) license shall be issued for each establishment and list the number of video gaming terminals licensed for said establishment and it shall be affixed in a conspicuous place. 
(f)  Operation of video gaming terminals. All such video gaming devices or terminals shall at all times be kept, placed, operated and monitored pursuant to State of Illinois laws and applicable regulations including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Prohibiting persons under age twenty-one (21) in the gaming area and restricting access in the gaming area to individuals who are visibly intoxicated; 
(2)  Video gaming terminals shall be placed in an area restricted to individuals' age twenty-one (21) or over. If individuals under the age of twenty-one (21) are allowed in any portion of the licensed premises, the establishment shall limit visibility of video gaming terminals from outside the room in which they are located; 
(3)  The operation of video gaming devices or terminals shall only be allowed during the legal hours of operation allowed for the consumption of alcoholic beverages at the licensed establishment. Upon the suspension or revocation of a licensee's liquor license, the licensee's video gaming license shall automatically be suspended (or revoked in the event of a liquor license revocation) without the requirement of any further action by the city. Licensee's gaming license shall be suspended for the same period of time as the suspension or revocation of the licensee's liquor license; 
(4)  The video gaming area shall be physically monitored by an employee over twenty-one (21) years of age at all times during the legal hours of operation; and 
(5)  Providing for camera surveillance of the video gaming area that meets the specifications of the city as specified in license application, with equipment that has the ability to record and may be accessed by the police department upon request to investigate a suspected violation of this section, any law or administrative code, or any unlawful activity. 
(g)  Signage. Required signage pursuant to State of Illinois laws, regulations and city ordinances shall be posted at all times in the establishment's video gaming terminal area and should further include signage prohibiting the video gaming terminal area to persons under twenty-one (21) years of age. All signage shall be approved by the city prior to its posting in the establishment. 
(h)  Responsible gaming policy. Licensees are required to submit their establishment's responsible gaming policy, which outlines all employee education and training programs, self-exclusion policies, and procedures to promote responsible gaming with their license application. If standardized training for responsible gaming becomes available at the future date, it shall be required as part of the video gaming license application. 
(i)  Inspection. As a condition for issuance of the video gaming license to the licensee, the city reserves the right to inspect the premises at any time for compliance with this section and all other applicable ordinances and statutes. 
(j)  Annual license fees. The annual license fee per video gaming terminal is five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(k)  Penalties. Any licensee violating this section shall be subject to a mandatory fine of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), plus court costs for each separate violation. Every day a violation continues in effect will be considered a separate and distinct violation subject to imposition of a mandatory fine of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per day for each day the violation continues. 
(l)  Enforcement. Proceedings to enforce violations of this section may be initiated and conducted in accordance with and pursuant to the provisions of the city ordinances providing for administrative adjudication of code violations or by any other means provided by law. 
(m)  Additional penalties. 
(1)  If, after a hearing or proceeding conducted pursuant to subsection (l), it is determined a violation of this section occurred, the mayor and city council may, in addition to any fine imposed, suspend or revoke any video gaming license issued pursuant to this section. 
(2)  In addition to the penalties provided in subsections (k) and (j)(1), the city mayor, acting in her capacity as local liquor commissioner, may also initiate an appropriate proceeding pursuant to the applicable provisions of chapter 6 of the Municipal Code of Calumet City, entitled "alcoholic liquor," to revoke or suspend the liquor license of a licensee or cause a fine to be imposed and paid by the liquor licensee as provided for in the Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 18-31, § 2, 6-28-2018)  
Secs. 54-165—54-180. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Device Licenses 
 
Sec. 54-181. - License required. 
No person, firm or corporation shall place or install or maintain or operate in any building or place within the city any electronic or electric amusement device for use by the public and for which a fee is charged without first having obtained a license for each place or location for such electronic or electric amusement device, which games use a video screen or electrical impulses which is so constructed that the result of the operation depends upon chance, or upon the skill of the operator, or upon both. 
(Code 1980, § 15-53; Ord. No. 82-8, § 1, 4-22-1982)  
Sec. 54-182. - License applications. 
(a)  Generally. Any person desiring to operate or maintain in the city any electronic or electric amusement device using video screens or electrical impulses shall make application for a license for each such device to the city clerk, in which application the applicant shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  Principal kind of business engaged in; 
(2)  Statement of whether the business will be conducted by a manager or managers and the name, address, date of birth and authority of each such manager, statement of personal history of each manager conducting business; 
(3)  The location of the place of business, the place where the amusement devices are to be kept or displayed and the description of all such devices to be kept or displayed on the premises. 
(b)  When applicant is a corporation. If the applicant is a corporation, the applications filed shall contain the following information in addition to such information as is required in subsection (a) of this section: 
(1)  Corporate name and address and date of incorporation; 
(2)  Name, date of birth and address of each corporate officer and director and of each person, firm or organization owning directly or indirectly five (5) percent or more of the corporation's stock; 
(3)  Statement of whether any officer, manager, director or shareholder owning directly or indirectly five (5) percent or more of the stock of the corporation has ever been convicted of any criminal offense. 
(c)  When applicant is a partnership. If the applicant is a partnership, the applications filed shall contain the following information in addition to such information as is required in subsection (a) of this section: 
(1)  Name, date of birth and address of each general partner and each limited partner owning directly or indirectly five (5) percent or more interest in the partnership; 
(2)  Statement of whether any general partner or any limited partner owning directly or indirectly five (5) percent or more interest in the partnership or any manager of the partnership has ever been convicted of any criminal offense. 
(d)  When applicant is an individual. If the applicant is an individual, the applications filed shall contain the following information in addition to such additional information as is required in subsection (a) of this section: 
(1)  Name, date of birth and address of the applicant; 
(2)  Statement of whether the applicant has ever been convicted of any criminal offense. 
(e)  Investigation. The city clerk and the chief of police, fire chief and the building inspector shall investigate the information contained in the application and shall determine the following: 
(1)  That the premises designated by the applicant as the location of the business comply with the provisions of the zoning ordinance of the city and that there be not less than forty (40) square feet per machine; 
(2)  That the premises and the manager comply with the provisions of this division; and 
(3)  That the applicant and each manager meet the standards for issuance of licenses. 
(f)  Issuance of license. Subject to the limitation established as to the maximum number of coin-operated amusement device business licenses to be issued hereunder, if the investigation shows the compliance of the applicant, its business and its managers with each of the requirements established in subsection (e) of this section, the mayor shall instruct the city clerk to issue the license, and upon payment by the applicant of the license fee required hereunder, such license shall be issued. 
(Code 1980, § 15-54; Ord. No. 82-8, § 1, 4-22-1982)  
Sec. 54-183. - Maximum number of amusement device business licenses to be issued. 
A person may be issued no more than three (3) amusement device business licenses as herein provided unless said person operates an amusement center, as hereinafter provided. 
(Code 1980, § 15-55; Ord. No. 82-8, § 1, 4-22-1982)  
Sec. 54-184. - Identification sticker required. 
All electronic or electric amusement devices licensed hereunder shall have a sticker affixed to said device designating the name, address and telephone number of the company distributing, owning and/or servicing said device. 
(Code 1980, § 15-60.1; Ord. No. 97-74, § 2, 12-23-1997)  
Secs. 54-185—54-200. - Reserved.  
Subdivision III. - Amusement Center Licenses 
 
Sec. 54-201. - Application; amusement arcade license. 
(a)  Any person may apply for an amusement center license by filing an application as provided in section 54-182 of this division. The total number of amusement center licenses to be issued shall be one (1). No new or additional amusement center licenses shall be issued to increase the total number of licenses. 
(b)  A person may apply for an amusement arcade license by filing an application as provided in section 54-182 of this division. The total number of amusement arcade licenses to be issued shall be one (1). No new or amusement arcade licenses shall be issued to increase the number of such licenses. 
(Code 1980, § 15-57; Ord. No. 82-8, § 1, 4-22-1982; Ord. No. 02-62, § II, 11-25-2002; Ord. No. 17-4A, § 2, 2-14-2017)  
Secs. 54-202—54-220. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - AUTOMATIC MUSIC DEVICES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— For similar provisions, see 65 ILCS 5/11-55-1. 
 
Sec. 54-221. - Defined. 
As used in this division, the term "automatic music device" means any phonograph, player piano, music box, jukebox, or other instrument or device capable of producing or reproducing any vocal or instrumental sounds, other than a motion picture sound machine, which is governed or controlled by the deposit of a coin or token. 
(Code 1980, § 15-61)  
Sec. 54-222. - License. 
(a)  Required. No person shall keep, or permit to be kept, for gain or profit from operation within the city, any automatic musical device without a license. 
(b)  Application. An application for a license required by this division shall be made to the city clerk. In addition, the applicant shall set forth the description of the automatic musical instrument or instruments intended to be kept for use on his premises. 
(c)  Fee: 
(1)  The annual fee for the license required by this division shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for each device kept or installed on the licensed premises. 
(2)  The annual fee for a distributor's license shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(d)  Transferability. No license issued pursuant to this division shall be transferable. 
(e)  Identification sticker. All automatic music devices licensed hereunder shall have a sticker affixed to said device designating the name, address and telephone number of the company distributing, owning and/or servicing said device. 
(Code 1980, §§ 15-62, 15-63, 15-64, 15-65, 15-67; Ord. No. 97-74, § 3, 12-23-1997; Ord. No. 05-50, § 1, 7-28-2005; Ord. No. 05-87, § 1, 12-8-2005)  
Sec. 54-223. - Disturbing the peace; immoral or indecent selections. 
No license issued under this division shall permit the operation of any automatic instrument at any place or in any manner which will disturb the peace and quiet of persons outside the licensed premises. No immoral or indecent selections shall be played on any such instrument. 
(Code 1980, § 15-66)  
Secs. 54-224—54-250. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - BILLIARD AND POOL HALLS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Power of city to license, tax and regulate billiard tables, pool tables, etc., 65 ILCS 5/11-42-2. 
 
Sec. 54-251. - License. 
(a)  Required. No person shall operate, maintain or conduct a billiard or pool table open to the public without a license. 
(b)  Application. An application for a license required by the provisions of this division shall state thereon the intended location of the place of business and the number of tables to be used therein. 
(c)  Fee. The annual fee for a license required by this division shall be thirty dollars ($30.00) for each table. 
(Code 1980, §§ 15-74, 15-75, 15-76; Ord. No. 05-50, § 1, 7-28-2005; Ord. No. 05-87, § 1, 12-8-2005)  
Sec. 54-252. - Hours of operation. 
No billiard hall or other hall licensed under this division shall be open for business or used between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. 
(Code 1980, § 15-78)  
Secs. 54-253—54-280. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - BOWLING ALLEYS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Power of city to license, tax and regulate bowling alleys, 65 ILCS 5/11-42-2. 
 
Sec. 54-281. - License. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate a bowling alley open to the public without a license. 
(b)  Application. An application for the license required by this division shall be made in writing to the city clerk and shall state thereon the intended location of the place of business and the number of alleys to be used. 
(c)  Fee. The annual fee for the license required by this division shall be thirty dollars ($30.00) per alley. 
(Code 1980, §§ 15-86, 15-87, 15-88; Ord. No. 05-50, § 1, 7-28-2005; Ord. No. 05-87, § 1, 12-8-2005)  
Sec. 54-282. - Minors. 
Persons under the age of sixteen (16) years shall not under any circumstances frequent, loiter, go or remain in any bowling alley licensed under this division at any time, unless it be upon some lawful errand and sent under the direction and with the consent of and knowledge of the parent, guardian or other person having the lawful custody of such minor. It shall be unlawful for the proprietor of any bowling alley so licensed to allow or permit any such minor to frequent, loiter or remain within the bowling alley in violation of this section. 
(Code 1980, § 15-89)  
Secs. 54-283—54-300. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - GO-CART TRACKS 
 
Sec. 54-301. - License. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful to maintain or operate any rental cart tracks, or place where persons are permitted, for hire, to use a motor vehicle in an enclosed area for amusement or entertainment, without a license. 
(b)  Application. An application for a license required by the provisions of this division shall comply with the general licensing provisions of this Code. 
(c)  Fee. The annual fee for the license required by this division shall be two hundred ten dollars ($210.00). 
(Code 1980, §§ 15-96, 15-97, 15-98; Ord. of 12-27-1973, § 2; Ord. No. 05-50, § 1, 7-28-2005; Ord. No. 05-87, § 1, 12-8-2005)  
Sec. 54-302. - Location restrictions. 
It shall be unlawful to locate or operate any establishment required to be licensed by this division except in accordance with the provisions of the zoning ordinance; provided further, that such location shall not be established within three hundred (300) feet of any area zoned for residence purposes. 
(Code 1980, § 15-99)  
Sec. 54-303. - Construction requirements. 
(a)  The surface of each track required to be licensed by this division shall be asphalt, concrete or similar construction, and the track shall not exceed one-fourth (¼) of a mile in length nor be less than one-twenty-fifth ( 1/25 ) of a mile. The minimum width shall be sixteen (16) feet and the maximum width shall be thirty-four (34) feet, excepting that an additional ten (10) feet may be allowed at the starting and stopping areas. A twenty (20) foot safety apron shall be maintained around the track on all sides. 
(b)  The track shall be protected by a fence at least four (4) feet high with posts ten (10) feet apart, the posts being outside the fence around the track and protected from collision impact. Such fence shall be a galvanized welded fence of ten (10) gauge two and five-eighths (2 5/8 ) mesh or chain link nine (9) gauge two (2) inch mesh, or a solid wood fence. The area for the spectators shall be separated from the track. Adequate lighting shall be provided, so located as to prevent glare outside the premises and so far as possible to prevent glare in the eyes of drivers of vehicles. 
(Code 1980, § 15-100)  
Sec. 54-304. - Operational restrictions. 
(a)  The maximum speed of any vehicle on a track required to be licensed by this division shall be fifteen (15) miles per hour. Carts shall have a wheelbase of not less than forty (40) inches, nor more than fifty (50) inches measured from axle centers with an overall length of not more than seventy-two (72) inches. The tread width shall be a minimum of two-thirds of the measurement of the wheel base, the height not to exceed twenty-four (24) inches at the center of the seat, and the tire size shall be a maximum of twelve and one-half (12½) inches with a minimum of nine (9) inches. Wheel bearings shall be ball bearings or rollers. Axle ends must be cottered, keyed or safety wired. The safety shell above the wheel centers may be plastic or metal. There shall be a metal sheath between the driver and the engine. 
(b)  Steering shall be direct, and safety designed for such operation as is anticipated, and the rod ends must be of the universal type with swivel joints. Engines shall be two (2) or four (4) cycles, mounted behind the driver, and all engines shall be properly muffled with exhaust fumes directed away from the driver. No gear box type shall be used, and brakes shall be pedal operated and effective on all four (4) wheels. Each such vehicle shall be equipped with a clutch, and a foot throttle with a self-operating returning spring. 
(c)  The ignition switch shall be within easy reach of the driver, and the driver's compartment shall be equipped with side rails of a maximum of four (4) inches above the seat. Fuel tanks shall be mounted in back of the driver. 
(d)  Each such vehicle shall be equipped with front and rear bumpers, constructed so far as possible so as to avoid hooking with other similar carts. No such vehicle shall be equipped with roll bars or safety belt seats. 
(e)  No more than six (6) carts shall be permitted in operation on a track having a length of less than one-twelfth ( 1/12 ) of a mile, ten (10) carts where the length is less than one-eighth ( 1/8 ) of a mile, and twelve (12) carts where the length is less than one-fourth (¼) of a mile. 
(Code 1980, § 15-101)  
Sec. 54-305. - Prizes. 
No prizes shall be permitted or awards allowed for any competition between drivers on a track required by this division to be licensed. 
(Code 1980, § 15-102)  
Sec. 54-306. - Inspections. 
The chief of police, the chief of the fire department, and the building commissioner shall make such inspections as are necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1980, § 15-103)  
Secs. 54-307—15-320. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - GOLF PRACTICE RANGES 
 
Sec. 54-321. - License. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, operate or maintain a golf practice range for the use of which a fee is charged without a license. 
(b)  Application. An application for the license required by this division shall be accompanied by plans or drawings showing the area to be used and showing compliance with the zoning ordinance. 
(c)  Fee. The annual fee for a license to conduct or operate a golf practice range shall be two hundred ten dollars ($210.00). 
(Code 1980, §§ 15-111, 15-112, 15-113; Ord. of 12-12-1973, § 3; Ord. No. 05-50, § 1, 7-28-2005; Ord. No. 05-87, § 1, 12-8-2005)  
Sec. 54-322. - Construction regulations; maintenance. 
Each golf practice range shall be constructed according to nationally recognized safe practice standards for such amusements to protect patrons, passersby and the surrounding area. Sufficient off-street parking for patrons shall be furnished and maintained. The premises shall be maintained in an orderly manner and grass and weeds kept down. 
(Code 1980, § 15-114)  
Sec. 54-323. - Concessions. 
Any food or beverage sold or offered for sale at a golf practice range, whether such sale is by operator, the owner or employees or by a concession, must comply with the provisions of this Code relating thereto and an additional fee for such sales shall be paid when required by this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 15-115)  
Sec. 54-324. - Inspections. 
The chief of police shall inspect golf practice ranges as often as necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1980, § 15-116)  
Secs. 54-325—54-350. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - KIDDIE PARKS 
 
Sec. 54-351. - License. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful to maintain, operate or conduct any commercial playground or kiddie park, for which admission is charged and to which children are invited to attend and do attend without a license. 
(b)  Application. An application for a license required by this division shall be accompanied by plans or drawings of such playground or park showing compliance with the zoning regulations of the city and the location of each ride or other proffered amusement. 
(c)  Fee. The annual license fee for kiddie parks shall be computed on the basis of the area of the premises to be licensed, and shall be as follows: 
Area (sq. ft.)     Fee 
Up to 1,000 ..... ..... $300.00 
Each additional 500, or portion thereof ..... 150.00 
(d)  Revocation. The license required by the provisions of this division may be revoked by the mayor for any violation of the provisions of this division; the chief of police or the building commissioner may seal any ride or other amusement so licensed when such ride or amusement is deemed dangerous to children or in an unsafe condition. 
(Code 1980, §§ 15-124, 15-125, 15-126, 15-130; Ord. of 12-27-1973, § 5; Ord. No. 05-50, § 1, 7-28-2005; Ord. No. 05-87, § 1, 12-8-2005)  
Sec. 54-352. - Construction and maintenance. 
Each playground or kiddie park shall be constructed according to nationally recognized safe practice regulations for such amusement parks. The provisions of this Code relating to public buildings and public gatherings shall be complied with both in constructing and maintaining such playgrounds or parks. 
(Code 1980, § 15-127)  
Sec. 54-353. - Supervision. 
A competent operator shall be in charge of each ride or other amusement in an establishment required to be licensed by this division. Sufficient number of persons to supervise the entire playground or park and maintain order therein shall be supplied by the owner or operator thereof. 
(Code 1980, § 15-128)  
Sec. 54-354. - Inspections. 
The chief of police and the building inspector shall make or cause to be made as many inspections as are necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1980, § 15-129)  
Secs. 54-355—54-380. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 10. - MINIATURE GOLF COURSES 
 
Sec. 54-381. - License—Generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or operate a miniature golf course to which a fee is charged for admittance without a license.  
Sec. 54-382. - Same—Application. 
Applications for the license required by this division shall be made in compliance with the general provisions of this Code relating to applications for licenses, and to the zoning regulations.  
Sec. 54-383. - Same—Fee. 
The annual fee for the license required by this division shall be two hundred ten dollars ($210.00). 
(Ord. of 12-27-1973, § 4; Ord. No. 05-50, § 1, 7-28-2005; Ord. No. 05-87, § 1, 12-8-2005)  
Sec. 54-384. - Hours of operation. 
It shall be unlawful to keep any miniature golf course in the city open for business or to permit the same to be used or patronized at any time between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.  
Secs. 54-385—54-400. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 11. - MOTION PICTURES AND THEATRICALS 
 
Sec. 54-401. - License required. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful to give, present or conduct any motion picture, or theatrical, for admission to which a fee is charged, excepting performances given solely for the benefit of and under the supervision of a religious, educational or charitable organization, without a license. 
(b)  Application. Applications for a license required by the provisions of this division shall be made in conformance with the general provisions of this Code relating to such applications, and shall state in addition to the other information required the place of the intended performance and the seating capacity thereof. 
(c)  Fee. The annual fee for the license required by this division shall be nine hundred sixty dollars ($960.00). 
(d)  Effect of license. Any person securing an annual license for motion pictures, or theatricals, naming a specific place or building where the performances are to be presented, may present therein any number of performances, including theatricals, during the year for which the license was secured without having to pay any additional fee. 
(Code 1980, §§ 15-151, 15-152, 15-153, 15-154; Ord. of 12-27-1973, § 6; Ord. No. 05-50, § 1, 7-28-2005; Ord. No. 05-87, § 1, 12-8-2005)  
Sec. 54-402. - Fee on unlicensed premises. 
For motion pictures or theatricals which are to be presented in premises which are not covered by the license required in this division, the fee to be paid shall be ten dollars ($10.00) per day; provided that no such motion picture or theatrical shall be presented in or on any premises or building which does not fully comply with the requirements of this Code relating to public gatherings and to maintenance of buildings for this purpose. 
(Code 1980, § 15-155)  
Sec. 54-403. - Building requirements. 
It shall be unlawful to present any public motion picture in any building or structure which does not contain the number of exits required by this Code or by state law concerning buildings or places intended for motion picture performances or in premises which do not comply with the provisions of this Code relating to public gatherings, or in premises in which the electric wiring does not fully comply with this Code. All places used for the exhibition of theatricals must be kept adequately ventilated during the performance and for as long a time as the audience remains therein. 
(Code 1980, § 15-156)  
Sec. 54-404. - Prohibited pictures. 
It shall be unlawful to permit any person to offer or present any motion picture which has a tendency to cause a riot or public disturbance of the peace, or any immoral, indecent or blasphemous picture or performance. 
(Code 1980, § 15-160)  
Secs. 54-405—54-430. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 12. - PUBLIC DANCES 
 
Sec. 54-431. - License. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful to operate or conduct a public dance in the city without a license. 
(b)  Application. Applications for licenses required by this division shall be made in conformance with the general provisions of this Code relating to licenses, and shall specify the location of the proposed dance or dances, and the person or organization sponsoring the same. 
(c)  Qualifications of applicant. No license shall be issued to a person who is not a person of good moral character, nor to a corporation or organization which is not represented in the city by a person of good moral character. 
(d)  Investigation of applicant. It shall be the duty of the chief of police to make or cause to be made an investigation into the character of each applicant for a license required by this division and report the results of such investigation to the city council. 
(e)  Fee. The annual license fee for public dances shall be three hundred dollars ($300.00). 
(Code 1980, §§ 15-171, 15-172, 15-173, 15-174; Ord. No. 05-50, § 1, 7-28-2005; Ord. No. 05-87, § 1, 12-8-2005)  
Sec. 54-432. - Premises. 
It shall be unlawful to conduct a public dance in any hall or place which is not equipped with sufficient and adequate exits, and no hall or building which is not provided with at least two (2) exits of four (4) feet or more in width shall be used for such purpose. 
(Code 1980, § 15-175)  
Sec. 54-433. - Prohibited conduct. 
It shall be unlawful to indulge in or to permit any improper or immoral conduct at any public dance. 
(Code 1980, § 15-176)  
Secs. 54-434—54-460. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 13. - SHOOTING GALLERIES 
 
Sec. 54-461. - License. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or conduct any shooting gallery in the city without a license. 
(b)  Fee. The annual fee for shooting galleries shall be two hundred ten dollars ($210.00). 
(Code 1980, §§ 15-184, 15-185; Ord. of 12-27-1973, § 7; Ord. No. 05-50, § 1, 7-28-2005; Ord. No. 05-87, § 1, 12-8-2005)  
Sec. 54-462. - Safety. 
Targets in a shooting gallery shall be placed before a backstop of steel, sufficiently thick to prevent any bullet from piercing it, and so arranged that there will be no danger from ricocheting bullets or deflected pieces of bullet. 
(Code 1980, § 15-186)  
Sec. 54-463. - Sanitation. 
Premises used for shooting galleries shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(Code 1980, § 15-187)  
Sec. 54-464. - Hours of operation. 
No shooting gallery shall be open for business or used between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. of any day. 
(Code 1980, § 15-188)  
Sec. 54-465. - Conduct. 
All persons present in any shooting gallery shall conduct themselves in an orderly manner, and shall not make or cause to be made any loud or unnecessary noise. It shall be unlawful to gamble or bet in any such place. 
(Code 1980, § 15-189)  
Secs. 54-466—54-490. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 14. - SKATING RINKS 
 
Sec. 54-491. - Defined. 
The term "public skating rinks" as used in this division shall mean and include roller skating and ice skating rinks. 
(Code 1980, § 15-196)  
Sec. 54-492. - License. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful to operate or maintain a public skating rink in the city without a license. 
(b)  Application. An application for a license required by this division shall be made in conformance with the general provisions of this Code relating to licenses and shall specify the location of the proposed skating rink and the person or organization sponsoring the same. 
(c)  Qualifications of applicant. No such license shall be issued to a person who is not of good moral character, nor to a corporation or organization which is not represented in the city by a person of good moral character. 
(d)  Investigation of applicant. It shall be the duty of the chief of police to make or cause to be made an investigation into the character of each applicant and report the results of such investigation to the mayor and city council. 
(e)  Fee. The fee for skating rinks shall be two hundred ten dollars ($210.00) for an annual license. 
(Code 1980, §§ 15-197, 15-198, 15-199; Ord. of 12-27-1973, § 8; Ord. No. 05-50, § 1, 7-28-2005; Ord. No. 05-87, § 1, 12-8-2005)  
Sec. 54-493. - Premises; inspection as license prerequisite. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to conduct a public skating rink in any hall or building which is not equipped with sufficient and adequate exits; no hall or building which is not provided with at least two (2) exits of four (4) feet or more in width shall be used for such purpose. 
(b)  No license shall be issued until an inspection of the premises shall have been made by the chief of police and building commissioner, and report made that said premises were in a safe condition, and that proper safeguards had been taken for the protection of patrons and the public. 
(Code 1980, § 15-200)  
Sec. 54-494. - Conduct; music. 
It shall be unlawful to indulge in any improper conduct or to permit any improper conduct at any public skating rink and it shall be unlawful to permit music at any public skating rink after the hour of 11:00 p.m. 
(Code 1980, § 15-201)  
Sec. 54-495. - Hours of operation. 
No person shall keep open, operate or use any skating rink licensed hereunder after the hour of 10:30 p.m., Mondays through Fridays, or 11:00 p.m. on Saturdays. The hours of operation on Sunday shall be from 2:30 p.m. until 10:30 p.m. 
(Code 1980, § 15-202)  
Secs. 54-496—54-520. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 15. - TRAMPOLINE CENTERS 
 
Sec. 54-521. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this division shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
Trampoline center means and includes any business establishment or place where rebound tumbling equipment is provided or maintained for public use or where a fee is charged for the use of such equipment. 
Rebound tumbling equipment shall be construed to mean and include any device or apparatus designed to provide resilience, by virtue of its own elasticity or that provided by elastic or spring suspension or support to be used for jumping, bouncing or acrobatic tumbling. 
(Code 1980, § 15-211)  
Sec. 54-522. - License. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, conduct or operate a trampoline center without a license. 
(b)  Application. Applications for the license required by this division shall be in compliance with the general provisions of this Code relating to licenses. 
(c)  Fee. The annual fee for the license required by this division shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(Code 1980, §§ 15-212, 15-213, 15-214; Ord. of 12-27-1973, § 9; Ord. No. 05-50, § 1, 7-28-2005; Ord. No. 05-87, § 1, 12-8-2005)  
Sec. 54-523. - Insurance. 
No trampoline center shall be operated unless there is in force a public liability insurance policy to cover any injury suffered as a result of the use of the equipment or the operation of the center in the amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for any one (1) occurrence and twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for injury to any person. 
(Code 1980, § 15-215)  
Sec. 54-524. - Inspections. 
The building commissioner shall make, or cause to be made, such inspections as are necessary to see to the enforcement of the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1980, § 15-224)  
Sec. 54-525. - Supervision. 
At all times when an establishment licensed by this division is open to the public or is in use, there shall be one (1) responsible adult for each eight (8) units or fraction thereof in operation to supervise and enforce the regulations applicable to such use. 
(Code 1980, § 15-216)  
Sec. 54-526. - Equipment. 
(a)  All rebound equipment in a trampoline center shall be maintained in good condition, safe for the purpose for which it is intended. Each unit shall be placed so that there is three (3) feet between the sides of the units and any other unit or the nearest fence or wall; and five (5) feet between the end of such unit and the nearest other unit or fence or wall. 
(b)  Pits for such units shall have a depth of not less than three (3) feet nor more than four (4) feet at the center, and solidly framed. 
(c)  The frame of such equipment shall be padded with pads two (2) inches thick filled with cotton linters or similar pads with equal resiliency. 
(Code 1980, § 15-217)  
Sec. 54-527. - Accidents and first aid. 
Every mishap in a trampoline center resulting in any injury to any person from the use of the equipment shall be promptly reported to the chief of police. There shall be maintained on the premises a first-aid kit of at least sixteen (16) units as defined in the first-aid manual of the American Red Cross. 
(Code 1980, § 15-218)  
Sec. 54-528. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the influence of alcohol to use such equipment as is referred to in this division, or to permit such person to use such equipment. 
(b)  The person in charge of any such center may at any time request a patron to cease any activity which is unduly dangerous to the patron or others and may, upon refund of the fee paid, if any, cause such person to leave the premises upon failure to comply with such request. 
(Code 1980, § 15-219)  
Sec. 54-529. - Noise. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to permit or cause any noise in a trampoline center so loud or of such a nature as to disturb the peace. 
(b)  The operation of any amplifier on the premises shall comply with the provisions of this Code relating to such devices. 
(Code 1980, § 15-220)  
Sec. 54-530. - Closing hours. 
Excepting when operated within a building, no such trampoline center shall be operated between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(Code 1980, § 15-221)  
Sec. 54-531. - Sanitary facilities. 
No trampoline center shall be operated unless there is on the premises separate toilet accommodations for men and women, and drinking water facilities complying with the provisions of this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 15-222)  
Sec. 54-532. - Other regulations. 
A trampoline center shall be considered as a place of public amusement or entertainment and shall be subject to all provisions of this Code relating thereto. 
(Code 1980, § 15-223)  
Secs. 54-533—54-560. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - MERCHANTS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 54-561—54-580. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - AUCTIONEERS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Power of city to license, tax and regulate auctioneers, 65 ILCS 5/11-42-1. 
 
Sec. 54-581. - License. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct an auction in the city or to do business as an auctioneer without a license. 
(b)  Application. Applications for an auctioneer's license shall be made in writing to the city clerk and shall state thereon the place of business, if any, intended to be occupied; and the names of any employees who are to be authorized to conduct auctions under the authority of the license. 
(c)  Fee. The fee, payable in advance, for auctioneers shall be forty-five dollars ($45.00) for each day of an auction. 
(d)  Investigation of applicant. The chief of police, or any other officer designated by the mayor, shall investigate the character of every applicant for an auctioneer's license and no such license shall be issued to any person who is not of good character. 
(e)  Designation of employees; additional license. Every person licensed as an auctioneer may designate not to exceed two (2) employees who may be authorized by him to conduct auctions. Notice containing the names of employees so designated shall be given to the city clerk, and an employee's license shall be issued on the payment of a fee of twenty dollars ($20.00). This license shall be good for one (1) year, and it shall be unlawful for any person not licensed under this section to conduct an auction, or for any auctioneer to permit an auction to be conducted by an unlicensed employee. 
(Code 1980, §§ 15-243, 15-244, 15-245, 15-246, 15-247; Ord. of 12-27-1973, § 17; Ord. No. 05-50, § 1, 7-28-2005; Ord. No. 05-87, § 1, 12-8-2005)  
Sec. 54-582. - Exception to division. 
Nothing in this division shall apply to any public auction or sale made or conducted by a public officer by virtue of any judicial order or process or by virtue of any power or authority contained in a mortgage or trust deed. 
(Code 1980, § 15-249)  
Sec. 54-583. - Street auctions. 
No person shall sell or attempt to sell or offer for sale at public auction any goods, chattels or personal or real property of any kind upon the public streets or sidewalks of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 15-248)  
Secs. 54-584—54-610. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - COAL DEALERS AND COAL YARDS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Power of city to regulate coal yards, 65 ILCS 5/11-8-5. 
 
Sec. 54-611. - License. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to do business as a coal dealer or maintain a coal yard without a license. 
(b)  Fee. The annual fee for the license required by this division shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(Code 1980, §§ 15-256, 15-257; Ord. of 12-27-1973, § 19; Ord. No. 05-50, § 1, 7-28-2005; Ord. No. 05-87, § 1, 12-8-2005)  
Secs. 54-612—54-640. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - FIREARMS AND ASSAULT WEAPONS DEALERS  
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 54-641. - Title. 
This division shall be known as the "Calumet City Firearms and Assault Weapons Control Ordinance." 
(Code 1980, § 15-707; Ord. No. 95-11, § 1, 4-12-1995)  
Sec. 54-642. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meaning: 
Chief means the Chief of Police of the City of Calumet City. 
Department means the Police Department of the City of Calumet City. 
Engaged in the business has the same meaning as in 18 U.S.C. 921(a) (21). 
Firearm means any device, by whatever name known, which is designed to expel a projectile or projectiles by the action of an explosion; expansion of gas or escape of gas, excluding, however: 
(1)  Any pneumatic gun, spring gun, paint ball gun or B-B gun which either expels a single globular projectile not exceeding .18 inch in diameter or breakable paint balls containing washable marking colors; 
(2)  Any device used exclusively for signaling or safety; and required or recommended by the United States Coast Guard or the Interstate Commerce Commission; 
(3)  Any device used exclusively for the firing of stud cartridges, explosive rivets or similar industrial ammunition; or 
(4)  An antique firearm (other than an assault weapon), which, although designed as a weapon, the Department of State Police finds by reason of the date of its manufacture, value, design, or other characteristic is primarily a collector's item and is not likely to be used as a weapon. 
Firearm ammunition means any self-contained cartridge or shotgun shell, by whatever name known, which is designed to be used or adaptable to use in a firearm, excluding, however: 
(1)  Any ammunition exclusively designed for use with a device used exclusively for signaling or safety and required or recommended by the United States Coast Guard or the Interstate Commerce Commission; 
(2)  Any ammunition designed exclusively for use with a stud or rivet driver or other similar industrial ammunition. 
Firearms dealer means any federally licensed firearms dealer, excluding any person licensed solely as a "collector" pursuant to section 923(b) of Title 18 of the United States Code (U.S.C.) and possessing only a Type 03 license. 
Gun shop means the premises of any federally licensed firearms dealer where the only or primary business or commercial enterprise conducted on the premises is the purchase or sale of firearms or firearm ammunition. 
Mayor means the Mayor of Calumet City. 
Person means any individual, public or private corporation, partnership, firm, society, or unincorporated association. 
(Code 1980, § 15-709; Ord. No. 95-11, § 1, 4-12-1995)  
Sec. 54-643. - Penalties. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this division shall result in a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day. Each day of operation in violation of section 54-671 of this division shall constitute a separate and distinct violation. 
(Code 1980, § 15-716; Ord. No. 95-11, § 1, 4-12-1995)  
Sec. 54-644. - Destruction of weapons confiscated. 
(a)  Whenever any firearm is surrendered or confiscated pursuant to the terms of this division, the chief of police shall ascertain whether such firearm is needed as evidence in any matter. 
(b)  If such firearm is not required for evidence, it shall be destroyed at the direction of the chief of police. A record of the date and method of destruction and inventory of the firearm so destroyed shall be maintained. 
(Code 1980, § 15-719; Ord. No. 95-11, § 1, 4-12-1995)  
Sec. 54-645. - Applicability. 
(a)  It is intended that this division shall preempt all county licensing or other regulatory schemes for firearms, firearms dealers and assault weapons. As provided in Article VII, Section 6(c) of the State of Illinois Constitution of 1970, if a county ordinance conflicts with an ordinance of a municipality, the municipal ordinance shall prevail within its jurisdiction. 
(b)  It is specifically intended that this division shall preempt the Cook County Firearms Dealer's License and Assault Weapons and Ammunition Ban Ordinance as now in effect or as may be hereafter amended. 
(c)  Licenses issued pursuant to this division shall be issued separate and apart from any general business license issued by the city. 
(Code 1980, § 15-708; Ord. No. 95-11, § 1, 4-12-1995)  
Secs. 54-646—54-670. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - License 
 
Sec. 54-671. - Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of dealing in firearms at an address within the corporate limits of the city without having applied for or obtained a city firearms dealer's license pursuant to this division within sixty (60) days of the adoption of this ordinance from which this division is derived. A city firearms dealer's license shall be required in addition to any other license required by law. All applicants for a city firearms dealer's license must possess a valid federal firearms dealer's license. Possession of a valid federal firearms dealer's license shall be deemed proof of being engaged in the business of dealing in firearms in the city and thus requiring a city firearms dealer's license. An applicant for a city firearms dealer's license shall meet all other applicable city ordinances and regulations. 
(b)  Any person who becomes a federally licensed firearms dealer after adoption of this division and is required under this division to obtain a city firearms dealer's license shall apply for such license within forty-five (45) days of receipt of the federal firearms dealer's license. 
(c)  Any person licensed under federal law at more than one (1) location within the city limits must obtain a city firearms dealer's license for each individual location. A separate application and license fee is required for each location. 
(d)  No license issued under this division shall be transferable or assignable to any other person or any other location. 
(Code 1980, § 15-710; Ord. No. 95-11, § 1, 4-12-1995)  
Sec. 54-672. - Application; issuance. 
(a)  All applications for a license under this division shall be made in writing to the chief of police on a form provided for that purpose. In addition to any other information required by the chief, each application shall contain: 
(1)  The applicant's full name, residence, and the address and telephone number where the person is engaged in the business of dealing in firearms; 
(2)  If the applicant is a corporation, the corporate name, business, and principal place of business of the applicant; the date and state of incorporation; and the names and residence addresses of the corporate officers and its registered agent; 
(3)  If the applicant is a partnership, the name and business address and telephone number of the principal office or place of business; the names, addresses and telephone numbers of all partners; the name, address and telephone number of a person authorized to receive notices issued pursuant to this division. 
(b)  The chief shall not issue a city firearms dealer's license to any person who fails to provide proof of a valid federal firearms dealer's license and a valid firearm owner identification card issued by the state. 
(Code 1980, § 15-713; Ord. No. 95-11, § 1, 4-12-1995)  
Sec. 54-673. - Administration. 
(a)  The chief of the police department shall administer the licensing of firearms dealers and shall approve or deny the applications for licenses and revoke existing licenses pursuant to this article. 
(b)  (1)  The chief shall promulgate reasonable rules, definitions and regulations necessary to carry out the duties imposed by this division, including, but not limited to developing reasonable procedures consistent with existing practices of licensing persons engaged in the business of dealing in firearms and including seeking the assistance of the city police department or other law enforcement agencies as necessary to conduct investigations or inspections in connection with licensing. 
(2)  Any rules or regulations promulgated under this article shall be filed in the police department's principal office and in the office of the city clerk and shall be made available for public inspection. Copies shall be made available upon request and payment of a reasonable fee as determined by the department or the city clerk to cover the cost of providing the copy. 
(Code 1980, § 15-711; Ord. No. 95-11, § 1, 4-12-1995)  
Sec. 54-674. - Fee. 
The annual fee for a city firearms dealer's license shall be three hundred dollars ($300.00). 
(Code 1980, § 15-712; Ord. No. 95-11, § 1, 4-12-1995; Ord. No. 05-50, § 1, 7-28-2005; Ord. No. 05-87, § 1, 12-8-2005)  
Sec. 54-675. - Denial. 
(a)  The chief may deny any application for a license if the applicant fails to provide the information required by, or is otherwise not in compliance with, any provisions of this article or any applicable rules or regulations. Such denial shall be in writing and shall state the reasons for the denial. Any person seeking to appeal the denial may do so by filing a written request for a hearing with the mayor, with a copy to the chief. Such a request must be filed within thirty (30) days of the denial, and a hearing must be held within thirty (30) days of receipt of the request. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures provided herein. 
(b)  The chief may revoke or suspend the license of any person who violates any provision of this article or rules or regulations adopted pursuant to this article. Before any such revocation or suspension is effective, the licensee shall be notified by certified mail or personal delivery of the specific basis for the suspension or revocation and the date for a hearing on the matter. Such hearing shall occur not fewer than seven (7) days and not more than fourteen (14) days after the mailing of the notice. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures provided herein. 
(Code 1980, § 15-714; Ord. No. 95-11, § 1, 4-12-1995)  
Sec. 54-676. - Hearing procedures. 
(a)  If a person wishes to appeal the denial of a city firearms dealer's license, or in the event of a revocation or suspension of a city firearms dealer's license, the mayor shall appoint a hearing officer who shall conduct the hearing. The hearing officer is authorized to conduct a hearing concerning any matter covered by this division and may determine factual and legal matters raised by the parties to the hearing. 
(b)  The hearing officer may: 
(1)  Examine any books, papers, records or memoranda bearing upon the business or activities of the licensee; 
(2)  Request the circuit court to issue subpoenas requiring the attendance of any person having personal knowledge of any contested issues; 
(3)  Request the circuit court to issue subpoenas duces tecum for the production of books, records, papers or memoranda; 
(4)  Administer oaths; 
(5)  Take testimony; 
(6)  Make rulings as to the admissibility of evidence; and 
(7)  Take any other action as may be required for the expeditious conduct of the hearing. 
(c)  The hearing officer is not bound by the technical rules of evidence. No informality in any proceeding or in the manner of taking testimony or receiving evidence shall invalidate any order, decision, ruling or recommendation of the hearing officer or final administrative decision of the mayor. 
(d)  The department's books, papers, records and memoranda or parts thereof may be proved in any hearing or legal proceeding by the original documents or by reproduced copy under the certificate of the chief. Without further proof, the original documents or reproduced copy shall be admissible into evidence at any hearing. 
(e)  If the circuit court issues a subpoena duces tecum , the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Service shall be made as provided by the Illinois Civil Practice Law, 735 ILCS 5/2-201, et seq.; 
(2)  Fees of witnesses for attendance and travel shall be the same as the fees of witnesses before the circuit court of the county and shall be paid after the witness is excused from further attendance; 
(3)  When a subpoena or subpoena duces tecum is issued at the instance of either party, the hearing officer may require that party to bear the cost of service and witness fees. 
(f)  Any party to a hearing may apply to any judge of the circuit court of this state for enforcement of any subpoena or subpoena duces tecum issued by a hearing officer holding a hearing authorized by this article. 
(g)  At any hearing held under this article, the chief's initial decision to deny or revoke a license shall be presumed prima facie correct and the person contesting the decision shall have the burden of proving with books, records and other documentary or testimonial evidence that it is incorrect. 
(h)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall make a recommendation to the mayor. The mayor shall adopt, reject or modify the recommendation based on a review of the record within seven (7) days of receiving the hearing officer's recommendation and shall issue a final decision. The mayor shall give written notification to the licensee of the decision and the reasons for such decision. The mayor's decision shall be a final decision reviewable under Section 3-101 of the Illinois Administrative Review Law. 
(i)  A person seeking judicial review of the mayor's final decision shall bear the cost of certification. If the licensee or protesting party prevails on appeal, the city shall reimburse that party for the cost of certification. 
(j)  Items constituting the record may include notices and demands; the initial decision; the written protest and petition for hearing; all relevant pleadings, briefs and memoranda of law; evidence admitted at the hearing; the transcribed testimony given at the hearing; the recommendation of the hearing officer; and the final decision of the mayor. 
(Code 1980, § 15-715; Ord. No. 95-11, § 1, 4-12-1995)  
Secs. 54-677—54-700. - Reserved.  
Subdivision III. - Assault Weapons 
 
Sec. 54-701. - Defined. 
As used in this article, the following term shall have the following meaning: 
Assault weapon means any weapon which shoots, is designed to shoot, or can be readily restored to shoot, automatically, more than one (1) shot, without manual reloading, by a single function of the trigger. The term shall also include the frame or receiver of any such weapon, any part designed and intended for use in converting a weapon into a machine gun, any combination of parts from which a machine gun can be assembled if such parts are in the possession or under the control of a person. 
(Code 1980, § 15-717; Ord. No. 95-11, § 1, 4-12-1995)  
Sec. 54-702. - Assault weapons; sale prohibited, exceptions. 
(a)  No person shall sell, offer or display for sale, give, lend, transfer ownership of, acquire or possess, manufacture or distribute any assault weapon or within the city limits. This subsection shall not apply to: 
(1)  The sale, distribution, or the possession for sale and distribution by any firearms dealer licensed pursuant to this article, of an assault weapon to any officer, agent, or employee of the city or any other municipality, county, body politic or state or of the United States, members of the armed forces of the United States, or the organized militia of this or any other state, and peace officers to the extent that any such person is otherwise authorized to acquire or possess an assault weapon and is acting within the scope of his duties; 
(2)  Transportation of assault weapons if such weapons are broken down and in a nonfunctioning state and are not immediately accessible to any person. 
(b)  Any assault weapon possessed, sold or transferred in violation of subsection (a) of this section is hereby declared to be contraband and shall be seized and disposed of in accordance with the provisions in section 54-644 of this article. 
(c)  Any person found in violation of this section shall be fined not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(d)  Any person who, prior to the effective date of this article, was legally in possession of an assault weapon prohibited by this section shall have fourteen (14) days from the effective date of this article to do any of the following without being subject to prosecution hereunder: 
(1)  To remove the assault weapon from within the city limits; 
(2)  To modify the assault weapon either to render it permanently inoperable or to permanently make it a device no longer defined as an assault weapon under this article; or 
(3)  To surrender the assault weapon to the chief of police or his designee for disposal as provided in section 54-644. 
(Code 1980, § 15-718; Ord. No. 95-11, § 1, 4-12-1995)  
Secs. 54-703—54-720. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - FLORISTS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Power of city to license, tax and regulate florists, 65 ILCS 5/11-42-1. 
 
Sec. 54-721. - Defined. 
For the purposes of this division, any person engaged in the business of selling flowers, shrubs or ornamental plants at retail in the city shall be construed to be a florist.  
Sec. 54-722. - License—Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to do business as a florist without a license.  
Sec. 54-723. - Same—Application. 
An application for a license to do business as a florist shall be made in writing to the city clerk, and must state thereon the nature of the business and the proposed location.  
Sec. 54-724. - Same—Fee. 
The license fee for doing business as a florist shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per year. 
(Code 1980, § 15-264; Ord. of 12-27-1973, § 20; Ord. No. 05-50, § 1, 7-28-2005; Ord. No. 05-87, § 1, 12-8-2005)  
Sec. 54-725. - Odors. 
No owner or operator of a florist shop shall permit any dead or dying vegetation to remain in or upon the premises so as to cause noxious or disagreeable odors. 
(Code 1980, § 15-268)  
Secs. 54-726—54-750. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - FUEL OIL DEALERS 
 
Sec. 54-751. - License. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful to do business as a fuel oil dealer without a license. 
(b)  Fee. The annual fee for the license required by this division shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(Code 1980, §§ 15-276. 15-277; Ord. of 12-27-1973, § 19; Ord. No. 05-50, § 1, 7-28-2005; Ord. No. 05-87, § 1, 12-8-2005)  
Secs. 54-752—54-780. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - LUMBERYARDS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Power of city to license, tax and regulate lumberyards, 65 ILCS 5/11-8-5, 11-42-1. 
 
Sec. 54-781. - License. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, conduct or maintain a lumberyard without a license. 
(b)  Application. Applications for the licenses required by this division shall be made to the city clerk in writing, and shall state thereon the location and size of the lumberyard intended. 
(c)  Fee. The annual fee for the license required by this division shall be two hundred forty dollars ($240.00), and no license shall be issued without the payment of this fee. 
(Code 1980, §§ 15-284, 15-285, 15-286; Ord. of 12-27-1973, § 23; Ord. No. 05-50, § 1, 7-28-2005; Ord. No. 05-87, § 1, 12-8-2005)  
Sec. 54-782. - Inspections. 
It shall be the duty of the fire marshal to inspect every lumberyard established in the city and to cause such inspections to be made at least once every six (6) months to ensure compliance with this division. 
(Code 1980, § 15-289)  
Sec. 54-783. - Piling lumber. 
It shall be unlawful to pile any lumber in a lumberyard in such a way that the lumber is overhanging or in danger of falling onto any adjoining property, street, alley or public way. 
(Code 1980, § 15-288)  
Secs. 54-784—54-810. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - SECONDHAND PERSONAL PROPERTY, GEMS AND PRECIOUS METALS DEALERS  
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 54-811. - Definitions. 
As used in this division the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed: 
Secondhand dealer means a secondhand dealer is hereby defined to mean an individual, partnership, corporation, joint venture, trust association, or any other legal entity however organized engaged in or conducting business in the city for purchasing, trading, bartering, or exchanging secondhand personal property, gold, silver, and other precious metals. 
Engaged in or conducting business means the purchase, sale, barter, or exchange of any item aforesaid, including advertising therefore and including such business conducted by an established dealer in a permanent location. 
Secondhand goods means secondhand goods or used personal goods shall consist of any item of personal property or object of value such as gold, silver, jewelry, and/or other precious metals, which is not purchased or sold as new. Secondhand or used personal goods do not include property purchased by one (1) licensed, established merchant in the normal course of business from another licensed established merchant. Secondhand or used personal goods shall include but are not limited to the following items: 
(1)  Jewelry of any kind and/or any metal, precious or semiprecious in nature; 
(2)  Gold, silver, and/or other precious metals in whatever identifiable form except for numismatic coins or bullions; 
(3)  Any type of gem or precious stone, including diamonds; 
(4)  Office supplies; 
(5)  Furniture fixtures; 
(6)  Electronic equipment such as televisions, radios, and stereos; 
(7)  Appliances. 
Precious metals means any item containing as part of its composition in any degree, gold, silver, platinum or pewter. 
Gems means any item containing or having any precious or semi-precious stones customarily used in jewelry or ornamentation. 
Exclusions means the provisions of this division do not apply to the following businesses or dealers: 
(1)  Junk; 
(2)  Used motor vehicles; 
(3)  Antique dealers which for purpose of this exclusion shall be read to be defined as any dealer who engages exclusively in the business or occupation of selling, bartering, or exchanging any painting, furniture, china, or other object painted or made more than fifty (50) years prior to the date of sale, which is valuable primarily by reasons of age, scarcity or the skill and craftsmanship of the article and artisan. Antiques will not include family heirlooms made of gold and silver or other precious metals; 
(4)  Coin collectors or coin shops which engage exclusively in the coin business or occupation. Further, that this exclusion does not exempt such dealers or businesses from compliance with the regulations as hereinafter provided in relation to any gold, silver, platinum or other precious metal or jewelry which they may purchase, trade, barter, or exchange in addition to their coin and bullion operations; 
(5)  Flea market; 
(6)  Neighborhood garage sales; 
(7)  Nonprofit or charitable secondhand goods or thrift type shops. 
(Code 1980, § 15-301; Ord. No. 86-9, § 1, 3-27-1986)  
Sec. 54-812. - Penalty for violation of division. 
Any violation of this division shall be punished by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each violation shall be a separate and distinct offense. 
(Code 1980, § 15-307; Ord. No. 86-9, § 7, 3-27-1986)  
Sec. 54-813. - Purchasing from minors. 
No secondhand dealer shall purchase, trade or deal in secondhand articles with a minor (an individual under the age of eighteen (18) years of age; or receive any goods or articles from any minors, to wit: seventeen (17) years old on down). 
(Code 1980, § 15-302; Ord. No. 86-9, § 2, 3-27-1986)  
Sec. 54-814. - Records of transactions required. 
(a)  Every secondhand dealer shall keep a record, which record system guidelines shall be established in conjunction with the chief of police of the city for the purpose of promoting uniformity and accessibility to the police department with minimum inconvenience to both the dealer and the department. However, under no circumstances will a looseleaf system be considered to be a proper medium of recordkeeping. 
(b)  The record of all transactions shall be written in the English language and in a clear, legible manner. 
(c)  The record maintained by the secondhand dealer shall be made at the time of the transaction and shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  Name, age, sex, general description of the individual with whom the transaction is had, as well as the individual's residence and his signature on the receipt and permanent record kept by the dealer; 
(2)  Confirmation of identification, by also securing a driver's license number along with the state of issuance of such license, military identification card number and the account number of a major credit card account, if used for purchase. This number shall be recorded along with the information hereinabove designated. 
(3)  The price or consideration paid or received at the time of the transaction. 
(4)  A description of every article (except as to the sale of goods by him of newspapers, magazines, or other wastepaper, rags, and clothing) received, purchased, sold, or exchanged by the dealer giving the manufacturer's name and other marks of identification appearing on the article including, but not limited to, the serial number, of any, on the article. 
(5)  If the property is delivered by motor vehicle, the license number of the delivering vehicle and the issuing state of said license shall be recorded along with all other identification requirements enumerated hereinabove; 
(6)  All entries in the record shall be signed by the person making the entry; 
(7)  Such records shall be retained for a period of one (1) year from the date of the transaction. 
(Code 1980, § 15-302; Ord. No. 86-9, § 2, 3-27-1986)  
Sec. 54-815. - Report to the chief of police or his designated agent. 
It shall be the duty of every secondhand dealer to make out and make available for the inspection of the chief of police or his designated agent before the hour of twelve o'clock (12:00) noon, each and every business day, a copy of the records required to be kept under the terms of this division, reflecting the completed transactions of the previous day. 
(Code 1980, § 15-302; Ord. No. 86-9, § 2, 3-27-1986)  
Sec. 54-816. - Record inspection. 
The record book, the goods, articles or things purchased, received or kept for sale or exchange, by every secondhand dealer, shall be open to inspection of any member of the police department at all reasonable business times, or any person duly authorized in writing for such purpose by the chief of police. 
(Code 1980, § 15-302; Ord. No. 86-9, § 2, 3-27-1986)  
Sec. 54-817. - Goods to be kept without concealment for seven business/working days. 
Every dealer in secondhand goods must keep without concealment for a period of seven (7) working/business days, subject to the inspection by any police officer, all goods, wares and merchandise, purchased or received from any person, before selling, shipping or otherwise disposing of the same. 
Proviso: Any goods, wares, or merchandise purchased or received from any person may be sold, shipped, or otherwise disposed of prior to the expiration of the seven (7) working/business day holding period if the goods, wares, or merchandise have been sooner inspected by the chief of police or his designated agent and received written clearance for such further disposition. 
(Code 1980, § 15-302; Ord. No. 86-9, § 2, 3-27-1986)  
Sec. 54-818. - Melting, wrecking and remodeling. 
No secondhand dealer shall melt any watch, watchcase, jewelry or other identifiable article composed or manufactured in whole or in part of gold, silver, platinum, or other precious metals until such dealer shall have made a record of his intention to do so along with all other data required to be recorded by the specific recordation provisions of this section and shall have reported the same to the chief of police or his designated agents within the burglary and theft division and unless and until he shall have kept such article intact in his licensed place of business, for inspection for seven (7) working/business days after the report provided for in this division has been made available to the chief of police or his designated agent; unless the identifiable article proposed to be melted down, wrecked or remodeled has been sooner inspected by the chief of police or his designated agent and received written clearance for such melting, wrecking or remodeling from same. 
(Code 1980, § 15-302; Ord. No. 86-9, § 2, 3-27-1986)  
Sec. 54-819. - Coin dealers, coin collection swap meets and conventions. 
(a)  Coin collectors and coin dealers shall not be subject to the extensive record keeping and goods retention requirements for secondhand goods or used personal property dealers to the extent of their actual dealings in coins. However, if any such coin establishment also purchases, trades, barters or exchanges any other type of secondhand personal property including gold, silver and/or other precious metals or jewelry in conjunction with its coin dealership, such establishment shall be subjected to the extensive record keeping, licensing and goods retention requirements as established in this division, as far as these other items of gold, silver and/or precious metals or jewelry are concerned. 
(b)  Coin collectors and coin dealers although not subject to the record keeping, licensing requirements, and goods retention provisions of this division as relates to their coin dealings, nonetheless will be required to meet the conditions set forth in subsection (c) of this section as they relate to their coin business. 
(c)  Registration. 
(1)  All coin dealers and/or collectors who conduct a coin business and conduct no other precious metal business shall be required to register with the city clerk. 
(2)  All coin swap meets and conventions shall be required to register with the city clerk no later than three (3) days before the scheduled date of the swap meet. The sponsor or sponsors of such a swap meet shall be required to submit the following information at the time of registration: 
a.  The type of swap meet to be conducted; 
b.  The location of the swap meet or convention; 
c.  The time and date of the swap meet or convention and its expected duration; 
d.  The approximate number of participants. 
(Code 1980, § 15-306; Ord. No. 86-9, § 6, 3-27-1986)  
Secs. 54-820—54-840. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - License 
 
Sec. 54-841. - License—Required. 
It shall be unlawful for an individual, partnership, corporation, joint venture, trust, association, or other legal entity to engage in the business of secondhand goods or used personal property, gold, silver and/or other precious metals dealer as defined in this division, without first obtaining a license therefor, as hereinafter provided. A separate license shall be required for each location, place or premises used for the conduct of the business of the secondhand dealer. 
(Code 1980, § 15-302; Ord. No. 86-9, § 2, 3-27-1986)  
Sec. 54-842. - Same—Application. 
Applicants for a license under this division, whether a person, firm, corporation, or other legal entity, shall file a written sworn application signed by the applicant, if an individual, by all partners, if a partnership, by all members of the joint venture or association, and by the president of a corporation with the city clerk, showing: 
(1)  The name or names of the person or persons having the management or supervision of the applicant's business; 
(2)  The local address or addresses of such person while engaged in the business; 
(3)  The permanent address or addresses of such persons; 
(4)  The capacity in which such person or persons will act, that is, whether as proprietor, agent, or otherwise; 
(5)  If a corporation, other than an Illinois corporation, the laws of the state that the same is incorporated under; 
(6)  The place or places in the city where it is proposed that the applicant's business will be conducted; 
(7)  A brief statement of the nature and character of the advertising done or proposed to be done in order to attract customers; 
(8)  Credentials from the person, firm or corporation, for which the applicant proposes to do business, authorizing the applicant to act as such representative; 
(9)  Whether or not the person or persons having management or supervision of the applicant's business have been convicted of a felony, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of such offense and the punishments assessed therefore; 
(10)  The place or places, other than the permanent place of business of the applicant, where applicant, within the six (6) months prior to this current application, conducted a previous business in secondhand or used personal goods, stating the nature thereof and giving the street address of any building or office in which such business was conducted. 
(Code 1980, § 15-302; Ord. No. 86-9, § 2, 3-27-1986)  
Sec. 54-843. - Same—Fee. 
The annual license fee is to be paid to the city in the amount of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00). 
(Code 1980, § 15-302; Ord. No. 86-9, § 2, 3-27-1986; Ord. No. 05-50, § 1, 7-28-2005; Ord. No. 05-87, § 1, 12-8-2005)  
Sec. 54-844. - Place of business; license restrictions. 
Any license issued under the provisions of this division shall designate the place in which the secondhand dealer shall carry on such business; and such business shall not be carried on or conducted in any other place than that designated in or by such license. 
(Code 1980, § 15-302; Ord. No. 86-9, § 2, 3-27-1986)  
Sec. 54-845. - Location change during unexpired term of license. 
In the event that a secondhand dealer should move either his main or satellite licensed dealership from the existing location to a new location before the expiration of his current license, he shall be permitted to secure a transfer license at a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per unexpired license to be valid until his existing license should expire. 
(Code 1980, § 15-302; Ord. No. 86-9, § 2, 3-27-1986)  
Sec. 54-846. - Exhibition of license; additional licenses. 
The license issued under this division shall be posted conspicuously in the place of business named therein. In the event that such person or persons applying for said license shall desire to do business in more than one (1) place within the city, separate licenses shall be issued for each place of business, and shall be conspicuously in each place of business. A separate five hundred dollars ($500.00) fee will be charged for each additional license issued. A separate license application will be needed for each additional place of business. 
(Code 1980, § 15-302; Ord. No. 86-9, § 2, 3-27-1986)  
Sec. 54-847. - License not transferable. 
The privilege extended by the above described license is a personal privilege and shall not be transferable to another individual or entity, nor shall there be any abatement of the fee for such license by reason of the fact that the license holder shall have exercised the privilege for any period less than it was granted. 
(Code 1980, § 15-302; Ord. No. 86-9, § 2, 3-27-1986)  
Sec. 54-848. - Appeal from denial of license. 
(a)  An appeal from the city clerk or mayor's decision to deny application for a license shall be made to the mayor or the city clerk in writing, within seven (7) days of the receipt of the decision. 
(b)  The appeal shall state the specific grounds for the appeal. 
(c)  The applicant will be granted the opportunity to present his evidence at the council hearing to show why the mayor or the city clerk's decision should not be sustained. 
(Code 1980, § 15-305; Ord. No. 86-9, § 5, 3-27-1986)  
Sec. 54-849. - Suspension and revocation of license. 
Upon conviction for a violation of any of the provisions of this division, the license granted under the provisions of this division shall be suspended for a period not less than thirty (30) days in duration at the end of which the individual must secure a clearance from the city clerk verifying the expiration of the suspension period. 
Upon a second conviction for a violation of any provisions of this division within the license period under which the previous suspension occurred, the license granted under the provisions of this division shall be revoked for a period no less than one (1) year in duration at the end of which the individual may submit a reapplication for another license. 
(Code 1980, § 15-302; Ord. No. 86-9, § 2, 3-27-1986)  
Secs. 54-850—54-880. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - OTHER BUSINESSES AND OCCUPATIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 54-881. - Other licenses. 
The following named businesses shall obtain a license and shall pay the indicated license fee for same, which, except as otherwise stated, shall be an annual license fee and are required to complete a business license application at the time of each renewal: 
Advertising distributors ..... $258.00 
Auto and truck accessories store ..... 150.00 
Auto body repair and/or painting ..... 150.00 
Automobile sales, including accessories ..... 240.00 
Automobile laundry (car wash) ..... 150.00 
Auto wrecking shops and yards ..... 360.00 
Bank and savings and loan associations ..... 360.00 
Barber shop - per chair ..... 60.00 
Beauty or [barber] shops - with retail sales ..... 150.00 
Beauty or barber school ..... 360.00 
Camera shop and/or supplies and hobby ..... 150.00 
Christmas tree sales ..... 90.00 
Clothing store ..... 150.00 
Collection agency ..... 360.00 
Currency exchange and money changer ..... 150.00 
Dancing and/or music school ..... 150.00 
Day care - commercial ..... 150.00 
Drug store and/or pharmacy ..... 240.00 
Dental laboratories ..... 150.00 
Electrical television and radio sales (wholesale) ..... 150.00 
Electrical television and radio sales (retail) ..... 150.00 
Electrical and/or home appliances store (retail) ..... 150.00 
Electrical and plumbing parts and supplies distributor (wholesale) ..... 150.00 
Furniture stores ..... 150.00 
Fabricating and/or assembly shop (wood or metal) ..... 150.00 
Fabric store ..... 150.00 
Festivals (with council approval per day) ..... 75.00 
Golf course ..... 360.00 
Guns, fire arms, ammunition, shells, including gun repair ..... 300.00 
Hardware store ..... 150.00 
Home improvement sales and services ..... 240.00 
Health clubs ..... 180.00 
Ice cream vending trucks (propelled by motor, four-cylinder and up) ..... 135.00 
Jewelry store and/or watch repair ..... 150.00 
Key and/or bicycle repair shop ..... 150.00 
Loan agency (personal) ..... 360.00 
Lawnmower sales and service ..... 150.00 
Massage parlor ..... 180.00 
Marine and boat docks ..... 210.00 
Monument sales ..... 150.00 
Movers and storage ..... 210.00 
Newspaper agencies ..... 210.00 
Nursery for children ..... 150.00 
Optical sales, glasses, frames, and lenses ..... 150.00 
Paint spray shop and services ..... 150.00 
Paint and/or wallpaper shops ..... 150.00 
Photography studios ..... 150.00 
Printing establishment and/or lithographers ..... 150.00 
Private police protection and/or detective agencies ..... 150.00 
Public weigh masters ..... 90.00 
Radio and/or television sales and service ..... 150.00 
Repair shops (lawnmowers, knives, car, watch, radio, television, electrical) ..... 150.00 
Sanitary landfill operator ..... 3,000.00 
Shoe repair ..... 150.00 
Specialty business ..... 150.00 
Secretarial services ..... 150.00 
Shades, draperies, and blinds ..... 150.00 
Tile, linoleum and ceramic sales ..... 150.00 
Television parts and supplies distributors ..... 150.00 
Trucking terminal and/or freight terminal ..... 210.00 
Trailer sales ..... 285.00 
Tailor and upholstering shop ..... 150.00 
Variety and notions vending machines ..... 30.00 
Vehicles delivering concrete (from out of town) ..... 360.00 
Vehicles carrying dry cleaning services for retail or wholesale (from out of town) ..... 150.00 
Vehicles carrying laundry for retail or wholesale (from out of town) ..... 150.00 
Vehicles carrying liquor or products for retail or wholesale (from out of town) ..... 150.00 
Vehicles carrying gas and oil and fuel products for retail or wholesale (from out of town) ..... 150.00 
Warehouse ..... 210.00 
Window washer and janitor services ..... 150.00 
Work permit ..... 150.00 
All other vending vehicles, retail or wholesale (from out of town) ..... 150.00 
All other businesses not listed ..... 150.00 
(Code 1980, § 15-316; Ord. of 12-27-1973, § 1; Ord. No. 80-8, § 1, 5-6-1980; Ord. No. 05-50, § 1, 7-28-2005; Ord. No. 05-87, § 1, 12-8-2005)  
Sec. 54-882. - Private schools, day care centers, and child care centers to be licensed or registered. 
(a)  All private schools, day care centers, or child care centers shall be licensed and/or registered by the appropriate state agency. The owners, operators, and/or financial officers for each of the aforementioned businesses shall apply to and follow all proper procedures with the appropriate state agency, in order to procure said license and/or registration. 
(b)  All parties applying to the Illinois State Board of Education for registration must provide proof to the city of said application and of said approval or denial before any license or occupancy permit will be issued. All parties regulated under this ordinance must also provide the city with its mission statement and/or purpose and must comply with all other applicable regulations or statutes, ordinances or other rules as passed by the general assembly and/or the city council. 
(c)  Should the party applying for said license or registration not be granted favorable status by the applicable agency, no occupancy permit shall be issued. 
(d)  All private schools, day care centers, or child care centers shall be subject to an occupancy inspection. The property must comply with all applicable laws and codes adopted by the City of Calumet City and other appropriate governmental agencies. Following the initial inspection, the city reserves the right to conduct annual inspections, suspicion based inspections, and random inspections to ensure compliance with the applicable codes, regulations and laws. 
(e)  Any violation of this ordinance may result in a fine not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per offense. Each day shall be considered a new offense. Any violations will be heard by the Calumet City licensing authority. Violations may also result in further remedies up to and including revocation of any municipal licenses or permits issued to that facility. In the event that a facility's license is revoked or otherwise suspended, terminated, or removed, the facility's owners, operators, share-holders, managers, assistant managers, and any other party managing the facility either implicitly or outright shall not be allowed to operate a like facility in the City of Calumet City. 
(Ord. No. 06-51, §§ 1—5, 6-29-2006; Ord. No. 06-78, §§ 1—5, 9-25-2006)  
Secs. 54-883—54-920. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ANIMAL HOSPITALS 
 
Sec. 54-921. - License. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful to operate any hospital for the treatment of small animals without a license. 
(b)  Fee. The annual fee for the license required by this division shall be three hundred sixty dollars ($360.00). 
(Code 1980, §§ 15-323, 15-324; Ord. of 12-27-1973, § 45; Ord. No. 05-50, § 1, 7-28-2005; Ord. No. 05-87, § 1, 12-8-2005)  
Sec. 54-922. - Sanitation. 
Every place used, maintained or operated as a small animal hospital shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, and no refuse or waste material shall be allowed to remain thereon for more than twenty-four (24) hours. 
(Code 1980, § 15-325)  
Sec. 54-923. - Attendant. 
There shall be a competent attendant on the premises used for a small animal hospital at all times. 
(Code 1980, § 15-326)  
Sec. 54-924. - Treatment of animals. 
All animals which are harbored in a small animal hospital shall be treated in a humane manner. 
(Code 1980, § 15-327)  
Secs. 54-925—54-950. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - AUTOMATIC DRY CLEANING MACHINES[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference— Power of city to regulate laundries, 65 ILCS 5/11-42-1; fire prevention power of city generally, Ch. 24, § 11-8-4. 
 
Sec. 54-951. - Defined. 
An automatic dry cleaning machine, as the term is used in this division, shall be construed to include and mean any device or apparatus for the cleaning of clothes or fabrics, and designed to be used or operated by any but the owner, or an employee of the owner thereof, which machine or device makes use of or contains perchloroethylene or any other chemical solvent or substance which may cause harm to human beings by reason of inhalation or contact. 
(Code 1980, § 15-336)  
Sec. 54-952. - Compliance with division and state law required. 
It shall be unlawful to install, operate or maintain any automatic dry cleaning machine except in compliance with the provisions of this division, or without complying with all of the provisions pertaining to the installation and operation of such machine herein contained, or in violation of any laws, rules or regulations of the Illinois Department of Public Health relating thereto. 
(Code 1980, § 15-340)  
Sec. 54-953. - Permit. 
It shall be unlawful to install any automatic dry cleaning machine without having secured a permit. Applications for such permit shall contain full information as to the mechanical equipment of such machine and provisions for ventilation for both the machine and the room in which the machine will be located. The fee for such permit shall be thirty dollars ($30.00) for each unit or machine. 
(Code 1980, § 15-337)  
Sec. 54-954. - License. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of maintaining an automatic dry cleaning machine for use by the public without a license. 
(b)  Fee. The annual fee for the license required by this division shall be ninety dollars ($90.00) plus fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each unit in addition to five (5) maintained in any one (1) establishment. 
(Code 1980, §§ 15-338, 15-339; Ord. No. 05-50, § 1, 7-28-2005; Ord. No. 05-87, § 1, 12-8-2005)  
Sec. 54-955. - Installation regulations. 
(a)  Each automatic dry cleaning machine shall be completely enclosed by a cabinet and shall be vented with intake at the top and the outlet at or near the bottom of such machine. Groups of machines may be entirely enclosed or supported on all open sides by an enclosure topped with a hood vented as provided for each individual machine. 
(b)  The exhaust system shall maintain a minimum flow of one hundred (100) cubic feet per minute face velocity through the loading door whenever the door is open. 
(c)  The discharge stack for the machines and for the room in which the machines are located shall extend at least two (2) feet above the level of any window which can be opened located within fifty (50) feet away from any fresh air intake leading to any premises. 
(d)  The machines must be so constructed as to prevent the loading door from being opened during the normal cycle of operation. Each machine shall be equipped with a transparent door or port to allow visual examination of the status of the cleaning cycle. 
(e)  Any connection of such machine with the water supply system must be equipped with an air gap or vacuum breaker in the line upstream from the condenser, with no control valves downstream from such gap or breaker. Wastewater shall be discharged through an air gap. 
(f)  The room in which such machine is installed shall be ventilated so that there shall be a minimum flow of air per machine from the area to which the public is admitted, of at least five hundred (500) cubic feet per machine per minute in a room where there are no more than three (3) machines installed; four hundred (400) cubic feet per minute where there are no more than eight (8) machines installed; three hundred seventy-five (375) cubic feet per minute where there are no more than sixteen (16) machines installed; and three hundred sixty (360) cubic feet per minute where there are more than seventeen (17) machines installed. For this purpose each cleaning cell shall be considered as one (1) machine. 
(g)  Each machine must be so designed and constructed as to prevent the leakage of liquids, gas or vapors. 
(Code 1980, § 15-341)  
Sec. 54-956. - Operation regulations. 
(a)  No automatic dry cleaning machine shall be operated unless all the equipment described in section 54-955 is properly installed and in good operating condition. 
(b)  No establishment for which a license is required under this division shall be open for business, and it shall be unlawful to admit the public or customers into the room where such machines are located unless there is on duty in the establishment at all times a competent person in charge of the establishment, and in charge of the operation of such machines. There shall be warning signs posted in places of easy observation warning of the dangers in the event leakage of liquids, gas or vapor occurs. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to permit any residue containing solvent to flow into the sewer system of the city; tightly covered metal containers may be used for temporary storage of such waste outside the building. Such containers shall bear labels indicating the contents and dangers involved in handling, and shall be locked if in an unenclosed place. 
(d)  At least one (1) legible sign shall be maintained in a place available to customers giving the name, address and phone number of the owner of the establishment, and of the service department or agency responsible for the proper maintenance of the machines. 
(Code 1980, § 15-342)  
Sec. 54-957. - Inspections. 
It shall be the duty of the mayor to cause such inspections to be made as are necessary to see to the enforcement of the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1980, § 15-343)  
Secs. 54-958—54-980. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - BARBERSHOPS[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference— Power of city to license, tax and regulate barbers, 65 ILCS 5/11-42-1. 
 
Sec. 54-981. - License. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a barbershop in the city without a license. 
(b)  Application. Applications for the license required by this division shall be made in writing to the city clerk, and shall state thereon the number of chairs to be used in the establishment. 
(c)  Fee. The annual fee for the license required by this division shall be sixty dollars ($60.00) per chair; no such license shall be issued except upon payment of the fee. 
(d)  Revocation. In addition to any penalty provided by law, any barbershop violating any of the provisions of this division, or any other applicable ordinance shall be subject to having the license revoked. 
(Code 1980, §§ 15-351, 15-352, 15-353, 15-354; Ord. No. 05-50, § 1, 7-28-2005; Ord. No. 05-87, § 1, 12-8-2005)  
Sec. 54-982. - Inspections. 
It shall be the duty of the health commissioner or some other person designated by the mayor and council to inspect every establishment licensed under this division as often as may be necessary to ensure compliance with this division and all other ordinances relative thereto. 
(Code 1980, § 15-357)  
Sec. 54-983. - Sanitation. 
Premises used for a barbershop shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, and it shall be unlawful to permit waste material of any kind to accumulate therein. It shall be unlawful to employ therein any person afflicted with a venereal or contagious disease. 
(Code 1980, § 15-355)  
Sec. 54-984. - Implements. 
It shall be unlawful to use in any establishment used as a barbershop any implements or tools upon any person after the same have been used upon a person afflicted with any skin or scalp disease without first sterilizing such implement or tool. It shall be unlawful to use any towel on any customer after the same has been used before without having such towel sterilized and cleaned prior to such second usage. 
(Code 1980, § 15-356)  
Secs. 54-985—54-1010. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - RESERVED[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-40, § 4, adopted July 28, 2011, repealed Div. 5, §§ 54-1011—54-1044, in its entirety, which pertained to solicitation and derived from the Code of 1980, §§ 15-365—15-372; Ord. No. 02-11, adopted Jan. 25, 2002; Ord. No. 05-31, §§ 2, 3, adopted May 26, 2005; Ord. No. 05-47, § 1, adopted May 26, 2005; Ord. No. 05-47, §§ 1, 3, adopted July 28, 2005. 
 
Secs. 54-1011—54-1070. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - CIGARETTE VENDING MACHINES  
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 54-1071. - Penalty. 
The violation of section 54-1072 shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more five hundred dollars ($500.00); and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. A second or subsequent violation of section 54-1072 may subject a licensee to a suspension or revocation of the machine license. 
(Code 1980, § 15-377)  
Sec. 54-1072. - Sales of tobacco to minors prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any cigarette vending machine licensee or any officer, director, manager, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee, to sell, offer for sell, buy for, give away, furnish or deliver tobacco products to persons under the age of eighteen (18) years. Unlawful acts constituting a violation of this provision by an officer, director, manager, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of any licensee shall be deemed and held to be the act of such licensee; and such licensee shall be punishable in the same manner as if such act had been done by the licensee personally. 
(Code 1980, § 15-376; Ord. No. 96-47, § 1, 7-25-1996)  
Secs. 54-1073—54-1090. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Licenses 
 
Sec. 54-1091. - Distributor's license. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to distribute cigarette vending machines for use on premises not owned or operated by the distributor without a license. 
(b)  The annual fee for the license required by this section shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(Code 1980, § 15-374)  
Sec. 54-1092. - Machine license. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to operate, maintain or expose for use any cigarette vending machine without a license. 
(b)  The annual fee for the retail sale of cigarettes from vending machines shall be one hundred twenty dollars ($120.00) for each such machine. 
(Code 1980, § 15-375; Ord. No. 05-50, § 1, 7-28-2005; Ord. No. 05-87, § 1, 12-8-2005)  
Sec. 54-1093. - Suspension; revocation of license; hearing. 
The mayor shall be charged with the administration of this division. The mayor may suspend or revoke any license issued under the provision of this division, if he determines that the licensee has violated any of the provisions of this division. However, no such license shall be suspended or revoked and no licensee shall be fined except after a public hearing by the mayor with a seven (7) day written notice to the licensee affording the licensee an opportunity to appear and defend against the charges contained in such notice. The seven (7) day notice provisions shall begin the day following delivery by certified mail or by personal service. 
The mayor shall within seven (7) days after such hearing, if he determines after such hearing that the license should be revoked or suspended, or that the licensee should be fined, state the reason for such determination in a written order and state either the amount of the fine, the period of suspension or the revocation of the license and serve a copy of such order within the seven (7) days upon the licensee. 
Any licensee determined by the mayor to have violated any of the provisions of this division shall pay to the city the costs of the hearing before the mayor on such violation. The mayor shall determine the costs incurred by the city for said hearing, including, but not limited to: court reporters' fees, the costs of transcripts or records, attorneys' fees, the cost of preparing and mailing notices and orders and all other miscellaneous expenses incurred by the city or such less sum as the mayor may allow. 
The licensee shall pay said costs to the city within thirty (30) days of notification of the costs by the mayor. Failure to pay said costs within thirty (30) days of notification is a violation of this division and may be cause for license suspension or revocation, or the levy of a fine. 
(Code 1980, § 15-378; Ord. No. 96-47, § 1, 7-25-1996)  
Sec. 54-1094. - Use of premises after revocation. 
When any license shall have been revoked for any cause, no license shall be granted to said licensee for the period of six (6) months thereafter for the conduct of the business of selling tobacco products in the premises described in such revoked license. 
(Code 1980, § 15-379; Ord. No. 96-47, § 1, 7-25-1996)  
Secs. 54-1095—54-1140. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - DAY CARE HOMES  
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 54-1141. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this division, the following terms are defined to mean: 
Certificate of compliance shall mean a certificate issued by the city evidencing that a day care home has been found to be in compliance with all applicable health and safety regulations of the city, including but not limited to the requirements of this division. 
Certified in food service sanitation shall mean a person who has completed the requirements of Subpart J: of Title 77: Public Health, Chapter I; Department of Public Health, Subchapter m: Food, Drugs and Cosmetics, Part 750 Food Service Sanitation Code. 
Day care home means a family home which receives more than three (3) or a maximum of twelve (12) children for less than twenty-four (24) hours per day. The age distribution shall be governed by those guidelines of Part 406 of the State of Illinois licensing standards. The maximum of twelve (12) children includes the family's natural, foster or adopted children and all other persons under the age of twelve (12). The term does not include facilities which receive only children from a single household. 
Department means the Illinois Department of Children and Family Services. 
D.I.S. means the Calumet City Department of Inspectional Services. 
Operator means an individual or individuals operating a day care home from the family residence. 
Part 406 shall mean Title 89: Social Services, Chapter III: Department of Children and Family Services, Subchapter e: Requirements of Licensure, Part 406, Licensing Standards for Day Care Homes. 
(Code 1980, § 15-663; Ord. No. 97-64, § 1, 10-28-1997)  
Secs. 54-1142—54-1170. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Certificate of Compliance 
 
Sec. 54-1171. - Required; transferability. 
(a)  No person shall operate a day care home within the city unless the operator obtains an annual certificate of compliance by the city department of inspectional services. 
(b)  The certificate of compliance shall not be transferable to any other person or any other premises by any means. 
(Code 1980, § 15-663.1; Ord. No. 97-64, § 1, 10-28-1997)  
Sec. 54-1172. - Minimum standards; requirements. 
No certificate of compliance shall be issued to a day care home unless the operator complies with the following regulations, restrictions and conditions: 
(1)  Day care homes may be operated only in R-1 zones. 
(2)  Each day care home shall comply with all building, zoning, fire and other health and safety regulations of the city as they may be amended from time to time. 
(3)  No day care home may operate unless the operator possesses a valid day care home license issued by the department. 
(4)  No day care home may operate in violation of any regulation of the department or those additional regulations set forth in this division. 
(5)  Each day care home shall be subject to at least twice yearly inspections by the city to determine compliance with the provisions of this division, and the operator shall cooperate with authorized inspecting agents of the city. 
(6)  Each operator shall make available at all times to the D.I.S. a list indicating the names, addresses and phone numbers of all children being cared for in the day care home. 
(7)  Each operator shall annually furnish to the city evidence that the operator and all employees have submitted to at least fifteen (15) hours annually of training in child care, in addition to current certification in first aid. Each operator and employee shall annually submit evidence of current certification in adult, child and infant CPR and emergency care for choking. These certificates shall be issued by the American Red Cross or the American Heart Association. It is the responsibility of each person to keep his certification in a continuously valid status. 
(8)  Each operator shall maintain a working and easily accessible telephone at all times. Affixed to or immediately adjacent to each phone shall be the emergency phone numbers for police, fire and EMS in addition to the street address and phone number of the day care home. 
(9)  The operator of each day care home shall provide a safe means of ingress and egress for children being transported to or from a day care home. In particular, an off-street drop-off/pickup area must be provided if a day care home is located on an arterial street, including but not limited to Wentworth Avenue, Burnham Avenue, Michigan City Road, Pulaski Road (154th St.), Sibley Boulevard, Memorial Drive (152nd St.), and State Street or any other location deemed necessary by the D.I.S. 
(10)  The operator shall maintain a day care home at a temperature no lower than sixty-eight (68) nor greater than eighty (80) degrees Fahrenheit during those times when the home is operating as a day care home. 
(11)  The operator shall immediately notify the city clerk and the D.I.S. by phone and within three (3) days in writing, after the operator's receipt of any action or complaints received from the department. 
(12)  Operations of a day care home shall fulfill all the requirements set forth by the department in accordance with Part 406 with the following amendments. These amendments shall supersede those of Part 406. 
Section 406.8(a)(2). Additional ABC fire extinguishers shall be located within ten (10) feet of each primary exit and at least one (1) on each level of the day care home. 
Section 406.8(a)(3). Extension cords shall not be permitted. All cords shall be arranged to have the minimum amount of cord exposed. All outlets on or below grade level, in the areas accessible to those children in the day care home, shall be ground fault circuit interrupter protected except where specifically excused by the National Electric Code. 
Section 406.8(a)(4)(A). All smoke detectors shall be of the a/c type with battery back-up. They shall be hard wired, interconnected and maintained in a continuously functional status. 
Section 406.8(a)(4)(B). Carbon monoxide (CO) detectors of the a/c type shall be located on each level and maintained in a continuously functional status. 
Section 406.8(a)(5), (6). Fireplaces, woodburning stoves or space heaters shall not be permitted to be in use while the premises is functioning as a day care home. 
Section 406.8(a)(15). The operator of the home shall notify the parent(s) or guardian of any child accepted for care that firearms and ammunition are stored on the premises. This notification shall require written confirmation of receipt by the parents/guardian. This written receipt shall be available for inspection by an agent of the city. 
Section 406.8(a)(16). At least one (1) drill every six (6) months shall be monitored by the fire department. 
Section 406.8(a)(20). Each swimming pool or spa shall also contain a functional entry alarm at all times it is not in use. 
Section 406.8(b)(1). The operator shall be certified in food service sanitation and must maintain this certification in a current status. 
Section 406.8(b)(2). The premises shall be inspected regularly by the health commissioner or his designee for compliance with the applicable portions of the Food Service Sanitation Code. 
Section 406.8(g)(1). This certification shall be done annually with copies of the certifications forwarded to the D.I.S. 
Section 406.8(g)(2). Uncertified animals shall not be permitted on the premises. 
Section 406.8(g)(4). All animal bites or scratches shall be reported to the city police department's animal control division. 
Section 406.8(g)(5). Cat litter boxes shall not be permitted in areas of child care activities, food preparation or serving areas and shall be arranged so as they are inaccessible to infants and toddlers. 
Section 406.8(g)(6). Reptiles shall not be permitted in the premises at any time. 
Section 406.8(j). Yards shall be completely fenced and gated. Gates shall be secured by means as to prevent the opening of them by toddlers and small children. Play spaces shall be protected by physical means and adult supervision. 
Section 406.8(k). Operations of other business on the premises shall not be allowed at any time that the premises is functioning as a day care home. 
Section 406.17(g). Tap water used for drinking and food preparation shall be tested by a commercial lab for the presence of lead. Copies of the test reports shall be submitted to the D.I.S. If lead is found to be present in the water, bottled water shall be used for drinking and food preparation. 
Section 406.24(m). The city clerk and the D.I.S. shall also be notified within the same time frame should any of these events occur. 
Section 406.24(o). The fire department and the D.I.S. shall also be notified within the same time frame should any of these events occur. 
(Code 1980, § 15-664; Ord. No. 97-64, § 1, 10-28-1997)  
Sec. 54-1173. - Application for certificate of compliance; requirements. 
(a)  Each applicant for a certificate of compliance to operate a day care home in the city shall complete an application form provided and furnished by the city, which form shall require the operator to furnish the following: 
(1)  Name, address and phone number of the operator. Post office box numbers are not acceptable. 
(2)  Name, address and phone numbers of all employees over the age of sixteen (16) involved in the operation of the day care home. 
(3)  A notarized copy of the operator's current valid day care home license issued by the department. 
(4)  Whether the operator or any employee has been, or is currently subject to any proceeding involving the suspension or revocation of the license issued by the department. 
(5)  The operator and all employees shall be fingerprinted by the city police department, and shall pay the city an additional amount as may be required by the State of Illinois and the Federal Bureau of Investigation to process such fingerprints. By making application for a certificate of compliance, the operator and employees authorize the city to forward the results of the fingerprint identification to the department. A certificate of compliance shall not be issued until the result of fingerprint checks are complete. 
(6)  Such other information relating to the terms and provisions of this division. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a completed application and the fee as provided in section 54-1174, the department of inspectional services and the health commissioner or his designee shall inspect the premises of the day care home for purposes of determining compliance with this division. Upon such determination, a certificate of compliance shall be issued and the operator shall be authorized to operate a day care home within the city. 
(Code 1980, § 15-665; Ord. No. 97-64, § 1, 10-28-1997)  
Sec. 54-1174. - Certificate of compliance fee; license year. 
Each applicant for a certificate of compliance to operate a day care home shall pay an annual fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) to the city at the time of making application for such certificate of compliance. The certificate shall be issued on the May 1 fiscal year basis. Applications for an initial certificate made after December 1 shall be accompanied by a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). There shall be no proration of any fee in the event a day care home discontinues operation during the course of any license. 
(Code 1980, § 15-666; Ord. No. 97-64, § 1, 10-28-1997; Ord. No. 05-50, § 1, 7-28-2005; Ord. No. 05-87, § 1, 12-8-2005)  
Sec. 54-1175. - Existing day care homes. 
Any day care home licensed by the department which is operating as of the effective date of this division shall have thirty (30) days after passage in which to make application to the city for a certificate of compliance and ninety (90) days in which to comply with all requirements of this division. No punitive action will be taken by the city against such facility during the pendency of the city's review in the event of a timely application. 
(Code 1980, § 15-667; Ord. No. 97-64, § 1, 10-28-1997)  
Secs. 54-1176—54-1200. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - DRY CLEANING PLANTS 
 
Sec. 54-1201. - Permit fee. 
The annual fee for the permit required by the Fire Prevention Code to operate a dry cleaning plant shall be two hundred forty dollars ($240.00). 
(Code 1980, § 15-384; Ord. of 12-27-1973, § 28; Ord. No. 05-50, § 1, 7-28-2005; Ord. No. 05-87, § 1, 12-8-2005)  
Secs. 54-1202—54-1240. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - EXPRESSMEN AND DRAYMEN[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
State Law reference— Power of city to license, tax and regulate expressmen, draymen, etc., 65 ILCS 5/11-42-6. 
 
Sec. 54-1241. - License. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct the business of drayman, carter, trucker or expressman without a license. 
(b)  Application. Applications for the license required by this division shall be made to the city clerk, and shall designate thereon the name of the licensee, the location of his business, and the number of vehicles intended to be used by him. 
(c)  Fee. The annual fee for the license required by this division shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for each vehicle used for such business. 
(Code 1980, §§ 15-391, 15-392, 15-393; Ord. of 12-27-1973, § 29; Ord. No. 05-50, § 1, 7-28-2005; Ord. No. 05-87, § 1, 12-8-2005)  
Sec. 54-1242. - Stolen property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person required to have a license by the provisions of this division to receive, move or conceal any goods or articles which he knows or has reason to suspect has been stolen. 
(Code 1980, § 15-394)  
Sec. 54-1243. - Vehicles. 
Every vehicle used for the business licensed by this division shall have printed thereon on a place easily visible from the side of the vehicle the name and address of the owner in letters legible to one of normal eyesight at a distance of twenty-five (25) feet. 
(Code 1980, § 15-395)  
Secs. 54-1244—54-1270. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 10. - GASOLINE SERVICE STATIONS[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
State Law reference— Fire prevention powers of city, 65 ILCS 5/11-8-4. 
 
Sec. 54-1271. - Defined. 
A service station is any place of business where gasoline, or any highly volatile fuels for motor vehicles or internal-combustion engines, are sold or offered for sale at retail, and dispensed into fuel tanks of such motor vehicles. It shall include also the private storage and dispensing of such products for the same purpose as those served by a service station, whether the storage is maintained for the use or benefit of the owner, lessee, agents or employees of either, or of any others. 
(Code 1980, § 15-406)  
Sec. 54-1272. - License. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or conduct a gasoline service station without a license. 
(b)  Fee. The fee for the license required by this division shall be one hundred twenty dollars ($120.00). 
(c)  Locations and equipment compliance. No gasoline service station license shall be issued unless the location and equipment to be used fully comply with all ordinances. 
(Code 1980, §§ 15-403, 15-404, 15-405; Ord. of 12-27-1973, § 21; Ord. No. 05-50, § 1, 7-28-2005; Ord. No. 05-87, § 1, 12-8-2005)  
Sec. 54-1273. - Nonbusiness stations. 
Any person maintaining or operating any storage tank for gasoline for the use of automobiles for the owner, lessee, employees or agents of such person shall comply with all of the provisions of this division other than the requirement for the payment of a license fee. 
(Code 1980, § 15-407)  
Sec. 54-1274. - Bulk sales prohibited. 
No motor fuels shall be dispensed at any service station except into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles, when such tanks are connected with the carburetion system of such vehicles; provided however, that individual sales up to five (5) gallons may be made in metal receptacles when painted red and labeled in full conformity with the Gasoline Lotter Act (430 ILCS 20/0.01 et seq.), such individual sales to be limited to five (5) gallons to any one (1) person. 
(Code 1980, § 15-408)  
Secs. 54-1275—54-1320. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 11. - HANDBILL AND SAMPLE DISTRIBUTORS 
 
Sec. 54-1321. - Permit. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful to distribute indiscriminately to the public, by leaving at stores, offices, houses or residences in the city, any cards, circulars, samples of merchandise, handbills or any advertising matter whatsoever without having first secured a permit; provided that this section shall not be construed to apply to the sale of articles by licensed solicitors. 
(b)  Application. All applications for the permit required by this division shall be made to the city clerk and shall contain a statement of the nature of the article, cards or advertisement to be distributed and the name of the applicant and the name of the manufacturer or distributor of such article or service advertised. 
(c)  Investigation of applicant. No such permit shall be issued to any but a person of good character. The chief of police shall make or cause to be made an investigation into the character of each applicant and shall report the results thereof to the clerk before any such permit is issued. 
(d)  Fee. The fee for the permit required by this division shall be thirty dollars ($30.00) per day. 
(Code 1980, §§ 15-434, 15-435, 15-436; Ord. of 12-27-1973, § 32; Ord. No. 05-50, § 1, 7-28-2005; Ord. No. 05-87, § 1, 12-8-2005)  
Sec. 54-1322. - Indiscriminate distribution prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute indiscriminately to the public any cards, circulars, handbills, samples of merchandise or any advertisement or advertising matter whatsoever on any public street or sidewalk or other public place in the city; provided that this section shall not be construed to prohibit the peddling or sale of any article or publication that may carry or be accompanied by advertising matter where a charge is made or a price is paid for such article or publication. 
(Code 1980, § 15-437)  
Secs. 54-1323—54-1350. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 12. - HOTELS AND ROOMING HOUSES 
 
Sec. 54-1351. - License. 
(a)  Required for hotels. It shall be unlawful to operate a hotel or a building or part thereof used or held out to the public as a place where sleeping accommodations are furnished for twenty (20) or more persons for a period of one (1) day or more without a license. 
(b)  Required for roominghouses. It shall be unlawful to conduct or operate a rooming house or building, apartment or portion of a building, in which any person or persons not related to the owner or occupant of such premises by blood or marriage are furnished sleeping accommodations for hire without a license. 
(c)  Fees: 
(1)  Hotels. The annual fee for a hotel license shall be three hundred dollars ($300.00) for the first unit and thirty dollars ($30.00) for each additional unit. 
(2)  Rooming houses. The fee for a rooming house license shall be one hundred eighty dollars ($180.00). 
(Code 1980, §§ 15-444, 15-445; Ord. of 12-27-1973, § 33; Ord. No. 05-50, § 1, 7-28-2005; Ord. No. 05-87, § 1, 12-8-2005)  
Sec. 54-1352. - Inspections. 
It shall be the duty of the chief of police to inspect every hotel or rooming house operated in the city as frequently as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1980, § 15-451)  
Sec. 54-1353. - Premises condition. 
All premises used for hotel or rooming house purposes shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, and all portions of such premises and hotels that are open for use by all guests or by the public shall be kept lighted at all times they are so open to use. All such premises shall be kept heated between October first and May first to a temperature of not less than sixty-eight (68) degrees between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. and to a temperature of not less than fifty-five (55) degrees at all other hours. 
(Code 1980, § 15-446)  
Sec. 54-1354. - Exits. 
(a)  No building shall be used for a hotel unless it is furnished with the number of exits and fire escapes required by the building ordinances of the city for the construction of a new hotel. 
(b)  No premises shall be used for a roominghouse unless there are at least two (2) exits to the outdoors from such premises. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to block or permit the blocking of any exit from any premises used for a hotel or roominghouse. 
(Code 1980, § 15-447)  
Sec. 54-1355. - Sanitary facilities. 
Water closets and lavatories shall be available to all guests using any hotel or rooming house and there shall be at least one (1) bathroom equipped with water closet, shower or tub, and lavatory facilities for each ten (10) residents on the premises. 
(Code 1980, § 15-448)  
Sec. 54-1356. - Guest register. 
Each hotel proprietor, and each operator therein, shall keep or cause to be kept a register of guests as required by state law. Such register or list shall be available for inspection by any member of the police department at any time. 
(Code 1980, § 15-449)  
Sec. 54-1357. - Harboring fugitives. 
It shall be unlawful to permit knowingly any fugitive from justice to stay in any roominghouse or hotel. 
(Code 1980, § 15-450)  
Secs. 54-1358—54-1390. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 13. - JUNK DEALERS[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
State Law reference— Power of city to license, tax and regulate junk stores, 65 ILCS 5/11-42-3. 
 
Sec. 54-1391. - License. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful to operate or carry on the business of junk dealer or to keep any junk shop, store or place for the purchase or sale of junk rags, old rope, paper or bagging, old iron, brass, copper or empty bottles, without a license. 
(b)  Application. Applications for the license required by this division shall be made in conformance with the provisions of this Code relating to licenses. 
(c)  Fee. The annual fee for the license required by this division shall be three hundred sixty dollars ($360.00). 
(Code 1980, §§ 15-461, 15-462, 15-463; Ord. of 12-27-1973, § 35; Ord. No. 05-50, § 1, 7-28-2005; Ord. No. 05-87, § 1, 12-8-2005)  
Sec. 54-1392. - Premises. 
Any premises, area or piece or parcel of land licensed and used as a junkyard shall have not more than two (2) entrances and two (2) exits each of which shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in width at the perimeter of the premises. Such premises, areas, pieces or parcels of land shall be enclosed with either a solid nontransparent wall or fence or line-weave steel wire or combination thereof with a minimum height of seven (7) feet from the ground level excepting for entrances and exits. The fence or wall shall not contain any poster or advertising of any kind excepting one (1) sign of the licensee not exceeding one hundred (100) square feet in size. 
(Code 1980, § 15-464)  
Sec. 54-1393. - Stolen goods. 
Every keeper of a junk shop who shall receive or be in possession of any goods, articles or things of value which may have been lost or stolen shall upon demand produce such article or thing to any member of the police department for examination. 
(Code 1980, § 15-465)  
Sec. 54-1394. - Vehicles. 
Every vehicle used by a junk dealer in the conduct of his business shall bear thereon in legible characters the name and address of the owner and proprietor thereof. 
(Code 1980, § 15-466)  
Secs. 54-1395—54-1420. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 14. - KENNELS AND PET SHOPS[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 10. 
 
Sec. 54-1421. - Defined. 
As used in this division, the term "kennel," "pet shop" or "small animal store" shall be construed to include any establishment for the raising, training, boarding or selling of dogs, cats, birds, mice, rats or other small animals for hire or profit, or where more than three (3) dogs or cats are harbored or kept. 
(Code 1980, § 15-475)  
Sec. 54-1422. - License. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful to operate a kennel, pet shop or small animal store anywhere in the city without a license. 
(b)  Fee. The annual fee for the license required by this division shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(Code 1980, §§ 15-476, 15-477; Ord. of 12-27-1973, § 36; Ord. No. 05-50, § 1, 7-28-2005; Ord. No. 05-87, § 1, 12-8-2005)  
Sec. 54-1423. - Sanitation. 
Every place used as a kennel, pet shop or small animal store shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, and no refuse or waste material shall be allowed to remain thereon for more than twenty-four (24) hours. All animals shall be humanely treated, and any animal having any disease shall be properly isolated and treated. 
(Code 1980, § 15-478)  
Secs. 54-1424—54-1440. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 15. - LAUNDRIES AND LAUNDROMATS[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
State Law reference— Power of city to regulate laundries, 65 ILCS 5/11-42-1. 
 
Sec. 54-1441. - License. 
(a)  Required. No person shall operate or conduct a laundry, including a self-service laundry, in the city without a license; provided that establishments licensed as dry cleaning establishments need not obtain a laundry license in addition to a dry cleaning license. 
(b)  Application. All applications for the license required by the provisions of this division shall be made in writing to the city clerk and shall state thereon the location of the premises intended to be occupied. 
(c)  Fee. The annual fee for laundry licenses shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), and no license shall be issued except upon the payment of the fee. 
(Code 1980, §§ 15-486, 15-487, 15-488; Ord. of 12-27-1973, § 37; Ord. No. 05-50, § 1, 7-28-2005; Ord. No. 05-87, § 1, 12-8-2005)  
Sec. 54-1442. - Inspections. 
It shall be the duty of the chief of police or other official designated by the mayor and council to inspect or cause to be inspected every establishment licensed under this division at least once every six (6) months. Any violation under the terms of this division, which are discovered, shall be reported to the mayor and council. 
(Code 1980, § 15-490)  
Sec. 54-1443. - Sanitation. 
Premises used for laundries must be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. No refuse of any kind shall be permitted to accumulate on such premises, and the premises must be kept free from rats, mice and vermin. It shall be unlawful to employ any person with a venereal or contagious disease in a laundry. 
(Code 1980, § 15-489)  
Secs. 54-1444—54-1470. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 16. - MACHINE SHOPS[17] 

Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
State Law reference— Power of city to regulate machine shops, 65 ILCS 5/11-42-8. 
 
Sec. 54-1471. - Defined. 
The term "machine shop" as used in this division shall be construed to include every workshop in which machines are made or metal parts thereof are repaired, or where parts of machines or tools, implements, gears, dies, screws, or other metal parts thereof are repaired, or where parts of machines or tools, implements, gears, dies, screws or other metal articles are cut, filed, shaped or repaired by means of a lathe or other machinery. 
(Code 1980, § 15-501)  
Sec. 54-1472. - License. 
(a)  Required. No person shall conduct, operate or manage a machine shop in the city without a license; provided, that this section shall not be construed as requiring an additional license for any class of machine specifically licensed under any other provision of this Code. 
(b)  Fee. The annual fee for the license required by this division shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(Code 1980, §§ 15-502, 15-503; Ord. of 12-27-1973, § 38; Ord. No. 05-50, § 1, 7-28-2005; Ord. No. 05-87, § 1, 12-8-2005)  
Sec. 54-1473. - Inspections. 
It shall be the duty of the health commissioner to make such inspections as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1980, § 15-506)  
Sec. 54-1474. - Operating hours. 
No machine shop shall be operated in the nighttime between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. in any place in which a majority of the buildings within a radius of four hundred (400) feet are used exclusively for residential purposes. 
(Code 1980, § 15-504)  
Sec. 54-1475. - Sanitary requirements. 
No building, structure or part thereof used in connection with any machine shop shall be so used as to endanger the health or property of the employees or of the public. The owner, lessee, occupant or manager of any such machine shop shall cause all floors or other surfaces around or beneath any machine or workbench to be kept in good order and repair and shall have suitable and convenient and sanitary receptacles for receiving waste and cloths used in and about the machine shop for the purpose of cleaning machines or parts thereof or which are intended for any other use. No person suffering from any actively contagious or infectious disease shall be employed in or about any machine where cutting compound or fluid is used. All such cutting compound or fluid shall be kept free from harmful or infectious matter. 
(Code 1980, § 15-505)  
Secs. 54-1476—54-1500. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 17. - MOTELS[18] 

Footnotes: 
--- (18) --- 
State Law reference— Power of city to regulate public sleeping accommodations, 65 ILCS 5/11-30-5. 
 
Sec. 54-1501. - Defined. 
The term "motel" as used in this division shall be construed to mean any parking lot or garage for the accommodation of motor vehicles where transient sleeping accommodations are afforded or provided on the same premises for the public or for the occupants of such automobiles; provided that a hotel which furnishes parking space or has a garage in connection with the hotel shall not be construed to be a motel. 
(Code 1980, § 15-515; Ord. of 6-25-1959, § 1)  
Sec. 54-1502. - License. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or operate a motel without a license. 
(b)  Application. Each applicant for a license to operate or maintain a motel shall file an application with the city clerk and shall state thereon the name and address of the applicant, the name and address of the owner or manager thereof, the location of the motel and the maximum number of persons and vehicles to be accommodated. This application shall be accompanied by plans of the motel showing the proposed or existing locations of all buildings, toilet, bath and wash basin facilities, slop sinks, water faucets, sewer connections, driveways and other improvements. 
(c)  Fee. The annual license fee for the license required by this division shall be three hundred dollars ($300.00) for the first unit and thirty dollars ($30.00) for each additional unit. 
(Code 1980, §§ 15-516, 15-517, 15-518; Ord. of 6-25-1959, § 4; Ord. No. 05-50, § 1, 7-28-2005; Ord. No. 05-87, § 1, 12-8-2005)  
Sec. 54-1503. - Inspections. 
The chief of police shall inspect all motels to ensure compliance with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1980, § 15-525; Ord. of 6-25-1959, § 7)  
Sec. 54-1504. - Lights. 
Any area or premises of a motel open to use by the public or by all persons staying at or being accommodated in such motel shall be kept adequately lighted at nighttime; provided that such lights must be so shaded or otherwise regulated so as to prevent them from shining upon any adjacent premises. 
(Code 1980, § 15-520; Ord. of 6-25-1959, § 8)  
Sec. 54-1505. - Sanitation. 
All motels shall be kept clean and sanitary at all times; waste material shall be removed from same at least once every twenty-four (24) hours. 
(Code 1980, § 15-521; Ord. of 6-25-1959, § 7)  
Sec. 54-1506. - Sanitary facilities. 
No motel shall be operated as such unless it is equipped with adequate toilet and other sanitary facilities to serve the total number of persons accommodated therein. All such sanitary facilities shall be properly connected with the sanitary sewer system of the city if the premises are located on a street served by such sewer. 
(Code 1980, § 15-522; Ord. of 6-25-1959, § 6)  
Sec. 54-1507. - Prohibited conduct. 
It shall be unlawful to permit any violation of any ordinance or statute in any motel or to permit any portion of same to be used for immoral purposes. 
(Code 1980, § 15-523; Ord. of 6-25-1959, § 7)  
Sec. 54-1508. - Trailers. 
It shall be unlawful to permit the use of or to use the premises of any motel for the accommodation of a trailer unless all requirements of this Code pertaining to trailer camps are complied with; provided that where a license fee for a trailer camp has been paid, it shall not be necessary to pay an additional fee for the operation of a motel on the same premises. 
(Code 1980, § 15-524)  
Secs. 54-1509—54-1530. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 18. - NURSING HOMES 
 
Sec. 54-1531. - Defined. 
For the purpose of this division, a "home" is hereby defined to mean any institution, place or dwelling house used for the reception or care, for a longer period than twenty-four (24) hours, of three (3) or more children or infants, apart from their parents. A "home" shall further mean any institution used for the reception or care of persons who are dependent or not capable of properly caring for themselves, and shall be understood to include homes for aged or infirm, orphan asylums, refugees and shelters, and also boarding homes caring for three (3) or more women with their children when such children are less than fourteen (14) years of age. 
(Code 1980, § 15-534)  
Sec. 54-1532. - License. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for any person other than the regularly constituted authorities of the United States, the county, the city or of the state or any association or institution for the care of children which has been accredited, certified or licensed by the state, pursuant to an act of the legislature, to regulate the treatment and control of dependent, neglected and delinquent children, to open, conduct, manage or maintain any homes within the corporate limits without a license. 
(b)  Application. Any person desiring the license required by this division shall make application in writing to the city clerk. Such applications shall conform to the general provisions of this Code relating to applications for licenses and shall state the location or proposed location of the home, the purpose for which it is to be opened, conducted or maintained, the accommodations for the inmates thereof, the nature and kind of care, instruction or benefits given or proposed to be given therein, the name and address of the officials conducting, managing or maintaining said home, the name and address of the chief physician, surgeon, or attending physician or surgeon, or the names and addresses of the board of physicians or surgeons attending therein if there is such a board. 
(c)  Fee. The license fee to be paid annually to the clerk for the license required by this division shall be three hundred sixty dollars ($360.00). 
(Code 1980, §§ 15-535, 15-536, 15-537; Ord. of 12-27-1973, § 37; Ord. No. 05-50, § 1, 7-28-2005; Ord. No. 05-87, § 1, 12-8-2005)  
Sec. 54-1533. - Inspections. 
It shall be the duty of the health commissioner, upon presentation of a license application, to make or cause to be made strict inquiry into the facts set out in such application, and if upon inquiry and inspection he shall find that such home complies with all ordinances and statutes relating thereto, he shall recommend to the mayor and city council that a license be issued. 
(Code 1980, § 15-538)  
Sec. 54-1534. - Accommodations for inmates; sanitary regulations. 
(a)  In every home required to be licensed by the provisions of this division, each room occupied or to be occupied by inmates shall be of such dimensions as shall give each inmate not less than four hundred (400) cubic feet of air space. Every such room shall have at least one (1) window connecting with the external air for each four (4) beds. Said windows shall be of such dimensions as shall secure to each inmate at least one thousand five hundred (1,500) cubic feet of fresh air per hour by ventilation; or in case said window shall not secure one thousand five hundred (1,500) cubic feet of fresh air per hour by natural ventilation, then each room shall in addition thereto be fitted with such appliances for ventilation as shall secure to each inmate in said room at least one thousand five hundred (1,500) cubic feet of fresh air per hour. Each bed shall have at least forty (40) square feet of floor space, and in every room or dormitory containing more than one (1) bed the beds shall be so arranged as to leave a passageway of not less than two (2) feet horizontally on all sides of each bed. 
(b)  Each ward or wing in said home shall have running water furnished in one (1) or more places, either in said ward or convenient thereto so that the same may be adequate and convenient to the occupants thereof. The plumbing, water closets, bathrooms and other sanitary appliances and equipment shall be constructed in accordance with the ordinances relating thereto. The floor of cellar or basement in the building used as a home shall be properly cemented so as to be watertight. 
(c)  The halls of each floor shall be open to the external air with suitable windows, and shall have no room or other obstruction at either end thereof, unless sufficient light and ventilation is otherwise provided for such halls, and the building as a whole shall be provided with adequate and proper fire escapes, stairways or inclines for exits. 
(d)  All homes, including the culinary department, dining rooms, laundry, laboratory, morgue and post-mortem rooms connected with the same, shall be equipped from May fifteenth to November fifteenth with doors, screens and other appliances necessary for the exclusion of flies. 
(Code 1980, § 15-539)  
Sec. 54-1535. - Closing or vacating pending compliance. 
In the event of a conviction of any person for a violation of any of the provisions of this division relating to the safety and accommodations of inmates, it shall be the duty of the health commissioner to close such home and to cause its vacation pending the repairs, alterations or additions necessary to make it safe and proper for the occupancy of its inmates and to make it comply with the terms of this division. 
(Code 1980, § 15-540)  
Secs. 54-1536—54-1560. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 19. - PAINT, DRUG AND CHEMICAL FACTORIES 
 
Sec. 54-1561. - Defined. 
The term "paint, drug or chemical factory" as used in this division shall be construed to mean and include any premises or establishment where soda, soda ash, sal soda, bicarbonate of soda, caustic soda, alcohol, ether, essential oils, carbonic acid gas, chlorine, aniline, perfumes, coal tar chemicals, inks, dyes, bluing, boiler compounds, disinfectants, cleaning compounds, explosives, photographic chemicals, glycerine, proprietary or patent medicines, paints, linseed oil, shellac, varnish, enamels or other chemicals, drugs or preparations containing any of the foregoing are made, mixed, compounded, purified or prepared for sale or for commercial or industrial use. 
(Code 1980, § 15-547)  
Sec. 54-1562. - License. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful to operate a paint, drug or chemical factory as defined in this article without a license. 
(b)  Application. Applications for a license required by this division shall be made in compliance with the general provisions relating to licenses, and each such application shall state whether or not a certificate of occupancy has been issued covering the premises and use contemplated. 
(c)  Fee. The annual fee for a license required by this division shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(Code 1980, §§ 15-548, 15-549, 15-550; Ord. of 12-27-1973, § 40; Ord. No. 05-50, § 1, 7-28-2005; Ord. No. 05-87, § 1, 12-8-2005)  
Sec. 54-1563. - Inspections. 
It shall be the duty of the chief of police to make or cause to be made such inspections as may be necessary to enforce the provisions of this Code applicable to the premises required to be licensed by this division. 
(Code 1980, § 15-552)  
Sec. 54-1564. - Sanitation. 
All premises required by this division to be licensed shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, and shall be thoroughly cleaned of all dirt, refuse and debris at least once every twenty-four (24) hours. Each building, or part thereof, used for such purposes shall be adequately equipped with devices to remove and eliminate all fumes, odors and dust. Adequate and convenient washing and toilet facilities for employees shall be provided. 
(Code 1980, § 15-551)  
Secs. 54-1565—54-1590. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 20. - PARKING LOTS[19] 

Footnotes: 
--- (19) --- 
State Law reference— Power of city to license and regulate parking lots, 65 ILCS 5/11-42-12. 
 
Sec. 54-1591. - Defined. 
The term "parking lot" as used in this division shall be construed to mean and include any place maintained for the outdoor parking of cars, excepting on a street, alley or other public place, where such parking is permitted upon the payment of compensation or is made available to patrons or customers of any places of business. 
(Code 1980, § 15-561)  
Sec. 54-1592. - Permit. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a parking lot without a permit. 
(b)  Application. Applications for the permit required by this division shall be made in writing to the city clerk and shall contain all necessary information to ensure compliance with the provisions of this division, including a description of the location, size, number of cars to be accommodated, and a statement of any services other than parking, or of any commodities for sale, offered to patrons of the parking lot. 
(c)  Fee. The annual fee for the permit required by this division shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(Code 1980, §§ 15-562, 15-563, 15-564; Ord. of 12-27-1973, § 41; Ord. No. 05-50, § 1, 7-28-2005; Ord. No. 05-87, § 1, 12-8-2005)  
Sec. 54-1593. - Location restrictions. 
No parking lot shall be established or operated in any place where such establishment or operation would be in violation of any ordinance pertaining thereto. 
(Code 1980, § 15-565)  
Sec. 54-1594. - Prohibited use. 
It shall be unlawful to use any parking lot for storage or for sale or to use any parking lot or portion thereof as an automobile repair shop. 
(Code 1980, § 15-566)  
Sec. 54-1595. - Surface. 
It shall be unlawful to operate a parking lot unless the surface thereof is covered with concrete, asphalt, macadam or similar paving; and such parking lot shall at all times be kept clean and free from dust or refuse. 
(Code 1980, § 15-567)  
Sec. 54-1596. - Driveways. 
No driveway to a parking lot shall be constructed excepting in full compliance with this Code relative to the issuance of permits for driveways; it shall be the duty of the operator of each parking lot to maintain the sidewalk and parkway over which such driveway passes in good condition. 
(Code 1980, § 15-568)  
Sec. 54-1597. - Markings; minimum exits. 
Each parking lot shall be marked so as to show the parking place allotted each car, and shall have sufficient entrances and exits to permit the entrance and egress of cars without obstruction to traffic. 
(Code 1980, § 15-569)  
Sec. 54-1598. - Capacity. 
Not more than one (1) car for each two hundred (200) square feet of area shall be accepted for parking in any parking lot. 
(Code 1980, § 15-570)  
Sec. 54-1599. - Buildings. 
Any buildings constructed on a parking lot shall be constructed in full compliance with the ordinances pertaining thereto, and shall have exterior walls of nonflammable material, provided, that any structure used or to be used for office purposes only may have less than the minimum area requirements prescribed for residences or commercial buildings. 
(Code 1980, § 15-571)  
Sec. 54-1600. - Rates; attendants. 
At the entrance of each parking lot there shall be posted in words and figures large enough to be read by prospective patrons a statement of the rates to be charged and of the closing hours. There shall be at least one (1) attendant on the premises at all times during which the parking lot is open for business. 
(Code 1980, § 15-573)  
Sec. 54-1601. - Condition of vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful to park or store in any parking lot, any vehicle which is not in a condition ready for use, or to permit the parking of any abandoned, junked or partially disabled vehicle in any such lot. 
(Code 1980, § 15-574)  
Sec. 54-1602. - Intoxicating liquors. 
It shall be unlawful to serve intoxicating liquor for consumption in any car parked in a parking lot, and it shall be unlawful for any person in a car parked in a parking lot to drink any intoxicating liquor while therein. 
(Code 1980, § 15-575)  
Sec. 54-1603. - Sanitation, trash containers. 
If a parking lot is maintained in connection with a licensed establishment serving food for consumption on the premises, and food and drinks are served to occupants of cars, sufficient and adequate containers must be maintained for all trash and refuse, and the premises must be kept thoroughly clean by the proprietor. 
(Code 1980, § 15-576)  
Sec. 54-1604. - Other business. 
If any business other than that of operating a parking lot is conducted on the same premises with a parking lot, such business shall be conducted in full compliance with all ordinances pertinent thereto; and any license required for the operation of such business must be obtained and the fee therefor required must be paid. 
(Code 1980, § 15-577)  
Secs. 54-1605—54-1620. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 21. - PAWNBROKERS 
 
Sec. 54-1621. - Restrictions. 
The number of pawnbrokers permitted within the city limits of the city shall be limited to one (1) per eight thousand five hundred (8,500) residents. 
(Code 1980, § 15-583; Ord. No. 98-5, § 1, 2-12-1998; Ord. No. 11-60, § 2, 10-27-2011)  
Sec. 54-1622. - License. 
(a)  Required. No person shall conduct or operate the business of pawnbroker without a license. 
(b)  Application. Applications for pawnbroker's licenses shall be made to the city clerk and shall state thereon the name of the applicant, the place of business and the number of employees indented to be engaged. The chief of police or any other officer of the city designated by the mayor and council shall investigate each applicant for such license, and shall report back whether or not such applicant is a person of good character. No license shall be issued to a person who has been convicted of the offense of receiving stolen goods or of burglary or robbery. 
(c)  Fee. The annual fee to be paid for a pawnbroker's license shall be three thousand five hundred dollars ($3,500.00), and this fee shall be payable in advance, and no license shall be issued until the fee is paid. 
(d)  Revocation. The mayor and city council may revoke any pawnbroker's license for any violation of any of the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1980, §§ 15-584, 15-585, 15-586, 15-587; Ord. No. 05-50, § 1, 7-28-2005; Ord. No. 05-87, § 1, 12-8-2005; Ord. No. 11-60, § 2, 10-27-2011)  
Sec. 54-1623. - Records. 
Every pawnbroker doing business in the city shall keep a record of every article pledged with him or sold to him, and this record shall be open to the inspection of any police officer at any time during normal business hours. 
(Code 1980, § 15-588)  
Sec. 54-1624. - Minors. 
No pawnbroker's license shall be issued to any person who is not eighteen (18) years of age or over; no pawnbroker shall employ a person of less than eighteen (18) years of age to assist him in his business. No pawnbroker shall have any business dealings as pawnbroker with any person less than eighteen (18) years of age, except with the written consent of the parent or guardian of the minor to each particular transaction. 
(Code 1980, § 15-589) 
State Law reference— Authority, 65 ILCS 5/11-42-3.  
Sec. 54-1625. - Weapons. 
No pawnbroker shall receive as a pledge or purchase any revolver, pistol, blackjack or sawed-off shotgun, and no pawnbroker shall display in his window or shop any such weapons for sale. 
(Code 1980, § 15-590)  
Sec. 54-1626. - Stolen or lost goods. 
It shall be the duty of every pawnbroker to report to the police any article pledged to him, if he shall have reason to believe that the article was stolen or lost, and found by the person attempting to pledge it in the case of a lost article. 
(Code 1980, § 15-591)  
Sec. 54-1627. - Secondhand dealers. 
No pawnbroker shall conduct the business of a secondhand dealer without having obtained the license required for such dealer in addition to his pawnbroker's license. 
(Code 1980, § 15-592)  
Secs. 54-1628—54-1650. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 22. - PUBLIC GARAGES[20] 

Footnotes: 
--- (20) --- 
State Law reference— Power of city to license and regulate parking garages, 65 ILCS 5/11-42-12. 
 
Sec. 54-1651. - License. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain a public garage in the city without a license. 
(b)  Application. An application for a license required by this division shall be made to the city clerk, in writing, and shall state the location of the garage and the number of cars which can be accommodated therein. 
(c)  Fee. The annual fee for the license required by this division shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(Code 1980, §§ 15-601, 15-602, 15-603; Ord. of 12-27-1973, § 43; Ord. No. 05-50, § 1, 7-28-2005; Ord. No. 05-87, § 1, 12-8-2005)  
Sec. 54-1652. - Inspections. 
It shall be the duty of the chief of police and the fire marshal to make or cause to be made such inspections of public garages as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this division. Any police officer may be permitted at any reasonable time to view any car stored or kept in any public garage, and it shall be unlawful to hinder any such inspection or to conceal any motorcar or motor vehicle from inspection. 
(Code 1980, § 15-607)  
Sec. 54-1653. - Premises. 
It shall be unlawful to maintain or operate any public garage in a frame building, or in any building or structure used for school, church or theater purposes, or in any building which does not conform to the requirements of the building ordinances. The premises of every garage must be kept clean and free from flammable waste. 
(Code 1980, § 15-604)  
Sec. 54-1654. - Changing identification marks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to change the identification marks on the engine of any car or automobile in any public garage. And it shall be unlawful to change the license tags on such cars, excepting in accord with the register of motor vehicles kept by the secretary of state. 
(Code 1980, § 15-605)  
Sec. 54-1655. - Smoking. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke or light a cigarette, pipe or cigar in any public garage. 
(Code 1980, § 15-606)  
Secs. 54-1656—54-1680. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 23. - REAL ESTATE AND INSURANCE BROKERS 
 
Sec. 54-1681. - License. 
(a)  Required. No person shall operate as a broker of real estate or insurance without a license; provided that this section shall not be construed to require an additional broker's license from employees of a licensed broker. 
(b)  Application. Applications for real estate or insurance broker's license shall be made in writing to the city clerk, and no such license shall be issued to a person who is not of good character, and it shall be the duty of the clerk to cause or make such an investigation into the character of such applicant. 
(c)  Fee. The annual fee for a real estate or insurance broker's license shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(Code 1980, §§ 15-616, 15-617, 15-618; Ord. of 12-27-1973, § 24; Ord. No. 05-50, § 1, 7-28-2005; Ord. No. 05-87, § 1, 12-8-2005)  
Sec. 54-1682. - Fraud. 
It shall be unlawful for any person operating as a real estate or insurance broker to practice fraud or deception of any sort or to make false pretenses of any kind or to represent both parties to a transaction without the consent and knowledge of both parties. 
(Code 1980, § 15-619)  
Secs. 54-1683—54-1700. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 24. - TOBACCO DEALERS[21] 

Footnotes: 
--- (21) --- 
State Law reference— Power of city to regulate tobacco, 65 ILCS 5/11-20-3. 
 
Sec. 54-1701. - Penalty. 
The violation of section 54-1704 or 54-1705 shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00); and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. A second or subsequent violation of section 54-1704 or 54-1705 may subject a licensee to a suspension or revocation of the license. 
(Code 1980, § 15-631; Ord. No. 96-48, § 1, 7-25-1996; Ord. No. 12-3, § 2, 2-9-2012)  
Sec. 54-1702. - License. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful to engage in the sale at retail of cigarettes, cigars or tobacco in any form without a license. 
(b)  Application. Applications for licenses required by the provisions of this division shall be made to the city clerk and no such license shall be issued to any person who is not a person of good character or to any corporation that is not represented in the city by a person of good character. 
(c)  Fee. The annual fee for the license required by this division shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(d)  Suspension or revocation. 
(1)  The mayor shall be charged with the administration of this division. The mayor may suspend or revoke any license issued under the provision of this division; if he determines that the licensee has violated any of the provisions of this division. However, no such license shall be suspended or revoked and no licensee shall be fined except after a public hearing by the mayor with a seven (7) day written notice to the licensee affording the licensee an opportunity to appear and defend against the charges contained in such notice. The seven (7) day notice provisions shall begin the day following delivery by certified mail or by personal service. 
(2)  The mayor shall within seven (7) days after such hearing, if he determines after such hearing that the license should be revoked or suspended, or that the licensee should be fined, state the reason for such determination in a written order and state either the amount of the fine, the period of suspension or the revocation of the license and serve a copy of such order within the seven (7) days upon the licensee. 
(3)  Any licensee determined by the mayor to have violated any of the provisions of this division shall pay to the city the costs of the hearing before the mayor on such violation. The mayor shall determine the costs incurred by the city for said hearing, including, but not limited to: court reporters' fees, the costs of transcripts or records, attorneys' fees the cost of preparing and mailing notices and orders and all other miscellaneous expenses incurred by the city or such less sum as the mayor may allow. 
(4)  The licensee shall pay said costs to the city within thirty (30) days of notification of the costs by the mayor. Failure to pay said costs within thirty (30) days of notification is a violation of this division and may be cause for license suspension or revocation, or the levy of a fine. 
(5)  When any license shall have been revoked for any cause, no license shall be granted to said licensee for the period of six (6) months thereafter for the conduct of the business of selling tobacco products in the premises described in such revoked license. 
(Code 1980, §§ 15-626, 15-627, 15-628, 15-632, 15-633; Ord. No. 96-48, § 1, 7-25-1996; Ord. No. 05-50, § 1, 7-28-2005; Ord. No. 05-87, § 1, 12-8-2005)  
Sec. 54-1703. - Sanitation. 
Premises and buildings used for the sale of cigarettes, cigars and tobacco shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition; the health commissioner shall investigate such places sufficiently often to ensure compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1980, § 15-629)  
Sec. 54-1704. - Prohibited sales to minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any retail tobacco dealer licensee or any officer, director, manager, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee, to sell, offer for sale, buy for, give away, furnish, or deliver tobacco products to persons under the age of eighteen (18) years. Unlawful acts constituting a violation of this provision by an officer, director, manager, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of any licensee shall be deemed and held to be the act of such licensee; and such licensee shall be punishable in the same manner as if such act has been done by the licensee personally. 
(Code 1980, § 15-630; Ord. No. 96-48, § 1, 7-25-1996)  
Sec. 54-1705. - Sale of single or loose cigarettes prohibited; license revocation. 
(a)  The sale or distribution by any person, whether a minor or not, of a tobacco product, including, but not limited to, a single or loose cigarette that is not contained within a sealed container, pack or package as provided by the manufacturer, which container, pack or package bears the health warning required by federal law is prohibited. 
(b)  If any officer, director, manager, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of a licensee is found guilty of violating a provision of this section, such unlawful act shall be deemed and held to be the act of such licensee; as if such act has been done by the licensee in the course of the licensee's business and shall be grounds for the suspension or revocation of licensee's license, as herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 12-3, § 2, 2-9-2012)  
Secs. 54-1706—54-1730. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 25. - TATTOO AND BODY PIERCING PARLORS 
 
Sec. 54-1731. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this division, the following words shall have their given meanings: 
Animal means every living creature, domestic or wild, but does not include human beings. 
Aseptic technique means a practice that prevents and hinders the transmission of disease-producing microorganisms from one (1) person or place to another person or place. 
Body piercing means the puncturing of skin for the purpose of inserting items of decoration, including, but not limited to, jewelry. Piercing of the ears shall not be considered body piercing. 
Body piercing artist means an individual who performs body piercing. 
Facial tattoo means any tattoo applied above the jawline, anterior to the ear and frontal hairline, including the eyelids, eyebrows or lips. 
Physician means a person licensed to practice medicine and all its branches under the Medical Practice Act of 1987. 
Tattoo means any permanent marks, designs, letters or numerals affixed upon a person by puncturing the skin and inserting indelible colors therein. 
Tattoo artist means an individual who practices tattooing or body piercing. 
Tattoo and/or body piercing parlor means any premises where a tattoo artist practices tattooing and shall also include premises where body piercing is performed. 
(Code 1980, § 15-650; Ord. No. 95-52, § 1, 9-28-1995; Ord. 97-62, §§ 1—3, 10-23-1997)  
Sec. 54-1732. - Penalty for violation. 
The violation of any provision of this division shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a term of imprisonment up to six (6) months or a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or both. 
(Code 1980, § 15-661; Ord. No. 95-52, § 1, 9-28-1995)  
Sec. 54-1733. - License. 
(a)  Required; fee. No person shall operate a tattoo and/or body piercing parlor in the city without first obtaining a license therefor in accordance with the licensing provisions of chapter 54, article II, of this Code. The annual license fee for each tattoo and/or body piercing parlor shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). The annual license fee for each tattoo artist shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00). 
(b)  Investigation of premises. In addition to the application procedures outlined in chapter 54, article II of this Code, the premises intended to be used as a tattoo and/or body piercing parlor shall be investigated by the city health authority or his designee for the purpose of determining the fitness and suitability of said premises for the conduct of such business from a sanitary standpoint, and as to whether the applicant has complied with any applicable state laws and provisions of this Code regulating health, sanitation and safety so as to safeguard properly the lives and health of the persons tattooing or being tattooed. The city health authority or his designee may, from time to time, at his own discretion, but not less than once each year upon renewal of the license, investigate or cause to be made an investigation of the licensed premises in order to assure its clean and sanitary condition. Every tattoo and/or body piercing parlor shall at all times be open to inspection by the city health authority or his designee whenever and as often as he/she deems proper. 
(c)  Denial, suspension, revocation, nonrenewal of licenses. A license may be suspended, revoked or the renewal of a license may be denied for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Violation of any of the provisions of this division; 
(2)  Conviction of an applicant or licensee of an offense arising from false, fraudulent, deceptive, or misleading advertising. The record of conviction or a certified copy shall be conclusive evidence of the conviction. 
(3)  Aiding or abetting an unlicensed person, knowingly combining or conspiring with an unlicensed person, allowing one's license to be used by an unlicensed person, or acting as agent or associate of an unlicensed person, in order to enable the unlicensed person to evade the restrictions on use of title imposed by this division. Upon denial of an application, refusal to renew a license, suspension of a license or revocation of a license, the city clerk shall notify the applicant in writing. The notice shall specify the charges or reasons for the contemplated action. If a license is suspended or revoked and such suspension or revocation is disputed by the licenseholder, the licenseholder must request a hearing within ten (10) days of receipt of the notice. Failure to request a hearing within ten (10) days shall constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing. 
(d)  Conduct of hearing. 
(1)  Upon suspension or revocation of a license, should a licenseholder request a hearing, such hearing shall be conducted by the city health authority or an individual designated in writing by the city health authority as a hearing officer. The city health authority or hearing officer may compel by subpoena or subpoena duces tecum the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of books and papers and administer oaths to witnesses. The hearing shall be conducted at a place designated by the city health authority or hearing officer. The procedures governing hearings in the issuance of final decisions under this division shall be in accordance with rules adopted by the permits and licenses committee of the city council. 
(2)  All subpoenas issued by the city health authority or hearing officer may be served as provided for in civil actions. The fees for witnesses for attendance and travel shall be the same as the fees for witnesses before the circuit court and shall be paid by the party to the proceedings at whose request the subpoena is issued. If a subpoena is issued at the request of the city health authority or hearing officer, the witness fee shall be paid as an administrative expense. 
(3)  In cases of refusal of a witness to attend or testify or to produce books or papers concerning any matter upon which he might be lawfully examined, the circuit court of the county wherein the hearing is held, upon application of any party to the proceeding, may compel obedience by proceeding as for contempt as in cases of a like refusal to obey a similar order of the court. 
(4)  The city health authority or hearing officer shall make findings of fact and conclusions of law in a hearing, and the city health authority shall render his decision, or the hearing officer his proposal for decision within forty-five (45) days after the termination of the hearing. A copy of the final decision shall be served upon the applicant or licensee in person or by certified mail. 
(e)  Surrender of license. Upon the revocation of a license, a licenseholder shall be required to surrender the license to city health authority and upon his failure or refusal to do so, the city health authority shall have the right to seize the same. 
(f)  Appeal. All final administrative decisions of the city health authority under this division may be appealed for review by the city council. If the city council concurs with the decision of the city health authority, such decision shall be subject to judicial review under the provisions of Article 3 of the Code of Civil Procedure. 
(Code 1980, §§ 15-651, 15-659, 15-660; Ord. No. 95-52, § 1, 9-28-1995; Ord. No. 05-50, § 1, 7-28-2005; Ord. No. 05-87, § 1, 12-8-2005)  
Sec. 54-1734. - Restrictions. 
(a)  A tattoo artist shall be twenty-one (21) years of age prior to being issued a valid license. 
(b)  No tattoo artist shall practice tattooing in any place other than a tattoo and/or body piercing parlor having a valid license. 
(c)  No tattoo artist shall apply a tattoo to or pierce the body of any person who appears to be or admits to being under the influence of intoxicating substances, including, but not limited to, alcohol, drugs, paints and glues, nor shall any tattoo artist practice his trade while in an intoxicated state. 
(d)  No tattoo artist shall apply a tattoo in violation of Section 1210 of the Criminal Code of 1961 (720 ILCS 5/12-10), which states that "any person, other than a person licensed to practice medicine in all its branches, who tattoos or offers to tattoo a person under the age of twenty-one (21) is guilty of a Class C misdemeanor." 
(e)  The number of tattoo parlors permitted within the city limits of the city shall be limited to one (1) per ten thousand (10,000) residents. 
(Code 1980, § 15-652; Ord. No. 95-52, § 1, 9-28-1995; Ord. No. 97-62, §§ 3, 4, 10-23-1997; Ord. No. 95-57, § 1, 10-9-1997)  
Sec. 54-1735. - Tattooing procedure. 
(a)  The tattoo artist shall explain the following to each client before a tattoo application: 
(1)  The application procedure; 
(2)  Possible tissue reactions following application; 
(3)  Importance of after application care. 
(b)  The tattoo and/or body piercing parlor license holder shall maintain proper records of each client. The records shall include the following: 
(1)  The date on which the tattoo was applied; 
(2)  The name, address and age of the client; 
(3)  The design and location of the tattoo; 
(4)  The name of the tattoo artist; 
(5)  The signature of the client; 
(6)  The manufacturer, dye lot and expiration date of the dye or pigment injected into the client. 
(c)  The information required in subsection (b) of this section shall be permanently recorded in a bound book that shall be made available for examination by the city health authority or his designee and shall be kept in the tattoo and/or body piercing parlor for at least two (2) years following the date of the last entry. 
(d)  All tattoo artists shall comply with the following: 
(1)  All tattoo artists shall wash their hands, using good mechanical action with soap or detergent and warm water, and shall dry their hands using clean single service or single use towels or other approved method immediately before and after tattooing; 
(2)  The area of the client's skin to be tattooed shall be adequately cleaned. Shaving, if done, shall be performed with a single service razor; 
(3)  Before placing the design on the client's skin, the tattoo artist shall treat the skin area with seventy (70) percent alcohol or other effective germicidal solution which shall be applied using aseptic technique; 
(4)  If petroleum jelly or other substances are used in applying stencil designs to the skin, they shall be dispensed from collapsible metal or plastic tubes; 
(5)  Reusable stencils for transferring the design to the skin shall be thoroughly cleansed and sanitized after each use; 
(6)  Only sterilized needles and tubes or tips, in good condition, shall be used for tattooing; 
(7)  Single service or individual portions or dyes or pigments in sterilized containers or single service containers shall be used for each client. After tattooing, the remaining unused dyes or pigments in the single service or individual containers shall be discarded; 
(8)  Immediately after tattooing, the tattoo artist shall advise the client on the care of the tattoo and instruct the client to consult a physician at the first sign of infection. 
(Code 1980, § 15-653; Ord. No. 95-52, § 1, 9-28-1995; Ord. No. 97-62, § 3, 10-23-1997)  
Sec. 54-1736. - Sterilization procedure. 
(a)  After each use, needles and assemblies shall be cleansed to remove protein residue (blood and tissue) and sterilized. 
(b)  One of the following methods of sterilization shall be used: 
(1)  Autoclave—Steam under pressure. 
a.  One hundred twenty (120) degrees Celsius (two hundred fifty (250) degrees Fahrenheit) for not less than thirty (30) minutes after the chamber of the autoclave has been evacuated of air and has reached temperature; or 
b.  As specified in the manufacturer's operator's manual. 
(2)  Dry heat sterilization (for steel tubing only): 
a.  One hundred seventy (170) degrees Celsius (three hundred thirty-eight (338) degrees Fahrenheit) for not less than two (2) hours after the sterilizer has reached temperature; or 
b.  As specified in the manufacturer's operator's manual. 
(c)  Sterilization shall be monitored by the use of chemical and heat-sensitive (color change) indicators with each batch of equipment sterilized. 
(d)  Sterilized equipment shall be stored, wrapped, or covered in a manner that ensures the equipment will remain sterile until used. 
(e)  Sterile equipment, stored in an approved manner and not used within thirty (30) days after sterilization, shall no longer be considered sterile and shall be resterilized before use. 
(Code 1980, § 15-654; Ord. No. 95-52, § 1, 9-28-1995)  
Sec. 54-1737. - Facial tattoo. 
Application of facial tattoos is prohibited except by a physician. 
(Code 1980, § 15-655; Ord. No. 95-52, § 1, 9-28-1995)  
Sec. 54-1738. - Sanitation requirements for tattoo parlors. 
(a)  The tattooing and waiting area shall be separated by a solid partition or barrier that prevents unauthorized entry into the tattooing area. 
(b)  The shop shall be maintained in a sanitary condition. 
(c)  The walls and ceiling shall be easily cleanable, smooth, durable, and light colored. All walls and ceilings shall be kept clean and in good repair. 
(d)  Tattooing area floors and floor coverings shall be constructed of materials that are smooth, durable, nonabsorbent, and easily cleanable. All floors shall be kept clean and in good repair. 
(e)  Adequate lighting shall be provided. 
(f)  Adequate ventilation shall be provided. 
(g)  Each tattoo and/or body piercing parlor shall be provided with a sink at the work station for the exclusive use of the tattoo artist for handwashing and preparing the client for tattooing. 
(h)  Animals shall not be permitted in the tattoo and/or body piercing parlor, except for guide or service animals accompanying persons with disabilities. 
(i)  Smoking and the use of tobacco in any form shall be prohibited in the tattooing room. 
(j)  Any other business or dwelling shall be completely separated from the tattoo and/or body piercing parlor by at least a solid partition from the floor to the ceiling. 
(Code 1980, § 15-656; Ord. No. 95-52, § 1, 9-28-1995; Ord. No. 97-62, § 3, 10-23-1997)  
Sec. 54-1739. - Equipment. 
(a)  Needles, tubes and tips shall be constructed in a manner that permits easy cleaning and sterilization. 
(b)  Needles and assemblies designed to be disposable shall be used one (1) time, on one (1) person only, and then discarded. 
(c)  All dyes and pigments used in tattooing shall be nontoxic, free from adulteration, and made from materials generally regarded as safe. 
(d)  Each tattoo artist shall be provided with adequate storage cabinets for the exclusive storage of instruments, dyes, pigments, carbon, stencils and other paraphernalia used in the parlor. 
(Code 1980, § 15-657; Ord. No. 95-52, § 1, 9-28-1995)  
Sec. 54-1740. - Disposal of infectious waste. 
Used tattoo needles and other infectious waste shall be stored, treated and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of Title XV of the Environmental Protection Act, which regulates the management and disposal of infectious waste. 
(Code 1980, § 15-658; Ord. No. 95-52, § 1, 9-28-1995)  
Sec. 54-1741. - Body piercing procedure. 
(a)  The tattoo artist or body piercing artist shall explain the following to each client before a body piercing procedure: 
(1)  The piercing procedure; 
(2)  Possible tissue reactions following the procedure; 
(3)  The importance of after-procedure care. 
(b)  The tattoo and/or body piercing parlor licenseholder shall maintain proper records of each client. The records shall include the following: 
(1)  The date on which the body piercing procedure was performed; 
(2)  The name and address of the client; 
(3)  The location of the body piercing; 
(4)  The name of the tattoo artist. 
(c)  The information required in subsection (b) of this section shall be permanently recorded in a bound book that shall be available for examination by the city healthaAuthority or his designee and shall be kept in the tattoo and/or body piercing parlor for at least two (2) years following the date of the last entry. 
(d)  All tattoo artists or body piercing artists shall comply with the following: 
(1)  All tattoo/body piercing artists shall wash their hands, using good mechanical action with soap or detergent and warm water, and shall dry their hands using clean single service or single use towels or other approved method immediately before and after body piercing; 
(2)  The area of the client's skin to be pierced shall be adequately cleaned. Shaving, if done, shall be performed with a single service razor; 
(3)  Before piercing the client's skin, the tattoo artist shall treat the skin area with seventy (70) percent alcohol or other effective germicidal solution which shall be applied using aseptic technique; 
(4)  All needles, piercing guns or other tools used in the piercing procedure shall be sterilized before use; 
(5)  Immediately after body piercing, the tattoo/body piercing artist shall advise the client on the care of the pierced area and instruct the client to consult a physician at the first sign of infection. 
(e)  No body piercing artist shall pierce the body of any person who appears to be or admits to being under the influence of intoxicating substances, including, but not limited to, alcohol, drugs, paints and glues, nor shall any body piercing artist perform his trade while in an intoxicated state. 
(Code 1980, § 15-662; Ord. No. 97-62, § 5, 10-23-1997)  
Secs. 54-1742—54-1760. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 26. - UNDERTAKERS 
 
Sec. 54-1761. - License. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful to maintain an undertaking establishment or to engage in business as a mortician within the city without a license. 
(b)  Fee. The annual fee for the license required by this division shall be two hundred forty dollars ($240.00). 
(Code 1980, §§ 15-638, 15-639; Ord. of 12-27-1973, § 31; Ord. No. 05-50, § 1, 7-28-2005; Ord. No. 05-87, § 1, 12-8-2005)  
Sec. 54-1762. - Compliance with state law. 
Every person maintaining an undertaking establishment or engaging in business as an undertaker or mortician within the city shall maintain such establishment and conduct such business in strict compliance with all state laws. 
(Code 1980, § 15-642)  
Sec. 54-1763. - Notices to police. 
It shall be the duty of every undertaker to notify the police department whenever a body is brought to him or turned over to him for his services. 
(Code 1980, § 15-641)  
Sec. 54-1764. - Exhibitions of bodies. 
It shall be unlawful for any undertaker to permit his establishment to be used for the exhibition of the body of any deceased person to the public, other than friends and relatives of the deceased. 
(Code 1980, § 15-640)  
Secs. 54-1765—54-1790. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 27. - USED MOTOR VEHICLE SALES LOTS[22] 

Footnotes: 
--- (22) --- 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 09-2, adopted Jan. 8, 2009, amended div. 27 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former div. 27 consisted of §§ 54-1791—54-1794, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the 1980 Code; and Ord. No. 99-23, adopted Mar. 11, 1999. 
 
Sec. 54-1791. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, and the interpretation and application thereof, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein, unless the context in which they are used shall indicate otherwise. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the singular number include the plural number and words in the plural number include the singular number. Words or phrases not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Used motor vehicle sales lot means a business displaying five (5) or more used motor vehicles for the purpose of wholesale or retail sale to the general public. 
Used motor vehicle means every motor vehicle which has been sold, bargained, exchanged, given away, or title transferred from the person who first acquired it from the manufacturer or importer, dealer or agent of the manufacturer or importer and so used as to have become what is commonly known as "second hand" within the ordinary meaning thereof. 
(Ord. No. 09-2, § 2, 1-8-2009)  
Sec. 54-1792. - License required. 
No person, firm, association, partnership or corporation shall establish, maintain, conduct or operate any used motor vehicle sales lot in violation of any of the provisions contained in this article and without having first obtained a license as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 09-2, § 2, 1-8-2009)  
Sec. 54-1793. - State licensing required; compliance with state law. 
Any person, firm, association, corporation or partnership applying for or holding a Used Motor Vehicle Sales Lot license, pursuant to this Article, must also hold a license to operate from the State of Illinois, whenever such license is required pursuant to the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/5-100, et seq., or pursuant to any other licensing provision of the State of Illinois and must show that such state license is current and active. In addition, any person, firm, association, corporation or partnership operating a used motor vehicle sales lot within the city must at all times be in full compliance with all laws, rules and regulations of the State of Illinois pertaining to the operation of a used motor vehicle sales lot. Failure to achieve and maintain full compliance with all laws, rules and regulations shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 09-2, § 2, 1-8-2009)  
Sec. 54-1794. - License application and issuance; fee. 
(a)  Application for a used motor vehicle sales lot license shall be made to the city clerk on such form as prescribed and furnished by the city clerk. The application shall identify the State of Illinois license number and shall be accompanied by good and sufficient proof of compliance with all State of Illinois licensing laws pertaining to a used motor vehicle sales lot. 
(b)  The annual fee for the license required by this article shall be two-hundred forty dollars and no cents ($240.00). 
(Ord. No. 09-2, § 2, 1-8-2008)  
Sec. 54-1795. - Term of license. 
See section 54-38 of the Municipal Code of the City of Calumet City. 
(Ord. No. 09-2, § 2, 1-8-2009)  
Sec. 54-1796. - License regulations. 
Every used motor vehicle sales lot shall be maintained and operated in accordance with the statutes of the State of Illinois as well as the regulations of the Municipal Code and Zoning Ordinance of the City, as from time to time supplemented and amended. A used motor vehicle sales lot operating before the effective date of this article, which does not conform to the requirement of the zoning ordinance shall be exempt from said requirement provided that such used motor vehicle sales lot is not enlarged, extended, reconstructed, structurally altered or changed to a different use, unless modified to conform with the provisions of the zoning ordinance to the fullest extent. 
(Ord. No. 09-2, § 2, 1-8-2009)  
Sec. 54-1797. - License transfer. 
See section 54-40 of the Municipal Code of the City of Calumet City. 
(Ord. No. 09-2, § 2, 1-8-2009)  
Sec. 54-1798. - Display of used motor vehicle, exception. 
No used motor vehicle shall be displayed for sale on any property within the city unless it is displayed on a used motor vehicle sales lot. This article shall not apply to a homeowner or lessee displaying a personally owned used motor vehicle for sale on the residential property on which that homeowner or lessee lawfully resides, excepting that only one (1) such Used Motor Vehicle shall be displayed at any one (1) time. 
(Ord. No. 09-2, § 2, 1-8-2009)  
Sec. 54-1799. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person, firm, association, partnership or corporation violating any provision of this article shall be fined not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. Every day that a violation exists constitutes a separate offense. 
(b)  Proceedings to enforce violations of this article may be initiated and conducted in accordance with and pursuant to the provisions of the Municipal Code of the City providing for administrative adjudication of Code violations or by any other means provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 09-2, § 2, 1-8-2009)  
Secs. 54-1800—54-1820. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - GARAGE SALES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 54-1821. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given in this section: 
Garage sale shall mean and include all general sales, open to the public, conducted from or on a residential premises in any residential zone, as defined by the zoning ordinance, for the purpose of disposing of personal property including, but not limited to, all sales titled "garage," "lawn," "yard," "attic," "porch," "room," "backyard," "patio," "flea market," or "rummage" sale. This definition shall not include a situation where no more than five (5) specific items are held out for sale and all advertisement of such sale specifically names those items to be sold. 
Personal property shall mean property which is owned, utilized and maintained by an individual or members of his residence and acquired in the normal course of living in or maintaining a residence. It does not include merchandise which was purchased for resale or obtained on consignment. 
(Code 1980, § 15-681; Ord. No. 86-23, § 1, 8-14-1986)  
Sec. 54-1822. - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to or affect the following: 
(1)  Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(2)  Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officials. 
(3)  Any sale conducted by any merchant or mercantile or other business establishment from or at a place of business wherein such sale would be permitted by the zoning regulation of the city or under the protection of the nonconforming use section thereof or any other sale conducted by a manufacturer, dealer or vendor and which sale would be conducted by a manufacturer, dealer or vendor and which sale would be conducted from properly zoned premises and not otherwise prohibited in other ordinances. 
(4)  Any bona fide charitable, eleemosynary, educational, cultural or governmental institution or organization when the proceeds from the sale are used directly for the institution or organization's charitable purposes and the goods or articles are not sold on a consignment basis. 
(Code 1980, § 15-682; Ord. No. 86-23, § 1, 8-14-1986)  
Sec. 54-1823. - Separate violations. 
Every article sold and every day a sale is conducted in violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1980, § 15-683; Ord. No. 86-23, § 1, 8-14-1986)  
Sec. 54-1824. - Inspection. 
A police officer or any other official designated by any city ordinance to make inspections under the licensing or regulating ordinance or to enforce the same, shall have the right of entry to any premises showing evidence of a garage sale for the purpose of enforcement or inspection and may close the premises from such a sale or arrest any individual who violates the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1980, § 15-691; Ord. No. 86-23, § 1, 8-14-1986)  
Sec. 54-1825. - Property permitted to be sold. 
It shall be unlawful for any individual to sell or offer for sale, under authority granted by this article, property other than personal property. 
(Code 1980, § 15-687; Ord. No. 86-23, § 1, 8-14-1986)  
Sec. 54-1826. - Hours of operation. 
Garage sales conducted under this article shall be limited in time to no more than the daylight hours of three (3) consecutive days or two (2) consecutive weekends (Saturday and Sunday). 
(Code 1980, § 15-688; Ord. No. 86-23, § 1, 8-14-1986)  
Sec. 54-1827. - Display of sale property. 
Personal property offered for sale under this article may be displayed within the residence, in a garage, carport and/or in a rear yard, but only in such areas. No personal property offered for sale at a garage sale shall be displayed in the front or side yard areas of any such premise or in any public right-of-way. However, a vehicle offered for sale may be displayed on a permanently constructed driveway within such front or side yards. 
(Code 1980, § 15-689; Ord. No. 86-23, § 1, 8-14-1986)  
Sec. 54-1828. - Public nuisance. 
The individual to whom a permit is issued under this article and the owner or tenant of the premises on which such sale or activity is conducted shall be jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance of good order and decorum on the premises during all hours of such sale or activity. No such individual shall permit any loud or boisterous conduct on said premises nor permit vehicles to impede the passage of traffic on any roads or streets in the area of such premises. All such individuals shall obey the reasonable orders of any member of the police or fire departments in order to maintain the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Code 1980, § 15-690; Ord. No. 86-23, § 1, 8-14-1986)  
Sec. 54-1829. - Parking. 
All parking of vehicles shall be conducted in compliance with all applicable laws and ordinances. Further, the police department may enforce such temporary controls to alleviate any special hazards and/or congestion created by any garage sale. 
(Code 1980, § 15-692; Ord. No. 86-23, § 1, 8-14-1986)  
Sec. 54-1830. - Third sale. 
A third garage sale shall be permitted in a calendar year if satisfactory proof of a bona fide change in ownership of the real property is first presented to the city clerk duly authorized representative. 
(Code 1980, § 15-700; Ord. No. 86-23, § 1, 8-14-1986)  
Sec. 54-1831. - Inclement weather. 
If a garage sale is not held on the dates for which the permit is issued or is terminated during the first day of the sale because of inclement weather conditions, and an affidavit by the permit holder to this effect is submitted, the city clerk may issue another permit to the applicant for a garage sale to be conducted at the same location within thirty (30) days from the date when the first sale was to be held. No additional permit fee is required. 
(Code 1980, § 15-702; Ord. No. 86-23, § 1, 8-14-1986)  
Sec. 54-1832. - Yard sales and garage sales—Location restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to conduct any sale or to display for sale any merchandise within the front yard setback line requirements of the applicable ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 18-89; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 54-1833. - Same—Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of section 54-1832 shall be upon conviction fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense; and separate offenses shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Code 1980, § 18-90; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Secs. 54-1834—54-1850. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 54-1851. - Permit required. 
No garage sale shall be conducted unless and until the individuals desiring to conduct such sale shall obtain a permit therefor from the city clerk. 
(Code 1980, § 15-693; Ord. No. 86-23, § 1, 8-14-1986)  
Sec. 54-1852. - Sales jointly conducted by two (2) or more residences. 
Members of more than one (1) residence may join in obtaining a permit for a garage sale to be conducted at the residence of one (1) of them. 
(Code 1980, § 15-695; Ord. No. 86-23, § 1, 8-14-1986)  
Sec. 54-1853. - Written application for permit. 
Prior to issuance of any garage sale permit, the individuals conducting such sale shall file a written application with the city clerk, at least five (5) days in advance of the proposed sale (mailed applications must be postmarked at least seven (7) days in advance of the sale), setting forth the following information: 
(1)  Full name and address of applicant. 
(2)  The location at which the proposed garage sale is to be held. 
(3)  The date or dates upon which the sale shall be held. 
(4)  The date or dates of any other garage sales within the current calendar year. 
(5)  An affirmative statement that the property to be sold was owned by the applicant as his own personal property and was neither acquired or cosigned for the purpose of resale. 
(Code 1980, § 15-696; Ord. No. 86-23, § 1, 8-14-1986)  
Sec. 54-1854. - Investigation. 
Before issuing a permit under this article, the city clerk may conduct an investigation as may reasonably be necessary to determine if there is compliance with this article. 
(Code 1980, § 15-697; Ord. No. 86-23, § 1, 8-14-1986)  
Sec. 54-1855. - Permit cancellation for conviction concerning violation of article. 
If any individual is convicted of an offense under this article, the city clerk is instructed to cancel any existing garage sale permit held by the individual convicted and not to issue such individual another garage sale permit for a period of two (2) years from the time of conviction. 
(Code 1980, § 15-698; Ord. No. 86-23, § 1, 8-14-1986)  
Sec. 54-1856. - Permit conditions. 
A permit issued under this article shall set forth and restrict the time and location of the garage sale. No more than two (2) such permits may be issued to one (1) residence and/or family household during any calendar year. If members of more than one (1) residence join in requesting a permit, then such permit shall be considered as having been issued for each and all of such residences. 
(Code 1980, § 15-699; Ord. No. 86-23, § 1, 8-14-1986)  
Sec. 54-1857. - Display of permit. 
Any permit in possession of a holder or holders of a garage sale shall be posted on the premises in a conspicuous place so as to be seen by the public and the city inspector or city police. 
(Code 1980, § 15-701; Ord. No. 86-23, § 1, 8-14-1986)  
Sec. 54-1858. - False information. 
Any permit issued under this article may be revoked or any application for issuance of a permit may be refused by the city clerk if the application submitted by the applicant or permit holder contains any false, fraudulent or misleading statement. 
(Code 1980, § 15-703; Ord. No. 86-23, § 1, 8-14-1986)  
Secs. 54-1859—54-1880. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - SIGNS 
 
Sec. 54-1881. - Generally. 
Two (2) signs of not more than (4) square feet shall be permitted to be displayed inside of the physical property or attached to the property of the residence where the garage sale is being conducted. 
(Code 1980, § 15-684; Ord. No. 86-23, § 1, 8-14-1986)  
Sec. 54-1882. - Time limitations. 
No sign or other form of advertisement shall be exhibited for more than two (2) days prior to the day on which a garage sale is to commence. 
(Code 1980, § 15-685; Ord. No. 86-23, § 1, 8-14-1986)  
Sec. 54-1883. - Removal. 
Signs displayed under this article must be removed within forty-eight (48) hours of the close of the garage sale activities. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per sign. Each day said violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1980, § 15-686; Ord. No. 86-23, § 1, 8-14-1986; Ord. No. 89-41, § 2, 11-9-1989)  
Secs. 54-1884—54-1910. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - RAFFLES 
 
Sec. 54-1911. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings given them: 
Charitable means an organization or institution organized and operated to benefit an indefinite number of the public. The service rendered to those eligible for benefits must also confer some benefit on the public. 
Educational means an organization or institution organized and operated to provide systematic instruction in useful branches of learning by methods common to schools and institutions of learning which compare favorably in their scope and intensity with the course of study presented in tax-supported schools. 
Fraternal means an organization or persons having a common interest, the primary interest of which is both to promote the welfare of its members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to lessen the burdens of government by caring for those that otherwise would be cared for by the government. 
Labor means an organization composed of workers organized with the objective of betterment of the conditions of those engaged in such pursuit and the development of a higher degree of efficiency in their respective occupations. 
Net proceeds means the gross receipts from the conduct of raffles less reasonable sums expended for prizes, local license fees and other reasonable operating expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle. 
Nonprofit means an organization or institution organized and conducted on a not-for-profit basis with no personal profit inuring to anyone as a result of the operation. 
Raffle means a form of lottery, as defined in section 28-2(b) of the Illinois Criminal Code of 1961, conducted by an organization licensed under this article in which: 
(1)  The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance represented and differentiated by a number or by a combination of numbers or by some other medium, one (1) or more of which chances is to be designated the winning chance; 
(2)  The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by some other method based on an element of chance by an act or set of acts on the part of persons conducting or connected with the lottery except that the winning chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly exhibited sporting contest. 
Religious means any church, congregation, society or organization founded for the purpose of religious worship. 
Veterans means an organization or association comprised of members of which substantially all are individuals who are veterans or spouses, widows or widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of which is to promote the welfare of its members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to confer a public benefit. 
(Code 1980, § 15-704; Ord. No. 90-18, § 1, 4-26-1990)  
Sec. 54-1912. - License—Issuance; eligibility; duration; maximum prize value. 
(a)  Location. Sales of raffle chances shall be only at locations designated on the license application and which are within the borders of the city. 
(b)  Eligibility for license. Licenses shall be issued only to bona fide religious, charitable, labor, fraternal, educational or veterans' organizations that operate without profit to their members and which have been in existence continuously for a period of five (5) years immediately before making application for a license and which have had during that entire five (5) year period a bona fide membership engaged in carrying out their objectives. 
(c)  Duration of license. Licenses shall permit the applicant to issue or sell raffle chances only for those dates stated in the license application, but in no event shall the period of sales exceed one hundred eighty (180) days. Each license is valid for one (1) raffle only. 
(d)  Maximum value of prizes. 
(1)  The aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise awarded by a licensee in a single raffle shall not exceed one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000.00). 
(2)  The retail value of each individual prize awarded by a licensee in a single raffle shall not exceed one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000.00). 
(e)  Price of chances. The price charged for each raffle chance sold or issued shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(Code 1980, § 15-705; Ord. No. 90-18, § 1, 4-26-1990)  
Sec. 54-1913. - Same—Required; application; restrictions. 
(a)  No person, firm or corporation shall conduct a raffle without having first obtained a license therefor. 
(b)  Each application for a license shall be in writing upon forms provided by the city and shall contain the following: 
(1)  Name and address of individual making application. 
(2)  Name and address of organization applying for a license. 
(3)  Approximate number of members of the organization that reside in the city and the length of existence of the organization. 
(4)  Name and address of the raffle manager. 
(5)  The location at which raffle chances are to be sold or issued. 
(6)  The time period during which raffle chances will be sold or issued. 
(7)  The maximum number of raffle chances to be sold. 
(8)  The time of determination of winning chances. 
(9)  The location at which winning chances will be determined. 
(10)  A sworn statement signed by the presiding officer and secretary, if there is one, of the organization attesting to the not-for-profit character of the organization and attesting to the fact that the organization is not otherwise ineligible to receive a license. 
(11)  Such other information as the city may require. 
(Code 1980, § 15-706; Ord. No. 90-18, § 1, 4-26-1990)  
Secs. 54-1914—54-1941. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES[23] 
Footnotes: 
--- (23) --- 
Cross reference— Zoning, app. B. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 54-1942. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions are adopted: 
Employee means any and all persons, including manager, servers, and entertainers who work or render services directly related to, the operation of a sexually oriented entertainment business. 
Entertainer means any person who provides sexually oriented entertainment within a sexually oriented entertainment business as defined in this section, whether or not a fee is charged or accepted for entertainment. 
Manager means any person who manages, directs, administers, or is in charge of the affairs and/or conduct of any portion of any activity involving sexually oriented entertainment business. 
Operator means any person operating, conducting or maintaining a sexually oriented entertainment business. 
Patron means any person attending, viewing the performance of an entertainer, purchasing or consuming food or drink, or otherwise entering a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether a fee or charge was exacted. 
Person means any individual, partnership, corporation, trust, incorporated or unincorporated association, joint venture, governmental entity, or other entity or group of persons however organized. 
Premises means the physical location of a sexually oriented entertainment business, including all private property under ownership, lease or right of access by the owner of sexually oriented entertainment business adjacent to the primary business location, including private parking lots and entrance areas. 
Server means any person who serves food or drink at a sexually oriented entertainment business. 
Sexually oriented entertainment means any live exhibition, performance, display or dance of any type, including, but not limited to, talking, singing, reading, listening, posing, serving food or beverages, soliciting for the sale of food, beverages or entertainment, pantomiming, modeling, removal of clothing, or any service offered for amusement on a premises where such exhibition, performance, display or dance is intended to seek to arouse or excite the sexual desires of the entertainer, other entertainers or patrons, or if the entertainment involves a person who is in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose to view any portion of specified anatomical areas. Sexually oriented entertainment is sometimes hereinafter referred to as "SOE." 
Sexually oriented entertainment business means any premises to which the public, patrons or members are invited or admitted and wherein an entertainer provides sexually oriented entertainment to a member of the public, a patron, an employee, or a member. A sexually oriented entertainment business is sometimes hereinafter referred to as an "SOE business." 
Specified anatomical areas means uncovered or exposed human genitals, pubic region, vulva, pubic hair, buttock, female breast or breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola or nipple, or the human male genitals in a discernible erect state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities means sexual conduct, being actual or simulated, acts of human masturbation; sexual intercourse; or physical contact, in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification, with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or the breast of a female; or any sadomasochistic abuse or acts including animals or any latent objects in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification. 
(Code 1980, § 15-720; Ord. No. 96-71, § 1, 11-14-1996)  
Sec. 54-1943. - Inspectors and inspections. 
All SOE business shall permit representatives of the police department or any other city official acting in their official capacity to inspect the premises as necessary to ensure the business is complying with all applicable regulations and laws. 
(Code 1980, § 15-734; Ord. No. 96-71, § 1, 11-14-1996)  
Sec. 54-1944. - Owner responsibility. 
Every act or omission by an employee of a SOE business constituting a violation of the provisions of this article shall be deemed the act or omission of the owner if such act or omission occurs either with the authorization, knowledge, or approval of the owner, or as a result of the owner's negligent failure to supervise the employee's conduct, and the owner shall be punishable for such act or omission in the same manner as if the owner committed the act or caused the omission. The owner shall be responsible for the conduct of all employees while on the premises and any act or omission of any employee while on the premises constituting a violation of the provisions of this article shall be deemed the act or omission of the owner for purposes of determining whether the owner's license shall be revoked, suspended or renewed. 
(Code 1980, § 15-731; Ord. No. 96-71, § 1, 11-14-1996)  
Sec. 54-1945. - Standards of conduct. 
It shall be unlawful for any licensee, owner, manager, server, entertainer and patrons of a SOE business, while on or about the premises of the business to fail to comply with the following standards of conduct: 
(1)  Age restriction. Only persons twenty-one (21) years of age or older shall be permitted on the premises of a SOE business. The manager or manager's representative shall verify the age by one (1) of the following methods: 
a.  A motor vehicle operator's license issued by any state, bearing the applicant's photograph and date of birth; 
b.  A state-issued identification card bearing the applicant's photograph and date of birth; 
c.  An official and valid passport issued by the United States of America; 
d.  An immigration card issued by the United States of America; 
Failure to verify the age of patron shall be considered a violation of this article. 
(2)  Exterior observation. The premises of all of the SOE businesses shall be constructed to include a partition or other physical barrier on all customer entrances that will ensure that observation of the interior of the business is not possible from the exterior. In addition, all windows will be covered to prevent viewing of the interior of the building from the outside and all doorways not constructed with a partition or other physical barrier shall be covered so as to prevent observation of the interior of the premises from the exterior of the building. No SOE business shall be conducted in a manner that permits the observation of live entertainers, servers, or employees from the exterior of the building. 
(3)  Exterior signs. The SOE business shall only be permitted to install a single sign which conforms to the city sign ordinance and shall not display or depict "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
(4)  Nudity prohibited. No employee, server, entertainer or patrons in a SOE business shall appear in any fashion that exposes to view any specified anatomical area as hereinafter specified. 
(5)  Certain acts prohibited. 
a.  No employee, server or entertainer shall perform any specified sexual activities as defined in this article, wear or use any device or covering exposed to view which stimulates any specified anatomical area, use artificial devices or inanimate objects to perform or depict any of the specified sexual activities as defined in this article, or participate in any act of prostitution. 
b.  No employee, server, entertainer or patron of a SOE business shall knowingly touch, fondle or caress any specified anatomical area of another person or knowingly permit another person to touch, fondle or caress any specified anatomical area of such employee, server, entertainer or patron, whether such specified anatomical areas are clothed, unclothed, covered or exposed. 
c.  No employee, server or entertainer of a SOE business shall be visible from the exterior of the SOE business while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose to view any specified anatomical area. 
d.  No SOE entertainer shall solicit, demand or receive any payment or gratuity from any patron or customer for any act prohibited by this article and no SOE entertainer shall receive any payment or gratuity from any customer for any entertainment except as follows: 
1.  While such entertainer is on the stage, a patron may place such payment or gratuity into a box fixed to the stage, or 
2.  While such entertainer is not on the stage and is clothed so as to not expose to view any specified anatomical area, a patron may either place such payment or gratuity into the entertainer's hand, or under a leg garter worn by such entertainer at least four (4) inches below the bottom of the pubic region. 
e.  No owner, operator, manager or other person in charge of the premises of a SOE business shall: 
1.  Knowingly permit alcoholic liquor to be brought upon or consumed on the premises; 
2.  Knowingly allow or permit the sale, distribution, delivery or consumption or any controlled substance or illegal drug or narcotic on the premises; 
3.  Knowingly allow or permit any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years of age to be in or upon the premises; 
4.  Knowingly allow or permit any act of prostitution or patronizing prostitution on the premises; or 
5.  Knowingly allow or permit a violation of this article, City Code of Ordinances, or state law. 
(6)  Hours of operation. No sexually oriented entertainment business may be open or in use between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. Only employees of the SOE business shall be permitted in or upon the premises of the business between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. 
(7)  Closed booths or rooms prohibited. Every SOE business shall be physically arranged in such a manner that the entire interior portion of the booths, cubicles, rooms or stalls, wherein sexually-oriented entertainment is provided, shall be visible from the common area of the premises. Visibility shall not be blocked or obscured by doors, curtains, partitions, drapes, or any other obstruction whatsoever. 
(8)  Alcohol prohibited. No employee, patron, manager, entertainer, owner or other person shall consume or possess any alcoholic liquor in a SOE business or premise. An SOE business shall not share a common interior entrance or access area with a business licensed by the city to sell alcoholic liquor. The owner and manager of the SOE business shall be responsible for prohibiting the consumption or possession of alcoholic liquor by patrons on the premises, including adjacent private parking facilities which serve the business. 
(9)  Intoxicated persons not allowed admittance. The manager shall not allow the admittance into a SOE business of a person who is intoxicated. 
(10)  Lighting required; interior and exterior. The interior premises of a SOE business shall be equipped with overhead lighting of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which customers are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one (1) footcandle as measured at the floor level, and such illumination must be maintained at all times that any customer or patron is present in the interior premises. 
(Code 1980, § 15-730; Ord. No. 96-71, § 1, 11-14-1996)  
Sec. 54-1946. - Manager on premises. 
A SOE manager shall be on duty at a SOE business at all times the premises is open for business. The name of the manager on duty shall be prominently posted during business hours. 
(Code 1980, § 15-733; Ord. No. 96-71, § 1, 11-14-1996)  
Secs. 54-1947—54-1970. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES  
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 54-1971. - License, classification and fees. 
(a)  The license year for all fees required under this article shall be from each January 1 through December 31. The application for a license shall be accompanied by payment in full of the fee stated in this section. Fees for a partial year shall be prorated on a monthly basis. No application shall be considered complete until such fee is paid. 
(b)  All licenses shall be issued for a specific location and shall be nonrefundable, nontransferable, and nonassignable. 
(c)  The classification of licenses and fees for each year shall be as follows: 
(1)  SOE business license fee is one thousand dollars ($1,000.00); 
(2)  SOE manager's license fee is one hundred dollars ($100.00); 
(3)  SOE entertainer's license fee is one hundred dollars ($100.00); 
(4)  SOE server's license fee is one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(Code 1980, § 15-723; Ord. No. 96-71, § 1, 11-14-1996)  
Sec. 54-1972. - Application processing. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a complete application for a SOE business or a SOE manager, server or entertainer license, the city clerk shall immediately transmit one (1) copy of the application to the chief of police for investigation of the application. In addition, the city clerk shall immediately transmit a copy of the application to the director of the department of inspectional services. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the chief of police to investigate such application to determine whether the information contained in the application is accurate and whether the applicant is qualified to be issued the license applied for. The chief of police shall report the results of the investigation to the mayor not later than fifteen (15) working days from the date the application is received by the city clerk. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the director of the department of inspectional services to determine whether the structure where the SOE business will be conducted complies with the requirements and meets the standards of the applicable zoning, building code and fire code provisions. The director of the department of inspectional services shall report the results of his investigation to the mayor not later than fifteen (15) working days from the date the application is received by the city clerk. 
(Code 1980, § 15-726; Ord. No. 96-71, § 1, 11-14-1996)  
Sec. 54-1973. - Examination of application, issuance of license, disapproval. 
(a)  If the application for a SOE business or SOE manager, server or entertainer is in proper form, accompanied by the appropriate license fee, and found to be in compliance with all of the requirements of the article, the mayor shall issue the license as provided by law. The mayor shall either approve or disapprove a license application within thirty (30) working days from the date the application is received by the city clerk. 
(b)  The license shall state that it is not transferable to other persons and the calendar year for which it is issued. The license shall be kept posted in a conspicuous place in the place of business that is licensed or where the licensee is working. 
(c)  If the application for a license is disapproved, the applicant shall be immediately notified by mail to the applicant's last known address, and the notification shall state the basis for such disapproval. Any applicant aggrieved by the disapproval of a license application may seek review as hereinafter provided. 
(Code 1980, § 15-727; Ord. No. 96-71, § 1, 11-14-1996)  
Sec. 54-1974. - License—posting and display. 
Every person, corporation, partnership, or association licensed under this article as a SOE business shall post the license in a conspicuous place on the premises. Every person holding a SOE manager, server, or entertainer license shall post his license in a conspicuous place on the premises so that it shall be readily available for inspection. 
(Code 1980, § 15-732; Ord. No. 96-71, § 1, 11-14-1996)  
Sec. 54-1975. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
(a)  Whenever the mayor has information that: 
(1)  The owner or operator of a SOE business or a holder of a SOE manager, server or entertainer has violated, or knowingly allowed or permitted the violation of any of the provisions of this article; or 
(2)  The SOE license or SOE manager, server or entertainer license was obtained through false statements in the application for such license, or renewal thereof; 
(3)  The SOE licensee or the SOE manager, server or entertainer licensee failed to make a complete disclosure of all information in the application for such license, or renewal thereof; 
(4)  The owner or operator, or any partner, or any corporate officer or director holding a SOE business license has become disqualified from having a license by a conviction as provided in section 54-1993; or 
(5)  The holder of a SOE manager, server or entertainer license has become disqualified from having a license by a conviction as provided in section 54-2013; 
The city clerk shall notify in writing, at the address provided in the application or subsequent amended address, by certified mail, the person holding the license that pending an opportunity for a hearing before the mayor, the license shall be revoked. Such notification shall include the specific Code violation alleged. 
(b)  The person shall have ten (10) days from the mailing of the notice to request in writing a hearing before the mayor on the pending revocation. Failure to request a hearing shall result in a revocation of the license by the city clerk. Based upon the evidence produced at the hearing, the mayor may take any of the following actions: 
(1)  Suspend the license for up to ninety (90) days. 
(2)  Revoke the license for the remainder of the license year. 
(3)  Place the license holder on administrative probation for a period of up to one (1) year, on the condition that no further violations of the article occur during the period of probation. If a violation does occur, and after a hearing the violation is determined to have actually occurred, the license will be revoked for the remainder of the license year. 
(Code 1980, § 15-735; Ord. No. 96-71, § 1, 11-14-1996)  
Sec. 54-1976. - Renewal of license. 
A license may be renewed by making application to the city clerk on application forms provided for that purpose. Licenses shall expire on December thirty-first of each calendar year. Upon timely application and review as provided for a new license, a license issued under the provisions of this article shall be renewed by issuance of a license in the manner provided in this article. 
(Code 1980, § 15-736; Ord. No. 96-71, § 1, 11-14-1996)  
Secs. 54-1977—54-1990. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Business License 
 
Sec. 54-1991. - License required for sexually oriented entertainment business. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain a SOE business in the city unless the owner, operator or lessee has obtained a SOE business license therefor from the city as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any entertainer, employee or manager to knowingly perform any work, service or entertainment directly related to the operation of an unlicensed SOE business. 
(c)  It shall be prima facie evidence that any SOE business that fails to have a SOE business license posted as hereinafter required has not obtained a license. 
(d)  In addition, it shall be prima facie evidence that any entertainer, employee or manager who performs any service or entertainment in a SOE business in which an SOE license is not posted, in the manner required by this article, had knowledge that such business was not licensed. 
(Code 1980, § 15-721; Ord. No. 96-71, § 1, 11-14-1996)  
Sec. 54-1992. - SOE business license. 
(a)  All persons desiring to secure a license to operate a SOE business under the provisions of this article shall make a verified application with the city clerk. All applications shall be submitted in the name of the person proposing to conduct or operate the SOE business. All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the city clerk and shall require the following information: 
(1)  The name, residence address, home telephone number, occupation, date and place of birth, and social security number of the applicant. 
(2)  The name of the SOE business, a description of the SOE to be performed on the premises, and the name of the owner of the premises where the SOE business will be located. 
(3)  The names, residence addresses, social security numbers and dates of births of all partners, if the applicant is a partnership; and if the applicant is a corporation, the same information for all corporate officers and directors and stockholders who own more than a ten (10) percent interest in the corporation. 
(4)  The addresses of the applicant, or of all partners, or of all corporate officers and directors for the five (5) years immediately prior to the date of application. 
(5)  A statement from the applicant, or from all partners, or from all corporate officers and directors, whether any such person or entity, in previously operating in this or any other village, city, town, county or state, has had a business license of any type revoked or suspended, and if so, the reason for the suspension or revocation and the business activity subjected to the suspension or revocation. 
(6)  A statement of the business, occupation or employment of the applicant, or of all partners, or of all corporate officers and directors for the three (3) years immediately preceding the date of the application. 
(7)  A statement from the applicant, or from each partner, or from each corporate officer and director, that each such person has not been convicted, pled guilty or nolo contendere from prosecution of a felony criminal act within five (5) years immediately preceding the application; or a misdemeanor criminal act within two (2) years immediately preceding the application; where such felony or misdemeanor criminal act involved sexual offenses, prostitution, promotion of prostitution, sexual abuse of a child, pornography or related offenses as defined in the state criminal code, or involved controlled substances or illegal drugs or narcotics offenses as defined in the Illinois Controlled Substances Act. 
(8)  A full set of fingerprints and a photograph, to be taken by the city police department, of the applicant, or of all partners if the applicant is a partnership, or of all corporate officers and directors if the applicant is a corporation. 
(9)  If the applicant is a corporation, a current certificate of good standing issued by the secretary of state of the state of incorporation and, if incorporated in a state other than Illinois, a current certificate of registration within the State of Illinois as a foreign corporation. 
(10)  A statement signed under oath that the applicant has personal knowledge of the information contained in the application and that the information contained therein is true and correct and that the applicant has read the provisions of this article regulating SOE businesses. 
(b)  Failure to provide the information and documentation required by this section shall constitute an incomplete application which shall not be processed. 
(Code 1980, § 15-724; Ord. No. 96-71, § 1, 11-14-1996)  
Sec. 54-1993. - SOE Business license ineligibility and disqualification. 
A SOE business license shall not be issued if any one (1) of the following conditions is met: 
(1)  The applicant's premises is located within five hundred (500) feet of any school, church or bona fide religious assembly location, child care center licensed by the state, and property zoned residential. Measurements shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest point on the property line of the applicant's premises to the nearest point on the property line of such school, church or bona fide religious assembly location, licensed child care, or property designated residential; 
(2)  The applicant's premises is located within one thousand (1,000) feet of any other SOB business for which there is a license issued. Measurements shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest point on the property line of the applicant's premises to the nearest point on the property line of such other SOE business; 
(3)  The applicant's premises is located within one hundred (100) feet of any business licensed by the city to sell alcohol liquor. Measurements shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest point on the property line of the applicant's premises to the nearest point on the property line of such other SOE business; 
(4)  The applicant failed to supply all of the information required on the application; 
(5)  The applicant gave materially false, fraudulent or untruthful information on the application; 
(6)  The applicant's proposed business premises does not comply with or meet the requirements of the applicable zoning, building, and fire codes. 
(7)  The applicant has been convicted, pled guilty or nolo contendere to any of the crimes set forth in section 54-1992 during the time period set forth in that section; 
(8)  This applicant has had a SOE license revoked or suspended in this or any other jurisdiction during the past five (5) years. 
(Code 1980, § 15-728; Ord. No. 96-71, § 1, 11-14-1996; Ord. No. 99-9, § 1, 1-28-1999)  
Secs. 54-1994—54-2010. - Reserved.  
Subdivision III. - Employee's License 
 
Sec. 54-2011. - License required for managers, servers and entertainers. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to work as an entertainer, server or manager at an adult entertainment business without first obtaining a license to do so pursuant to this article. All managers, servers and entertainers shall be a minimum of twenty-one (21) years of age. All managers, servers and entertainers shall be employees of the owner. 
(Code 1980, § 15-722; Ord. No. 96-71, § 1, 11-14-1996)  
Sec. 54-2012. - SOE manager, server, entertainers license. 
(a)  All persons desiring to secure a license under the provisions of this article to be an SOE manager, server or entertainer shall make a verified application to the city clerk. All applications shall be submitted in the name of the person proposing to be a SOE manager, server or entertainer. All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the city clerk and shall require the following information: 
(1)  The applicant's name, home address, home telephone number, date and place of birth, and social security number. 
(2)  The name and address of each SOE business where the applicant intends to work as a manager, server or entertainer, and an "intent to hire" statement from a SOE business that is licensed, or that has applied for a license, under the provisions of this article, indicating the SOE business intends to hire the applicant to manage, serve or entertain on the premises. 
(3)  A statement from the applicant that the applicant has not been convicted of, released from confinement for conviction of, or diverted from prosecution of a felony criminal act within five (5) years immediately preceding the application; or a misdemeanor criminal act within two (2) years immediately preceding the application; where such felony or misdemeanor criminal act involved sexual offenses, prostitution, promotion of prostitution, sexual abuse of a child, pornography or related offenses as defined in the Illinois Criminal Code, or involved controlled substances or illegal drugs or narcotics as defined in the state controlled substances act. 
(4)  A full set of fingerprints and a photograph, to be taken by the police department, of the applicant. 
(5)  The applicant shall present to the city clerk a document that establishes that the applicant has attained the age of twenty-one (21) years at the time the application is submitted. Any of the following shall be accepted as documentation of age: 
a.  A motor vehicle operator's license issued by the state, bearing the applicant's photograph and date of birth; 
b.  A state issued identification card bearing the applicant's photograph and date of birth; 
c.  An official and valid passport issued by the United States of America; 
d.  An immigration card issued by the United States of America; 
(b)  Failure to provide the information required by this article shall constitute an incomplete application and shall not be processed. 
(Code 1980, § 15-725; Ord. No. 96-71, § 1, 11-14-1996)  
Sec. 54-2013. - SOE manager, server or entertainer license; eligibility and disqualification. 
No person is eligible nor shall a license be issued to an applicant for a SOE manager, server or entertainer if one (1) or more of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The employer for whom the applicant intends to work does not have or is ineligible to receive a SOE business license for any of the reasons stated in this article. 
(2)  The applicant has been convicted, pled guilty or nolo contendere to any of the crimes set forth in section 54-2012 during the time period set forth in such section; 
(3)  The applicant failed to provide all of the information required on the application; 
(4)  The applicant gave materially false, fraudulent or untruthful information on the application; 
(5)  The applicant has had a SOE manager, server or entertainer license revoked or suspended in this or any other municipality, county or state during the past five (5) years. 
(Code 1980, § 15-729; Ord. No. 96-71, § 1, 11-14-1996)  
Secs. 54-2014—54-2031. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED MATERIALS BUSINESSES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 54-2032. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions are adopted: 
Employee means any and all persons, including managers, who work or render services directly related to the operation of a sexually oriented materials business. 
Manager means any person who manages, directs, administers, or is in charge of the affairs and/or conduct of any portion of any activity involving sexually oriented materials business. 
Operator means any person operating, conducting or maintaining a sexually oriented materials business. 
Patron means any person renting, purchasing, viewing, or otherwise entering a sexually oriented materials business, regardless of whether a fee or charge was exacted. 
Person means any individual, partnership, corporation, trust, incorporated or unincorporated association, joint venture, governmental entity, or other entity or group of persons however organized. 
Premises means the physical location of a sexually oriented materials business, including all private property under ownership, lease or right of access by the owner of a sexually oriented materials business adjacent to the primary business location, including private parking lots and entrance areas. 
Sexually oriented materials means any sexually oriented materials, including but not limited to videotapes, videodiscs, motion pictures, books, magazines, posters, photographs, and sexual devices and paraphernalia. 
Sexually oriented materials business means any premises to which the public, patrons, or members are invited or admitted and in which sexually oriented materials comprise over seven and one-half (7.5) percent of the total square feet of interior building retail or wholesale space, excluding storage areas. A sexually oriented materials business may sometimes hereinafter be referred to as an "SOM business." 
(Code 1980, § 15-738; Ord. No. 96-71, § 2, 11-14-1996; Ord. No. 97-16, § 1, 3-13-1997)  
Sec. 54-2033. - Inspectors and inspections. 
All SOM business shall permit representatives of the police department or any other city official acting in their official capacity to inspect the premises as necessary to ensure the business is complying with all applicable regulations and laws. 
(Code 1980, § 15-752; Ord. No. 96-71, § 2, 11-14-1996)  
Sec. 54-2034. - Owner responsibility. 
Every act or omission by an employee of a SOM business constituting a violation of the provisions of this article shall be deemed the act or omission of the owner if such act or omission occurs either with the authorization, knowledge, or approval of the owner, or as a result of the owner's negligent failure to supervise the employee's conduct, and the owner shall be punishable for such act or omission in the same manner as if the owner committed the act or caused the omission. The owner shall be responsible for the conduct of all employees while on the premises and any act or omission of any employee while on the premises constituting a violation of the provisions of this article shall be deemed the act or omission of the owner for purposes of determining whether the owner's license shall be revoked, suspended or renewed. 
(Code 1980, § 15-749; Ord. No. 96-71, § 2, 11-14-1996)  
Sec. 54-2035. - Age requirement. 
All owners, operators, managers and employees shall be a minimum of twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(Code 1980, § 15-741; Ord. No. 96-71, § 2, 11-14-1996)  
Sec. 54-2036. - Standards of conduct. 
It shall be unlawful for any licensee, owner, manager, employee or patron of a SOM business, while on or about the premises of the business to fail to comply with the following standards of conduct: 
(1)  Age restriction. Only persons twenty-one (21) years of age or older shall be permitted on the premises of a SOM business. The manager or manager's representative shall verify the age by one (1) of the following methods: 
a.  A motor vehicle operator's license issued by any state, bearing the applicant's photograph and date of birth; 
b.  A state-issued identification card bearing the applicant's photograph and date of birth; 
c.  An official and valid passport issued by the United States of America; 
d.  An immigration card issued by the United States of America; 
Failure to verify the age of a patron shall be considered a violation of this article. 
(2)  Exterior observation. The premises of all of the SOM businesses shall be constructed to include a partition or other physical barrier on all customer entrances that will ensure that observation of the interior of the business is not possible from the exterior. In addition, all windows will be covered to prevent viewing of the interior of the building from the outside and all doorways not constructed with a partition or other physical barrier shall be covered so as to prevent observation of the interior of the premises from the exterior of the building. No SOM business shall be conducted in a manner that permits the observation of sexually oriented materials from the exterior of the building. 
(3)  Exterior signs. The SOM business shall only be permitted to install a single sign which conforms to the city sign ordinance and shall not display, or depict "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
(4)  Hours of operation. No sexually oriented materials business may be open or in use between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. Only employees of the SOM business shall be permitted in or upon the premises of the business between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. 
(5)  Alcohol prohibited. No employee, patron, manager, owner or other person shall consume or possess any alcoholic liquor in a SOM business or premises. An SOM business shall not share a common interior entrance or access area with a business licensed by the city to sell alcoholic liquor. The owner and manager of the SOM business shall be responsible for prohibiting the consumption or possession of alcoholic liquor by patrons on the premises, including adjacent private parking facilities which serve the business. 
(6)  Intoxicated persons not allowed admittance. The manager shall not allow the admittance into a SOM business of a person who is intoxicated. 
(Code 1980, § 15-748; Ord. No. 96-71, § 2, 11-14-1996)  
Sec. 54-2037. - Manager on premises. 
A SOM manager shall be on duty at a SOM business at all times the premises is open for business. The name of the manager on duty shall be prominently posted during business hours. 
(Code 1980, § 15-751; Ord. No. 96-71, § 2, 11-14-1996)  
Secs. 54-2038—54-2050. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE  
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 54-2051. - License and fees. 
(a)  The license year for all fees required under this article shall be from each January first through December thirty-first. The application for a license shall be accompanied by payment in full of the fee stated in this section. Fees for a partial year shall be prorated on a monthly basis. No application shall be considered complete until such fee is paid. 
(b)  All licenses shall be issued by a specific location and shall be nonrefundable, nontransferable, and nonassignable. 
(c)  The classification of licenses and fees for each year shall be as follows: 
(1)  SOM business license fee is three thousand dollars ($3,000.00); 
(2)  SOM manager's license fee is three hundred dollars ($300.00); 
(3)  SOM employee's license fee is three hundred dollars ($300.00). 
(Code 1980, § 15-740; Ord. No. 96-71, § 2, 11-14-1996; Ord. No. 05-50, § 1, 7-28-2005; Ord. No. 05-87, § 1, 12-8-2005)  
Sec. 54-2052. - Application processing. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a complete application for a SOM business or a SOM manager or employee license, the city clerk shall immediately transmit one (1) copy of the application to the chief of police for investigation of the application. In addition, the city clerk shall immediately transmit a copy of the application to the director of the department of inspectional services. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the chief of police to investigate such application to determine whether the information contained in the application is accurate and whether the applicant is qualified to be issued the license applied for. The chief of police shall report the results of the investigation to the mayor not later than fifteen (15) working days from the date the application is received by the city clerk. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the director of the department of inspectional service to determine whether the structure where the SOM business will be conducted complies with the requirements and meets the standards of the applicable zoning, building code and fire code provisions. The director of the department of inspectional services shall report the results of his investigation to the mayor not later than fifteen (15) working days from the date the application is received by the city clerk. 
(Code 1980, § 15-744; Ord. No. 96-71, § 2, 11-14-1996)  
Sec. 54-2053. - Examination of application, issuance of license, disapproval. 
(a)  If the application for a SOM business or SOM manager or employee is in proper form, accompanied by the appropriate license fee, and found to be in compliance with all of the requirements of the article, the mayor shall issue the license as provided by law. The mayor shall either approve or disapprove a license application within thirty (30) working days from the date the application is received by the city clerk. 
(b)  The license shall state that it is not transferable to other persons and the calendar year for which it is issued. The license shall be kept posted in a conspicuous place in the place of business that is licensed or where the licensee is working. 
(c)  If the application for a license is disapproved, the applicant shall be immediately notified by mail to the applicant's last known address, and the notification shall state the basis for such disapproval. Any applicant aggrieved by the disapproval of a license application may seek review as hereinafter provided. 
(Code 1980, § 15-745; Ord. No. 96-71, § 2, 11-14-1996)  
Sec. 54-2054. - License-posting and display. 
Every person, corporation, partnership, or association licensed under this article as a SOM business shall post the license in a conspicuous place on the premises. Every person holding a SOM manager or employee license shall post his license in a conspicuous place on the premises so that it shall be readily available for inspection. 
(Code 1980, § 15-750; Ord. No. 96-71, § 1, 11-14-1996)  
Sec. 54-2055. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
Whenever the mayor has information that: 
(1)  The owner or operator of a SOM business or a holder of a SOM manager or employee license has violated, or knowingly allowed or permitted the violation of any of the provisions of this article; 
(2)  The SOM license or SOM manager or employee license was obtained through false statements in the application for such license, or renewal thereof; 
(3)  The SOM licensee or the SOM manager or employee licensee failed to make a complete disclosure of all information in the application for such license, or renewal thereof; 
(4)  The owner or operator, or any partner, or any corporate officer or director holding a SOM business license has become disqualified from having a license by a conviction as provided in section 54-1993; or 
(5)  The holder of a SOM manager or employee license has become disqualified from having a license by a conviction as provided in section 54-2013; 
The city clerk shall notify in writing, at the address provided in the application or subsequent amended address, by certified mail, the person holding the license that pending an opportunity for a hearing before the mayor, the license shall be revoked. Such notification shall include the specific Code violation alleged. The person shall have ten (10) days from the mailing of the notice to request in writing a hearing before the mayor on the pending revocation. Failure to request a hearing shall result in a revocation of the license by the city clerk. Based upon the evidence produced at the hearing, the mayor may take any of the following actions: 
a.  Suspend the license for up to ninety (90) days. 
b.  Revoke the license for the remainder of the license year. 
c.  Place the license holder on administrative probation for a period of up to one (1) year, on the condition that no further violations of the article occur during the period of probation. If a violation does occur, and after a hearing the violation is determined to have actually occurred, the license will be revoked for the remainder of the license year. 
(Code 1980, § 15-753; Ord. No. 96-71, § 2, 11-14-1996)  
Sec. 54-2056. - Renewal of license. 
A license may be renewed by making application to the city clerk on application forms provided for that purpose. Licenses shall expire on the thirty-first of December of each calendar year. Upon timely application and review as provided for a new license, a license issued under the provisions of this article shall be renewed by issuance of a license in the manner provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 96-71, § 2, 11-14-1996)  
Secs. 54-2057—54-2080. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Business License 
 
Sec. 54-2081. - License required for sexually oriented materials business. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain a SOM business in the city unless the owner, operator or lessee has obtained a SOM business license therefor from the city as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any employee or manager to knowingly perform any work or service directly related to the operation of an unlicensed SOM business. 
(c)  It shall be prima facie evidence that any SOM business that fails to have a SOM business license posted as hereinafter required has not obtained a license. In addition, it shall be prima facie evidence that any employer or manager who performs any service in a SOM business in which an SOM license is not posted, in the manner required by this article, had knowledge that such business was not licensed. 
(Code 1980, § 15-739; Ord. No. 96-71, § 2, 11-14-1996)  
Sec. 54-2082. - SOM business license. 
(a)  All persons desiring to secure a license to operate a SOM business under the provisions of this article shall make a verified application with the city clerk. All applications shall be submitted in the name of the person proposing to conduct or operate the SOM business. All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the city clerk and shall require the following information: 
(1)  The name, residences address, home telephone number, occupation, date and place of birth, and social security number of the applicant. 
(2)  The name of the SOM business, a description of the SOM business to be sold, leased or rented, and the name of the owner of the premises where the SOM business will be located. 
(3)  The names, residence addresses, social security numbers and dates of births of all partners, if the applicant is a partnership; and if the applicant is a corporation, the same information for all corporate officers and directors and stockholders who own more than a ten (10) percent interest in the corporation. 
(4)  The addresses of the applicant, or of all partners, or of all corporate officers and directors for the five (5) years immediately prior to the date of application. 
(5)  A statement from the applicant, or from all partners, or from all corporate officers and directors, whether any such person or entity, in previously operating in this or any other city, town, village, county or state, has had a business license of any type revoked or suspended, and if so, the reason for the suspension or revocation and the business activity subjected to the suspension or revocation. 
(6)  A statement of the business, occupation or employment of the applicant, or of all partners, or of all corporate officers and directors for the three (3) years immediately preceding the date of the application. 
(7)  A statement from the applicant, or from each partner, or from each corporate officer and director, that each such person has not been convicted, pled guilty or nolo contendere from prosecution of a felony criminal act within five (5) years immediately preceding the application; or a misdemeanor criminal act within two (2) years immediately preceding the application; where such felony or misdemeanor criminal act involved sexual offenses, prostitution, promotion of prostitution, sexual abuse of a child, pornography or related offenses as defined in the state criminal code, or involved controlled substances or illegal drugs or narcotics offenses as defined in the state controlled substances act. 
(8)  A full set of fingerprints and a photograph, to be taken by the city police department, of the applicant, or of all partners if the applicant is a partnership, or of all corporate officers and director if the applicant is a corporation. 
(9)  If the applicant is a corporation, a current certificate of good standing issued by the secretary of state of the state of incorporation and, if incorporated in a state other than Illinois, a current certificate of registration within the State of Illinois as a foreign corporation. 
(10)  A statement signed under oath that the applicant has personal knowledge of the information contained in the application and that the information contained therein is true and correct and that the applicant has read the provisions of this article regulating SOM businesses. 
(b)  Failure to provide the information and documentation required by this section shall constitute an incomplete application which shall not be processed. 
(Code 1980, § 15-742; Ord. No. 96-71, § 2, 11-14-1996)  
Sec. 54-2083. - SOM business license; ineligibility and disqualification. 
A SOM business license shall not be issued if any one (1) of the following conditions is met: 
(1)  The applicant's premises is located within five hundred (500) feet of any school, church or bona fide religious assembly location, child care center licensed by the State of Illinois, and property zoned residential pursuant to appendix B of the City Code. Measurements shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest point on the property line of the applicant's premises to the nearest point on the property line of such school, church or bona fide religious assembly location, licensed child care, or property designated residential; 
(2)  The applicant's premises is located within one thousand (1,000) feet of any other SOM business for which there is a license issued. Measurements shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest point on the property line of the applicant's premises to the nearest point on the property line of such other SOM business; 
(3)  The applicant's premises is located within one hundred (100) feet of any business licensed by the city to sell alcohol liquor. 
Measurements shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest point on the property line of the applicant's premises to the nearest point on the property line of such other SOM business; 
(4)  The applicant failed to supply all of the information required on the application; 
(5)  The applicant gave materially false, fraudulent or untruthful information on the application; 
(6)  The applicant's proposed business premises does not comply with or meet the requirements of the applicable zoning, building, and fire codes. 
(7)  The applicant has been convicted, pled guilty or nolo contendere to any of the crimes set forth in section 54-1992 during the time period set forth in that section; 
(8)  This applicant has had a SOM license revoked or suspended in this or any other jurisdiction during the past five (5) years. 
(Code 1980, § 15-746; Ord. No. 96-71, § 2, 11-14-1996; Ord. No. 99-9, § 2, 1-28-1999)  
Secs. 54-2084—54-2100. - Reserved.  
Subdivision III. - Employee's License 
 
Sec. 54-2101. - SOM manager and employee license—Generally. 
(a)  All persons desiring to secure a license under the provisions of this article to be a SOM manager or employee shall make a verified application to the city clerk. All applications shall be submitted in the name of the person proposing to be a SOM manager or employee. All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the city clerk and shall require the following information: 
(1)  The applicant's name, home address, home telephone number, date and place of birth, and social security number. 
(2)  The name and address of each SOM business where the applicant intends to work as a manager or employee and an "intent to hire" statement from the SOM business that is licensed, or that has applied for a license, indicating the SOM business intends to hire the applicant to manage or work on the premises. 
(3)  A statement from the applicant that the applicant has not been convicted of, released from confinement for conviction of, or diverted from prosecution of a felony criminal act within five (5) years immediately preceding the application; or a misdemeanor criminal act within two (2) years immediately preceding the application; where such felony or misdemeanor criminal act involved sexual offenses, prostitution, promotion of prostitution, sexual abuse of a child, pornography or related offenses as defined in the state criminal code, or involved controlled substances or illegal drugs or narcotics as defined in the state controlled substances act. 
(4)  A full set of fingerprints and a photograph of the applicant to be taken by the city police department. 
(5)  The applicant shall present to the city clerk a document that establishes that the applicant has attained the age of twenty-one (21) years at the time the application is submitted. Any of the following shall be accepted as documentation of age: 
a.  A motor vehicle operator's license issued by the state, bearing the applicant's photograph and date of birth. 
b.  A state-issued identification card bearing the applicant's photograph and date of birth; 
c.  An official and valid passport issued by the United State of America; 
d.  An immigration card issued by the United States of America. 
(b)  Failure to provide the information required by this article shall constitute an incomplete application and shall not be processed. 
(Code 1980, § 15-743; Ord. No. 96-71, § 2, 11-14-1996)  
Sec. 54-2102. - SOM manager or employee license—Eligibility and disqualification. 
No person is eligible nor shall a license be issued to, an applicant for a SOM manager or employee if one (1) or more of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The employer for whom the applicant intends to work does not have or is ineligible to receive a SOM business license for any of the reasons stated in this article. 
(2)  The applicant has been convicted, pled guilty or nolo contendere to any of the crimes set forth in section 54-2012 during the time period set forth in such section; 
(3)  The applicant failed to provide all of the information required on the application; 
(4)  The applicant gave materially false, fraudulent or untruthful information on the application; 
(5)  The applicant has had a SOM manager or employee license revoked or suspended in this or any other municipality, county or state during the past five (5) years. 
(Code 1980, § 15-747; Ord. No. 96-71, § 2, 11-14-1996)  
Secs. 54-2103—54-2120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - SOLICITORS[24] 
Footnotes: 
--- (24) --- 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 08-50, adopted July 24, 2008 amended art. X in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. X consisted of §§ 54-2121—54-2124, 54-2151—54-2159, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the 1980 Code; an ordinance of Nov. 12, 1970; an ordinance of June 12, 1975; Ord. No. 99-34, adopted June 10, 1999; Ord. No. 05-31, adopted May 26, 2005; and Ord. No. 05-47, adopted July 28, 2005. 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78. 
State Law reference— Power of city to regulate hawkers, transients, vendors and peddlers, 65 ILCS 5/11-42-5. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 54-2121. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, and the interpretation and application thereof, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein, unless the context in which they are used shall indicate otherwise. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the singular number include the plural number and words in the plural number include the singular number. Words or phrases not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Business shall mean any city-licensed business located in any zoning district. 
Chief of police shall mean the Chief of Police of the Calumet City Police Department or such other designee. 
Residence shall mean every separate living unit occupied for residential purposes by one (1) or more persons, contained within any type of building or structure. 
Soliciting or solicitation shall mean one (1) or more of the following activities: 
(1)  Seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, services of any kind, character or description whatever, for any kind of consideration whatever. 
(2)  Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application or purchase of insurance of any type, kind or character. 
(3)  Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals, newspapers and every other type or kind of publication. 
(4)  Seeking to obtain gifts or contributions of money, clothing or any other valuable thing for the support or benefit of any charitable or nonprofit association, organization, corporation or project. 
(Ord. No. 08-50, § 2, 7-24-2008)  
Sec. 54-2122. - License required; age restriction; exception. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in solicitation activities within the city without first obtaining a license issued by the Calumet City Police Department. 
(b)  No person under the age of sixteen (16) may obtain a solicitation license. 
(c)  No person engaging in the mere act of expressing ideas for charitable, benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic, not-for-profit, religious or political purposes shall be required to obtain a solicitation permit from the city unless such activities are coupled with a request for donations or the offering of property for sale. 
(Ord. No. 08-50, § 2, 7-24-2008; Ord. No. 11-40, § 2, 7-28-2011) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-40, § 2, adopted July 28, 2011, changed the title of § 54-2122 from "License required; exception" to "License required; age restriction; exception". This historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes.  
Sec. 54-2123. - Application required. 
(a)  Application for a solicitation license shall be made upon a form provided by the city and shall be filed with the Calumet City Police Department. The applicant shall, under oath, truthfully state in full the information requested on the application, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  The applicant's name and residential address and the length of residence at said address; if less than three (3) years at present place of residence then provide prior place of residence; 
(2)  The applicant's business address, if other than a residential address; 
(3)  Proof of the applicant's age and address, as identified on a state-issued form of identification; 
(4)  The applicant's social security number; 
(5)  A complete physical description of the applicant; 
(6)  Two (2) photographs of the applicant which shall have been taken no later than sixty (60) days before the date of filing of the application. Said photographs shall measure approximately one (1) inch by two and one-half (2½) inches and depict the head, face and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner; 
(7)  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant's employer or, if acting as an agent or representative, the name, address and telephone number of the principal who is being represented, with credentials in written form to establish the relationship and the authority of the employee or agent to act for the employer or principal, as the case may be; 
(8)  The length of time of employment or relationship, as the case may be; 
(9)  A description sufficient for identification of the subject matter of the solicitation activity the applicant will engage in; 
(10)  The dates and hours in which the solicitation is proposed to begin, the expected duration of the proposed soliciting, and the geographic area within the city wherein such solicitation shall occur; 
(11)  A complete description and license number of the vehicle to be used by the applicant, if applicable; 
(12)  The approximate date of any previous application for a license under this article and indication if any license issued to the applicant by the city under this article has been revoked; 
(13)  Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this article or the ordinances of any other unit of government regulating soliciting; 
(14)  Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony under the laws of the State of Illinois or any other state or federal law; 
(15)  A copy of the applicant's certificate of registration under the Retailer's Occupation Tax Act, 35 ILCS 120/1 et seq. or copy of a registration statement or the annual report filed with attorney general pursuant to 225 ILCS 460/1 et seq., whichever is applicable; 
(16)  Execution of a statement indicating that, if a license is granted, it shall not be used or represented in any way as an endorsement by the city or any of its departments or employees thereof; and 
(17)  Any such additional information as the chief of police deems necessary to process the application. 
(b)  Before issuing a license, the chief of police shall require the applicant, in addition to the completion of the application form, to submit the applicant's fingerprints, along with all other necessary identifying information, in order to allow the chief of police to conduct a background criminal record check on the applicant, if deemed necessary. 
(Ord. No. 08-50, § 2, 7-24-2008)  
Sec. 54-2124. - License fee; duration. 
At the time the application is filed with the Calumet City Police Department, the applicant shall pay a fee for the license of thirty dollars ($30.00) for each person applying for a license. The license shall only be valid for thirty (30) days from the date of issuance of the license. 
(Ord. No. 08-50, § 2, 7-24-2008)  
Sec. 54-2125. - Application review; denial of license; appeal. 
(a)  [Review.] Upon the Calumet City Police Department's review of the application, the chief of police may refuse to issue a license to the applicant for any of the following reasons, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  The location and time of solicitation would endanger the safety and welfare of the applicant or their customers; 
(2)  An investigation reveals that the applicant falsified information on the application; 
(3)  The applicant has been convicted of a violation of any provision of this article or the ordinance of any other unit of government regulating soliciting; 
(4)  The applicant has been convicted of a felony under the laws of the state or any other state or federal law; 
(5)  There is no proof as to the authority of the applicant to serve as an agent or representative to the principal or employee to the employer, as the case may be; 
(6)  The applicant has been denied a license under this article, unless the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the chief of police that the reasons the earlier denial no longer exists; or 
(7)  The application or proposed solicitation is not in compliance with the provisions of this article or other applicable requirements of law. 
(b)  Denial. Any denial by the chief of police and the reasons for denial shall be noted on the application and the applicant shall be notified that the application is denied and that no license shall be issued. Notice shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the applicant at the address shown on the application. 
(c)  Appeal. An appeal may be filed by the applicant. An appeal must be filed in the office of the city clerk within twenty-one (21) days after the date of the written notice notifying the applicant of the denial of the application. Notice and time and place of the hearing shall be given to the applicant in the same manner as provided for the mailing of notice in subsection 54-2125(b). A hearing shall be set no later than twenty (20) days from receipt of the applicant's appeal with the city clerk. The applicant shall have the burden of proof to show, by a preponderance of the evidence, the denial is not justified. The decision of the mayor or such other designee shall be binding and final and reviewable in a manner provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 08-50, § 2, 7-24-2008)  
Sec. 54-2126. - Records; application and license. 
The chief of police shall cause to be kept in his office an accurate record of every application received and processed with all other information and data pertaining thereto. Every application shall be numbered in consecutive order as filed and every license issued shall be identified with the duplicate number of the application upon which it was issued. 
(Ord. No. 08-50, § 2, 7-24-2008)  
Sec. 54-2127. - Display of license. 
Every license shall be carried at all times by the applicant to whom the license was issued, when soliciting in the city, and shall be exhibited by such licensee whenever requested to do so by any prospective customer or police officer. 
(Ord. No. 08-50, § 2, 7-24-2008)  
Sec. 54-2128. - Temporary identification; display. 
At the time of the issuance of a license, the chief of police shall issue to each licensee temporary identification, in the form and manner as prescribed by the chief of police, which shall be worn by the licensee in such a way as to be conspicuous at all times while soliciting in the city. The information included on the temporary identification shall include, but not be limited to, the name of the licensee, the picture of the licensee and the expiration date of the license. 
(Ord. No. 08-50, § 2, 7-24-2008)  
Sec. 54-2129. - Assignment; transfer of license or temporary identification. 
No license or temporary identification shall be assigned or transferred nor shall it be used by any person other than the person to whom it was issued. 
(Ord. No. 08-50, § 2, 7-24-2008)  
Sec. 54-2130. - Time limit on soliciting and location restriction. 
Solicitation at a business or residence shall be permitted only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday. Solicitation at any other time shall be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance. No soliciting is permitted on a Sunday or any state or federal holiday. No more than four (4) persons may solicit at an authorized location or intersection at any one (1) given time. 
(Ord. No. 08-50, § 2, 7-24-2008; Ord. No. 11-40, § 3, 7-28-2011) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-40, § 3, adopted July 28, 2011, changed the title of § 54-2130 from "Time limit on soliciting" to "Time limit on soliciting and location restriction". This historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes.  
Sec. 54-2131. - Uninvited soliciting. 
(a)  No person shall engage in soliciting from persons in residences or businesses where a notice is displayed upon or near the main entrance door stating that solicitation is uninvited. Such notice shall consist of a weatherproof card, approximately three (3) inches by four (4) inches in size with letters at least one-third ( 1/3 ) of an inch in height and may be obtained from the Calumet City Police Department, at the cost thereof. Any solicitation in disregard of a posted notice shall be unlawful and constitute a nuisance. 
(b)  No person shall engage in soliciting, whether invited or not, in a business or residence, when requested to do so by any occupant. Every such person shall be required to immediately and peacefully depart the business or residence. 
(Ord. No. 08-50, § 2, 7-24-2008)  
Sec. 54-2132. - False personation; representation. 
(a)  No person shall falsely represent to be an employee, agent or representative of any organization or charitable organization or when any person exhibits or uses in any manner any decal, badge or insignia of any organization or charitable organization when not authorized to do so by any organization or charitable organization. 
(b)  No person shall claim or represent that they are acting on behalf of the city, or any of its departments or employees thereof, unless the city has first entered into a written agreement with the person or the person's employer authorizing solicitation. 
(Ord. No. 08-50, § 2, 7-24-2008)  
Sec. 54-2133. - Revocation; appeal. 
(a)  Revocation. The chief of police shall revoke a license for a violation of any regulation listed in this article. Upon such revocation, written notice shall be mailed by the chief of police to the holder of the license, to the address shown on the application, by certified mail, return receipt requested, and all solicitation shall promptly cease. 
(b)  Appeal. An appeal may be filed by the licensee. An appeal must be filed in the office of the city clerk within twenty-one (21) days after the date of the written notice notifying the licensee of the revocation along with a written statement under oath setting forth the grounds for the appeal. Notice and time and place of the hearing shall be given to the licensee in the same manner as provided for the mailing of notice in subsection 54-2133(a). A hearing shall be set no later than twenty (20) days from receipt of the licensee's written statement. The licensee shall have the burden of proof to show, by a preponderance of the evidence, the revocation is not justified. The decision of the mayor or such other designee shall be binding and final and reviewable in a manner provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 08-50, § 2, 7-24-2008)  
Sec. 54-2134. - Violation; penalty. 
(a)  Any person violating any provision of this article shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. Every day that a violation exists constitutes a separate offense. 
(b)  Proceedings to enforce violations of this article may be initiated and conducted in accordance with and pursuant to the provisions of the Municipal Code of the city providing for administrative adjudication of code violations or by any other means provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 08-50, § 2, 7-24-2008)  
Secs. 54-2135—54-2159. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - FRAUDULENT SALES 
 
Sec. 54-2160. - Definitions. 
(a)  Going out of business sale means any sale, whether described by such name or by any other name (such as, but not limited to, "closing out sale", "liquidation sale", "lost our lease sale", "forced to vacate sale"), held in such a manner as to induce a belief that upon disposal of the stock of goods on hand, the business will cease and be discontinued at the premises where the sale is conducted. 
(b)  Goods includes all goods, wares, merchandise and other personal property, excepting choses in action and money. 
(c)  Person includes a person, firm, corporation, partnership, association or two (2) or more persons having a joint or common interest. 
(d)  Removal sale means any sale held in such a manner as to induce a belief that upon disposal of the stock of goods on hand, the business will cease and be discontinued at the premises where the sale is conducted, and thereafter will be moved to and occupy another location. 
(Ord. No. 08-17, § 2, 3-13-2008)  
Sec. 54-2161. - License required. 
No person shall directly or indirectly advertise or cause to be advertised, represent or cause to be represented, or hold out to the public in any manner that any sale of goods is an insurance, salvage, removal, going out of business, insolvent's, assigner's or creditor's sale of goods, or that it is a sale of goods which have been damaged by fire, smoke, water or otherwise within the City of Calumet City, unless such person shall first have obtained a license to conduct such sale under one (1) of such descriptive names, from the clerk of the City of Calumet City; provided however, that this shall not apply to any sales directly ordered by any court or referee in bankruptcy, or to any person acting under the direction and supervision of state or federal courts in the course of their official duties; provided further, that this shall not apply to any sales by a person regularly engaged in insurance or salvage sales of goods, or sale of goods which have been damaged by fire, smoke, water or otherwise, who acquired the goods for the account of others as a result of fire or other casualty. 
(Ord. No. 08-17, § 2, 3-13-2008)  
Sec. 54-2162. - License application. 
Any applicant for such a license shall file an application in writing and under oath with the city clerk setting out the following facts and information regarding such a proposed sale: 
(a)  The name and address of the applicant for the license, who must be the owner of the goods to be sold, and in addition, if the applicant is a partnership, corporation, firm or association, the name and position of the individual filing such application. 
(b)  The name and style in which sale is to be conducted and the address where such sale is to be conducted. 
(c)  The dates and period of time during which the sale is to be conducted. 
(d)  The name and address of the person or persons who will be in charge of and responsible for the conduct of such sale. 
(e)  A full explanation with regard to the condition or necessity which is the occasion for such sale, including a statement of the descriptive name of the sale and the reason why such name is truthfully descriptive of the sale. If the application is for a license to conduct a going out of business sale, it shall also contain a statement that the business will be discontinued at the premises where the sale is to be conducted upon termination of the sale. If the application is for a license to conduct a removal sale, it shall also contain a statement that the business will be discontinued at the premises where the sale is to be conducted upon termination of the sale, in addition to the location of the premises to which the business is to be moved. If the application is for a license to conduct a sale of goods damaged by fire, smoke, water or otherwise, it shall also contain a statement as to the time, location and cause of such damage. 
(f)  A full, detailed and complete inventory of the goods that are to be sold, which inventory shall: 
(1)  Itemize the goods to be sold and contain sufficient information concerning each item, including make and brand name, if any, to clearly identify it; 
(2)  List separately any goods which were purchased during a 60-day period immediately prior to the date of making application for the license; and 
(3)  Show the cost price of each item in the inventory together with the name and address of the seller of the item to the applicant, the date of the purchase, the date of the delivery of each item to the applicant and the total value of the inventory at cost. 
(g)  A statement that no goods will be added to the inventory after the application is made or during the sale and that the inventory contains no goods received on consignment. 
(h)  A statement that the applicant has in the past maintained a place of business within the City of Calumet City for not less than four (4) months prior to the time of making application for such license. However, this subparagraph shall not apply to any applicant who acquired a right, title or interest in the goods as: 
(1)  An heir, legatee or surviving joint tenant; 
(2)  An executor, administrator, trustee, or guardian; or 
(3)  Pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(i)  The application for license shall be subscribed and sworn to under oath by the applicant and shall, directly above the space reserved for the signature of the applicant, contain the following legend in at least ten-point bold type: "Warning to applicant. This application must be fully and accurately completed. False or misleading statements may subject applicant to the penalties of perjury in addition to other penalties provided by law." 
(Ord. No. 08-17, § 2, 3-13-2008)  
Sec. 54-2163. - License. 
The city clerk, upon receipt of an application giving fully and completely the information under oath as required above and upon receipt of the fee hereinafter provided for, shall issue a license to the applicant therefor authorizing such applicant to advertise, represent, and to sell the particular goods so inventoried at the time and place stated in the application and in accordance with these provisions. The license shall be issued in duplicate and shall bear a number and date of its expiration. A license issued under this chapter shall be granted and valid only for the sale of the inventoried goods which are the property of the licensee. Such license shall apply only to the premises specified in the application, and it may not be transferred or assigned. If a licensee is engaged in business in other locations, advertising or offering of goods on behalf of such locations shall not represent or imply any participation in or cooperation with the sale on the premises specified in the license, nor shall any advertising or any other offering of goods on behalf of the premises where the licensed sale is being conducted represent or imply any participation in or cooperation with such sale at other locations. 
No license shall be issued to any person: 
(a)  To conduct a sale in the trade name or style of a person in whose goods the applicant for the license has acquired a right or title thereto within six (6) months prior to the time of making application for such a license; 
(b)  To continue a sale in the name of a licensee under this chapter in whose goods such person acquired a right or title while such a sale is in progress; or 
(c)  To conduct a sale, other than an insurance sale, a salvage sale or a sale of damaged goods, on the same premises within one (1) year from the conclusion of a prior sale of the nature covered by this section. 
The previous sentence, including subparts (a) (b) and (c) thereof, shall not apply to any person who acquired a right, title or interest in goods as an heir, legatee or pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 08-17, § 2, 3-13-2008)  
Sec. 54-2164. - City clerk records. 
The city clerk shall endorse upon each such application the date of its filing and shall preserve it, and the inventory attached to it, as a public record of the clerk's office, and shall make a notation of it in a book to be kept for that purpose, properly indexed, showing the name of the applicant, the date of the application, the descriptive name of the proposed sale, the place where such sale is to be conducted, its duration, the date of the license issued thereon, and the total value of the goods thus to be sold. A copy of the inventory shall be available for public inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 08-17, § 2, 3-18-2008)  
Sec. 54-2165. - Unlawful acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise, or otherwise to represent for sale, or to sell, any goods at a bankruptcy, executor's, administrator's, receiver's or trustee's sale, except pursuant to, and in compliance with, federal or state statutory authority or judicial process, or as an assignee's or insolvent's sale except when there is a bona fide assignment for the benefit of creditors. 
(Ord. No. 08-17, § 2, 3-18-2008)  
Sec. 54-2166. - Time of sale. 
A license to conduct a sale issued pursuant to this chapter shall not be issued or valid for a period more than sixty (60) days from the start of such date, and such sale may be conducted only during the period set forth in such license; provided, however, that such license may be renewed once only for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days upon affidavit of the licensee that the goods listed in the inventory have not been disposed of and that no new goods have been or will be added to the inventory previously filed pursuant to this section by purchase, acquisition on consignment or otherwise. The application for renewal of the license shall be made not more than fourteen (14) days prior to the time of the expiration of the license and shall contain a new inventory of the goods remaining on hand at the time the application for renewal is made, which new inventory shall be prepared and furnished in the same manner and form as the original inventory. No renewal shall be granted if any goods have been added to the stock listed in the inventory since the date of the issuance of the license. A fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) shall accompany an application for a license and a fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for the renewal of a license. 
(Ord. No. 08-17, § 2, 3-18-2008)  
Sec. 54-2167. - Advertisement. 
A copy of the application for a license to conduct a sale under this article, including the inventory filed therewith, shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the sales room or place where the inventoried goods are to be sold, so that the public may be informed of the facts relating to the goods before purchasing same; provided, however, that such copy not show the purchase price of the goods. The duplicate copy of a license issued hereunder shall be attached to the front door of the premises where the sale is conducted in such a manner that it be clearly visible from the street. Any advertisement or announcement published in connection with the sale shall conspicuously show on its face the number of the license and the date of its expiration. 
(Ord. No. 08-17, § 2, 3-18-2008)  
Sec. 54-2168. - Change in inventory. 
Any substitution for or addition to goods described in an inventory filed pursuant to this section or any change in the time or place for a sale conducted pursuant to this section shall be unlawful and shall void any license issued to conduct a sale pursuant to this article and such license shall cease to apply to such sale. In the case of a sale of goods damaged by fire, smoke, water or otherwise, or in the case of an insurance sale or a salvage sale, the goods to be sold at such sale shall be clearly and distinctly segregated, marked or identified, and advertised, if at all, so that both on display and in advertising such goods may be readily distinguished from other stocks, and their identity readily ascertained. Any commingling of such goods with other stocks of the licensee in such a manner as to cause the goods to lose their separate identity, either on display or in advertising, shall be unlawful and shall void any license issued to conduct such a sale pursuant to this article and such license shall cease to apply to such sale. 
No person in contemplation of conducting any going out of business, removal, assignee's or creditor's sale, or during the continuance of such a sale, shall order or purchase any goods for the purpose of selling them at such sale, and any unusual purchase, or additions to the stock of such goods within sixty (60) days before the filing of such application for a license to conduct such a sale, shall be presumptive evidence that such purchases or additions were made in contemplation of such sale and for the purpose of selling them at such sale. 
(Ord. No. 08-17, § 2, 3-18-2008)  
Sec. 54-2169. - Penalty. 
Any person, including both the applicant and an individual filing on behalf of an applicant, who shall procure from the city clerk a license to conduct a sale under the description of one (1) of the names set out in section 54-2162 hereof which name shall be a misrepresentation of the true description or character of such sale or of the kind or condition of goods to be sold under such license, or any such person violating any of the other provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. Each false statement of fact in an application or inventory required to be filed hereunder shall constitute a separate offense under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 08-17, § 2, 3-18-2008)  
Secs. 54-2170—54-2175. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - INSTALLMENT LOAN BUSINESSES 
 
Sec. 54-2176. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of this article is to limit the number of installment loan businesses operating in the city in order to minimize the detrimental effects that certain installment loan business practices have on individuals and families. Nothing in this article is meant to conflict with the Payday Loan Reform Act, 815 ILCS 122/1-1 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 08-25, § 2, 4-24-2008)  
Sec. 54-2177. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, and the interpretation and application thereof, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein, unless the context in which they are used shall indicate otherwise. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the singular number include the plural number and words in the plural number include the singular number. Words or phrases not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Consumer installment loan business means any person, firm, association, corporation or partnership, engaged in the business or service of, and providing facilities for, consumers to receive cash or evidence of cash in exchange for a loan agreement to be repaid in installments over a period of weeks, months or years, which agreement is either collateralized or not, and for which any service charge is made or interest received, including but not limited to loans collateralized by personal check, payroll check, wage assignment or personal property title, or collateralized with the promise to relinquish possession to any personal property upon default, or engaged in any one (1) or more of the foregoing businesses; except, that this definition does not include: state or national banks, or savings banks, the United States Postal Service, Postal Telegraph Company or Western Union Telegraph Company, credit unions, or any person, firm, association, corporation or partnership engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property at retail who, in the course of such business and only as an incident thereto, receives checks, drafts, money orders or other evidences of money, or receives or issues a contractual agreement to receive money or evidence of money on an installment basis in exchange for tangible goods sold or rented on the premises, with or without using such tangible goods as collateral or as a repossessible item upon default. 
(Ord. No. 08-25, § 2, 4-24-2008)  
Sec. 54-2178. - License required. 
No person, firm, association, partnership or corporation shall conduct or operate a consumer installment loan business in violation of any of the provisions contained in this article and without having first obtained a license as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 08-25, § 2, 4-24-2008)  
Sec. 54-2179. - State licensing required; compliance with state law. 
Any person, firm, association, corporation or partnership applying for or holding a consumer installment loan business license, pursuant to this article, must also hold a license to operate from the State of Illinois, whenever such license is required pursuant to the Consumer Installment Loan Act, 205 ILCS 670/1, et seq., or the Payday Loan Reform Act, 815 ILCS 122/1-1 et seq., or pursuant to any other licensing provision of the State of Illinois and must show that such state license is current and active. In addition, any person, firm, association, corporation or partnership operating a consumer installment loan business within the city must at all times be in full compliance with all laws, rules and regulations of the State of Illinois pertaining to the operation of a consumer installment loan business. Failure to achieve and maintain full compliance with all laws, rules and regulations shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 08-25, § 2, 4-24-2008)  
Sec. 54-2180. - License application and issuance; fee. 
(a)  Application for a consumer installment loan business license shall be made to the city clerk and shall state therein the name of the applicant, the place of business and the number of employees intended to be engaged. The application shall identify the State of Illinois license number and shall be accompanied by good and sufficient proof of compliance with all State of Illinois licensing laws pertaining to a consumer installment loan business. The city clerk or designee may request additional information from the applicant. 
(b)  The annual fee for the license required by this article shall be three hundred sixty dollars ($360.00). 
(Ord. No. 08-25, § 2, 4-24-2008; Ord. No. 12-47, § 2, 10-11-12)  
Sec. 54-2181. - Term of license. 
See section 54-38 of the Municipal Code of the City of Calumet City. 
(Ord. No. 08-25, § 2, 4-24-2008)  
Sec. 54-2182. - Number of licenses; restrictions. 
The number of licenses for a consumer installment loan business shall not exceed nine (9). No license shall be issued unless renewed by the current holder of a license. If a current license holder relinquishes a license in writing to the city clerk, or if a current license holder fails to renew said license in a timely manner, a new applicant may receive a license. 
(Ord. No. 08-25, § 2, 4-24-2008)  
Sec. 54-2183. - Hours of operation. 
No consumer installment loan business may be open between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 08-25, § 2, 4-24-2008)  
Sec. 54-2184. - Transfer. 
(a)  Any license required and described in this article shall be a purely personal privilege, not to exceed its designated term. It shall not constitute property and shall not be transferable, except as provided in this article; and 
(b)  No person shall be authorized to do business or act under such license but the person to whom it is granted, or at any other place than specified therein, nor shall any license authorize any person to act under it at more than one (1) place of business, or at any other time than is therein specified. There shall be no transfer of the location of the license to premises other than the licensed premises; and 
(c)  In the case of the sale of a licensed consumer installment loan business by the current licensee, said current licensee may request that the purchasing person or entity succeed as licensee. Upon application of the purchaser, a consumer installment loan business may be issued by the city if the applicant meets all the criteria applicable to a new licensee and subject to the conditions imposed on the licensee to whom it was originally issued. The purchaser shall pay the required fees for the duration of the license term prior to being issued any license. Nothing contained in this section shall serve to increase the number of licenses as restricted in this article; or 
(d)  In the case of the death of any person licensed under the provisions of this article, before the term of the license shall have expired, the surviving partner, in the case of a partnership, or the legal representative may continue to act under the license for the unexpired term thereof subject to the conditions imposed on the licensee to whom it was originally issued. Nothing contained in this section shall serve to increase the number of licenses as restricted in this article. 
(Ord. No. 08-25, § 2, 4-24-2008)  
Sec. 54-2185. - Prohibited activities. 
(a)  No person, firm, association, partnership or corporation licensed to conduct a consumer installment loan business shall accept items in pawn or for bailment in exchange for cash or other evidence of cash nor shall a consumer installment loan business accept evidence of title or ownership in real property in exchange for cash or evidence of title or ownership in real property in exchange for cash or evidence of cash. 
(b)  No person shall alter, deface, forge, counterfeit, or duplicate any consumer installment loan business license issued by the city. 
(Ord. No. 08-25, § 2, 4-24-2008)  
Sec. 54-2186. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person, firm, association, partnership or corporation violating any provision of this article shall be fined not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. Every day that a violation exists constitutes a separate offense. 
(b)  Proceedings to enforce violations of this article may be initiated and conducted in accordance with and pursuant to the provisions of the Municipal Code of the city providing for administrative adjudication of code violations or by any other means provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 08-25, § 2, 4-24-2008)  
Secs. 54-2187—54-2200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIII. - AUTOMATED RENTAL MACHINES 
 
Sec. 54-2201. - Definitions. 
The term "automated rental machine" shall mean any machine which accepts coin, paper money or other remuneration that is intended for use as a vending machine for videos or DVDs for rental at times when no employee or representative of the sponsoring company or organization is present to accept payment. 
(Ord. No. 08-37, § 2, 6-12-2008)  
Sec. 54-2202. - Requirements; maintenance. 
Every requirement herein contained shall apply to any automated rental machine currently situated or to be placed within the corporate boundaries of the city. 
(a)  The organization or company benefitting from an automated rental machine or the host site on whose property an automated rental machine is situated, shall indicate the following information on an automated rental machine: name of organization or company, address, contact telephone number. 
(b)  All signage on an automated rental machine shall be in compliance with all requirements contained in the Municipal Code of the City of Calumet City. 
(c)  An automated rental machine shall be painted and in good condition and appearance, with no structural damage, no holes in the machine that would allow leaks, no visible rust and free of graffiti or advertising other than the name of the host site or organization or company benefitting from an automated rental machine. 
(d)  No automated rental machine shall be located outside of a building. An automated rental machine shall only be placed within a fully enclosed and principal building situated on a lot. No automated rental machine shall be situated in a fully enclosed and principal building in violation of any requirement contained in the Municipal Code of the City of Calumet City. No accessory building or secondary structure on a lot shall contain an automated rental machine. 
(Ord. No. 08-37, § 2, 6-12-2008)  
Sec. 54-2203. - License required. 
A license shall be obtained from the city before placement of an automated rental machine occurs as permitted in this article. 
(Ord. No. 08-37, § 2, 6-12-2008)  
Sec. 54-2204. - License application. 
Application for a license, pursuant to this section, shall be made to the city clerk on forms provided by the city. An application for the license required in section 54-2203 hereof shall contain the following information: 
(a)  Name and address of the applicant; 
(b)  The specific location of the proposed automated rental machine; 
(c)  The number and description of the automated rental machine intended to be kept for use at that location; and 
(d)  Any other information deemed necessary by the city clerk. 
The applicant must also provide, accompanying the application, a certificate of insurance and a statement of permission to locate the automated rental machine signed by the owner of the property, business owner or representative thereof, where the automated rental machine will be located. 
(Ord. No. 08-37, § 2, 6-12-2008)  
Sec. 54-2205. - License fee. 
The annual fee for the license required by this article shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(Ord. No. 08-37, § 2, 6-12-2008)  
Sec. 54-2206. - Term of license. 
See section 54-38 of the Municipal Code of the City of Calumet City.  
Sec. 54-2207. - Minors. 
A license holder under this article shall comply with section 62-393 of the Municipal Code of the City of Calumet City regarding material harmful to minors as well as all other applicable laws of the city. 
(Ord. No. 08-37, § 2, 6-12-2008)  
Sec. 54-2208. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The entity benefitting from an automated rental machine will be held primarily responsible for the maintenance, upkeep and servicing of an automated rental machine. However, in the event the entity fails to adequately maintain and service an automated rental machine, the business owner, or host site, on whose property an automated rental machine is placed shall also be responsible. 
(b)  Failure to properly maintain, upkeep or service an automated rental machine shall result in a fine pursuant to the penalty provision contained in this article. 
(Ord. No. 08-37, § 2, 6-12-2008)  
Sec. 54-2209. - Relationship to other laws. 
Nothing in this article shall be deemed to limit the city in any way to use any or all other means available to remove the nuisance, or summarily eliminate immediate hazards to the public health, safety or welfare as granted in any ordinances of the city or the laws or Constitution of the State of Illinois. 
(Ord. No. 08-37, § 2, 6-12-2008)  
Sec. 54-2210. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person, firm, association, partnership or corporation violating any provision of this article shall be fined not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. Every day that a violation exists constitutes a separate offense. 
(b)  Proceedings to enforce violations of this article may be initiated and conducted in accordance with and pursuant to the provisions of the municipal code of the city providing for administrative adjudication of code violations or by any other means provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 08-37, § 2, 6-12-2008)  
Secs. 54-2211—54-2219. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIV. - CRIME-FREE RESIDENTIAL RENTAL LICENSE 
 
Sec. 54-2220. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, and the interpretation and application thereof, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein, unless the context in which they are used shall indicate otherwise. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the singular number include the plural number and words in the plural number include the singular number. Words or phrases not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Common area means any area in a rented or leased building that is not within the dwelling unit and is or may be used by all persons occupying the building. 
Designated agent means any person or business entity hired or appointed to oversee the property that is being rented for residential purposes. This term shall also include any person that the landlord has designated to accept notices and processes. 
Dwelling unit means any rooming or boarding house, single-family attached or detached dwelling, multifamily dwelling unit, town home or condominium unit or any other dwelling unit. 
Landlord means any person, trustee, corporation, partnership, association, membership, cooperative, business entity or other title holder engaged in renting, leasing or operating a dwelling unit. 
Tenant means any person who resides in a dwelling unit, regardless of whether or not a written lease has been executed between the tenant and the landlord. 
(Ord. No. 09-27, § 2, 6-25-2009)  
Sec. 54-2221. - Crime-free residential rental license required. 
No landlord shall rent, lease or operate a dwelling unit unless a valid crime-free residential rental license has been issued by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 09-27, § 2, 6-25-2009)  
Sec. 54-2222. - Crime-free residential rental license; application and renewal. 
(a)  Application. No crime-free residential rental license under this article shall be issued except upon application filed with the city clerk, on forms provided by the city. Application for a crime-free residential rental license shall be made in the name of the landlord of the dwelling unit. The application shall set forth, but not be limited to, the following information: 
(1)  Name, home address, and business address of the landlord; a home phone number, work phone number, cellular phone number and facsimile number of the landlord. Post office boxes will not be accepted. 
(2)  If the applicant designates an agent, the application shall also set forth the name, address and telephone number of the designated agent and the authority of the designated agent to rent, manage, make expenditures and to accept notices and process. Post office boxes will not be accepted. 
(3)  The address of the dwelling unit and number of units in the dwelling unit. 
(4)  Such other information as the city may require from time to time. 
(b)  Renewal. Application for renewal shall be made in the same manner as for a new crime-free residential rental license. No crime-free residential rental license shall be renewed unless application has been made within thirty (30) days prior to the expiration date of a currently valid crime-free residential rental license. 
(Ord. No. 09-27, § 2, 6-25-2009)  
Sec. 54-2223. - Applicant residency. 
No crime-free residential rental license shall be issued or renewed for a nonresident applicant, unless such applicant designates in writing to the city clerk the name of a designated agent in the County of Cook, State of Illinois, for the receipt of notice and service of process for violation of the provisions of this article. Such designation shall be made in writing and shall accompany each application. 
No crime-free residential rental license shall be issued or renewed for a resident applicant, when such applicant is regularly absent from the city for a period of sixty (60) days or more, unless such applicant designates in writing to the city clerk the name of a designated agent in the County of Cook, State of Illinois, for the receipt of notice and service of process for violation of the provisions of this article. Such designation shall be made in writing and shall accompany each application. 
(Ord. No. 09-27, § 2, 6-27-2009)  
Sec. 54-2224. - Transferability. 
(a)  No crime-free residential rental license shall be transferable. 
(b)  Every person holding a crime-free residential rental license shall give written notice to the city clerk within twenty-four (24) hours after having conveyed or otherwise transferred or disposed of the legal control of any licensed dwelling unit. Such notice shall include the name and address of the person succeeding to the ownership or control of such dwelling unit. Each new landlord of a dwelling unit must obtain a new crime-free residential rental license. 
(Ord. No. 09-27, § 2, 6-25-2009)  
Sec. 54-2225. - Crime-free residential rental licensing requirements. 
The city clerk shall not issue a residential rental license unless the following requirements are met: 
(a)  The landlord or designated agent, attends and completes the crime-free housing seminar pursuant to section 54-2232 of this article of the Municipal Code. 
(b)  The landlord shall provide a current list of tenants and dwelling units that they occupy. This list shall be updated by the license holder or applicant upon occupancy of any new tenant. 
(c)  No new or renewal license shall be issued to a license applicant who owes a debt to the city for in excess of thirty (30) days beyond its due date. Such debt shall include but is not limited to debts, fines, fees, water bills, code enforcement citation fines or costs, traffic or red light photo enforcement citation fines, or any other indebtedness due the city. The city shall not reinstate a license until such overdue indebtedness has been paid in full, or other assurances that the debt will be paid, have been approved in writing by the mayor or mayor's designee. No new or renewal license shall be issued to a license applicant if the subject rental premises is delinquent in its Cook County property tax bills for in excess of two (2) years from said bills initial due date. 
(Ord. No. 09-27, § 2, 6-25-2009; Ord. No. 18-13, § 2, 4-23-2018)  
Sec. 54-2226. - Crime-free residential rental license term. 
A crime-free residential rental license shall be issued by the city clerk in accordance with the provisions of this article for a period of one (1) calendar year from the date of issuance, unless sooner revoked, and may be renewed annually. All crime-free residential rental licenses shall expire on December 31 next after issuance, unless previously revoked. 
(Ord. No. 09-27, § 2, 6-25-2009)  
Sec. 54-2227. - Crime-free residential rental license fee. 
Any multi-unit residential rental building with three (3) dwelling units or less and which includes one (1) or more dwelling units occupied by the owner or owners of the building will be exempt from payment of the annual crime-free housing ordinance rental license fee. This exemption from payment of the annual license fee will not apply if the owner of the building is not in compliance with all of the remaining provisions of chapter 54, article XIV of the Municipal Code at the time of application for the initial license or for renewal of the license. 
(Ord. No. 09-27, § 2, 6-25-2009; Ord. No. 11-39, § 2, 7-28-2011; Ord. No. 11-61, § 2, 10-27-2011; Ord. No. 12-5, § 2, 2-9-2012; Ord. No. 12-9, § 2, 3-8-2012; Ord. No. 16-40, § 2, 12-19-2016)  
Sec. 54-2228. - Crime-free residential rental license display. 
Each crime-free residential rental license shall be displayed in the foyer or other conspicuous place within the common area of the dwelling unit. 
(Ord. No. 09-27, § 2, 6-26-2009)  
Sec. 54-2229. - Security and safety inspection. 
No crime-free residential rental license shall be issued or renewed unless the dwelling unit along with its common areas has undergone a security and safety inspection and are found, after a security and safety inspection, to meet all provisions of this article and all applicable laws and regulations of the city. Where there is a change in ownership of a dwelling unit, before a new crime-free residential rental license is issued, the dwelling unit shall be subject to a security and safety inspection. Every dwelling unit along with its common area are also subject to periodic security and safety inspections by the city during the term of a crime-free residential rental license, at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner, to ensure continuing compliance with all provisions of this article and all applicable laws and regulations of the city. Any security and safety inspection shall be in addition to any other required inspection pursuant to the Municipal Code. 
The landlord or designated agent shall be provided with a security and safety inspection report describing any condition that fails to meet security and safety guidelines and constitutes a violation of any provisions of this article or applicable laws or regulations of the city, and shall be afforded a reasonable time period to correct such conditions. In the event that more than two (2) follow-up security and safety inspections are required to determine compliance, the applicant shall pay a service charge of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each additional security and safety inspection. Payment of the service charge must be made in full prior to issuance of the crime-free residential rental license. Failure to correct any violation shall result in the suspension or revocation of an existing crime-free residential rental license or, in the case of a new crime-free residential rental license application, the denial of a crime-free residential rental license application. 
(Ord. No. 09-27, § 2, 6-25-2009)  
Sec. 54-2230. - Required reports. 
Every landlord or designated agent shall report to the city clerk any change in the designated agent or any change in ownership of a dwelling unit within seven (7) days. 
(Ord. No. 09-27, § 2, 6-25-2009)  
Sec. 54-2231. - Exceptions. 
The residential rental licensing requirements shall not apply to group homes governed by the Specialized Living Centers Act, 405 ILCS 25/1 et seq., dealing with the developmentally disabled, or other similar use governed by state or federal laws, rules, or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 09-27, § 2, 6-25-2009)  
Sec. 54-2232. - Crime-free housing seminar. 
(a)  All persons applying for a crime-free residential rental license and all persons administering, managing or controlling the operation of any dwelling unit must attend a crime-free housing seminar, administered by the police department, prior to the issuance of the crime-free residential rental license. The seminar may be attended after the application has been submitted. The crime-free residential rental license will be issued after successful completion and pursuant to this article of the Municipal Code. Upon approval from the crime-free housing coordinator, seminars attended in other municipalities that participate in the crime-free housing seminar will also be accepted. Each landlord or designated agent shall attend a crime-free housing seminar every three (3) years. 
(b)  In the event a landlord files a crime-free residential rental license application, satisfies licensing requirements and a crime-free housing seminar is not available, a conditional license may be issued. A conditional license will be valid for three (3) months and upon successful completion of the seminar by the landlord or designated agent, a crime-free residential rental license shall be issued for the balance of the year. 
(c)  In the event a designated agent attends a crime-free housing seminar in compliance with this article and such designated agent is no longer employed or designated by the landlord for the dwelling unit, the landlord or a new designated agent shall successfully complete the crime-free housing seminar within three (3) months of the change. 
(d)  A crime-free residential rental license shall not be renewed if attendance at the crime-free rental housing seminar is required and not completed within three (3) months of notice. Notice shall be delivered or mailed to the landlord or designated agent at the address designated on the most recent crime-free residential rental license application. 
(e)  At any time after the date of issuance of a crime-free residential rental license, a landlord or designated agent shall be required to attend and successfully complete the crime-free housing seminar, if criminal activity is occurring or has occurred at the dwelling unit or on the property where the dwelling unit is located and the landlord is failing or has failed to initiate eviction proceedings or take other appropriate action. 
(Ord. No. 09-27, § 2, 6-25-2009)  
Sec. 54-2233. - Crime-free housing coordinator. 
A crime-free housing coordinator shall be designated by the chief of police. The crime-free housing coordinator may be a civilian or sworn officer. The crime-free housing coordinator shall be trained through the National Crime-Free Housing Association. The crime-free housing coordinator shall provide the city clerk with a list of landlords and designated agents, who have attended the crime-free housing seminar, along with dates of attendance and verification that the landlord or designated agent has otherwise complied with this article to be eligible for issuance or renewal of a crime-free residential rental license. 
(Ord. No. 09-27, § 2, 6-25-2009)  
Sec. 54-2234. - Crime-free lease addendum. 
Any landlord of a dwelling unit shall utilize the "Crime Free Lease Addendum" for any lease, extension or other agreement for the rental of a dwelling unit executed on or after January 1, 2010. The "Crime-Free Lease Addendum" shall be in the following form: 
CRIME-FREE LEASE ADDENDUM 
In addition to all other terms of the lease, Landlord and Tenant agree as follows: 
1.  The Tenant, any member of the Tenant's household, any guest or any other person associated with the Tenant or under the Tenant's control regardless of whether the individual engaging in such activity is a member of the household, on or off the leased premises: 
a)  Shall not engage in or facilitate any criminal activity, including any drug-related criminal activity, on or off the leased premises. "Drug related criminal activity" means the illegal manufacture, sale, distribution, use, or possession of any illegal or controlled substance as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802; and 
b)  Shall not engage in any act intended to facilitate criminal activity; and 
c)  Shall not permit the Dwelling Unit to be used for or to facilitate any criminal activity. 
2.  ANY ACTIVITY PROHIBITED BY THIS AGREEMENT SHALL CONSTITUTE A SUBSTANTIAL VIOLATION OF THE LEASE, MATERIAL NONCOMPLIANCE WITH THE LEASE, AND GROUNDS FOR TERMINATION OF TENANCY AND EVICTION. 
3.  Violation of the above provisions shall be a material and irreparable violation of the lease and good cause for termination of tenancy. A violation of any of the provisions of this added addendum shall be deemed a serious violation and a material and irreparable non-compliance. It is understood that a single violation shall be good cause for immediate termination of the lease. There is no "good cause" requirement of the State of Illinois for lease terminations. Unless otherwise provided by law, proof of violation shall not require criminal conviction but shall be by a preponderance of the evidence. 
4.  In case of conflict between the provisions of this addendum and any other provisions of the lease, the provisions of the addendum shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 09-27, § 2, 6-25-2009; Ord. No. 09-55, § 2, 9-23-2009)  
Sec. 54-2235. - Crime-free residential rental license suspension; revocation; hearing; appeal. 
The city clerk, or such designee, may suspend or revoke any crime-free residential rental license, on not less than seven (7) days notice to the licensee and an opportunity for a hearing, whenever the city clerk, or such designee, finds that a licensee has failed or refused to correct any violation of any law or regulation applicable to the property, after reasonable notice and opportunity to take corrective action. Any person whose crime-free residential rental license has been suspended or revoked shall be entitled to an appeal to the mayor, or such designee. Said appeal must be filed with the city clerk within seven (7) days of the notice of suspension or revocation. The decision of the mayor, or such designee, shall be final and binding. 
(Ord. No. 09-27, § 2, 6-25-2009)  
Sec. 54-2236. - Violation of the "Crime-Free Lease Addendum" prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit any tenant to occupy any dwelling unit in violation of any provision of the "Crime-Free Lease Addendum" required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 09-27, § 2, 6-25-2009)  
Sec. 54-2237. - Penalty. 
(a)  Unless otherwise specified in this article, any violation of this article may result in revocation of the crime-free residential rental license and a possible fine of no less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred and fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day that a violation exists shall be a separate offense. Each violation contained in a dwelling unit in a multi-unit structure which is in violation of this article shall be a separate and distinct violation. 
(b)  Proceedings to enforce violations of this article may be initiated and conducted in accordance with and pursuant to the provisions of the Municipal Code of the city providing for administrative adjudication of code violations or by any other means provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 09-27, § 2, 6-25-2009)  
Secs. 54-2238—54-2249. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XV. - PRECIOUS METAL DEALER BUSINESSES 
 
Sec. 54-2250. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of this article is to limit the number of precious metal dealer businesses, commonly known as cash-for-gold operators, operating in the city in order to minimize the detrimental effects that certain business practices have on individuals and families. Nothing in this article is meant to conflict with any state law. 
(Ord. No. 11-59, § 2, 10-27-2011)  
Sec. 54-2251. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, and the interpretation and application thereof, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein, unless the context in which they are used shall indicate otherwise. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the singular number include the plural number and words in the plural number include the singular number. Words or phrases not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Precious metal dealer means any person, firm, partnership, association or corporation engaged in the business or service of, and providing facilities for the purchasing of personal property made of or containing "precious metals," as defined herein, in the city in exchange for cash or such immediate tangible form of currency, and who maintains a permanent place of business in the city. 
Precious metals shall include, but is not limited to, gold, silver, and platinum, in such forms as coins, rings, bracelets, necklaces, jewelry of all types, silverware and any other item containing such precious metals with a retain value in excess of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(Ord. No. 11-59, § 2, 10-27-2011)  
Sec. 54-2252. - License required. 
No person, firm, association, partnership or corporation shall conduct or operate a precious metal dealer business in violation of any of the provisions contained in this article and without having first obtained a license as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 11-59, § 2, 10-27-2011)  
Sec. 54-2253. - Compliance with state law. 
Any person, firm, association, corporation or partnership applying for or holding a precious metal dealer business license, pursuant to this article, must at all times be in full compliance with all laws, rules and regulations of the State of Illinois pertaining to the operation of said business. Failure to achieve and maintain full compliance with all laws, rules and regulations shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 11-59, § 2, 10-27-2011)  
Sec. 54-2254. - License application and issuance; fee. 
(a)  Application for a precious metal dealer business license shall be made to the city clerk and shall state therein the name of the applicant, the place of business and the number of employees intended to be engaged. The application shall be accompanied by good and sufficient proof of compliance with all State of Illinois licensing laws pertaining to said business. The city clerk or designee may request additional information from the applicant. 
(b)  The annual fee for the license required by this article shall be three thousand five hundred dollars ($3,500.00). 
(Ord. No. 11-59, § 2, 10-27-2011)  
Sec. 54-2255. - Term of license. 
See section 54-38 of the Municipal Code of the City of Calumet City. 
(Ord. No. 11-59, § 2, 10-27-2011)  
Sec. 54-2256. - Number of licenses; restrictions. 
The number of licenses for a precious metal dealer business shall not exceed five (5). No license shall be issued unless renewed by the current holder of a license. If a current license holder relinquishes a license in writing to the city clerk, or if a current license holder fails to renew said license in a timely manner, a new applicant may receive a license. 
(Ord. No. 11-59, § 2, 10-27-2011)  
Sec. 54-2257. - Hours of operation. 
No precious metal dealer business may be open between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 11-59, § 2, 10-27-2011)  
Sec. 54-2258. - Record of transaction. 
Every precious metal dealer licensed under this article shall keep and use such books and forms in which shall be legibly written in ink and in the English language, at the time of each purchase, an accurate description of the goods, articles of things purchased, with the name, age, place of residence, driver's license number or other personal identification and a brief physical description of the person of the seller. The precious metal dealer shall also record in such book all identifying letters or marks inscribed on any of the articles so purchased. 
(Ord. No. 11-59, § 2, 10-27-2011)  
Sec. 54-2259. - Transfer. 
(a)  Any license required and described in this article shall be a purely personal privilege, not to exceed its designated term. It shall not constitute property and shall not be transferable, except as provided in this article; and 
(b)  No person shall be authorized to do business or act under such license but the person to whom it is granted, or at any other place than specified therein, nor shall any license authorize any person to act under it at more than one (1) place of business, or at any other time than is therein specified. There shall be no transfer of the location of the license to premises other than the licensed premises; and 
(c)  In the case of the sale of a licensed precious metal dealer business by the current licensee, said current licensee may request that the purchasing person or entity succeed as licensee. Upon application of the purchaser, a precious metal dealer business may be issued by the city if the applicant meets all the criteria applicable to a new licensee and subject to the conditions imposed on the licensee to whom it was originally issued. The purchaser shall pay the required fees for the duration of the license term, if applicable, prior to being issued any license. Nothing contained in this section shall serve to increase the number of licenses as restricted in this article; or 
(d)  In the case of the death of any person licensed under the provisions of this article, before the term of the license shall have expired, the surviving partner, in the case of a partnership, or the legal representative may continue to act under the license for the unexpired term thereof subject to the conditions imposed on the licensee to whom it was originally issued. Nothing contained in this section shall serve to increase the number of licenses as restricted in this article. 
(Ord. No. 11-59, § 2, 10-27-2011)  
Sec. 54-2260. - Prohibited activities. 
(a)  No person, firm, association, partnership or corporation licensed to conduct a precious metal dealer business shall accept items in pawn, nor shall a precious metal dealer business accept evidence of title or ownership in real property in exchange for cash or evidence of title or ownership in real property in exchange for cash or evidence of cash. 
(b)  No person shall alter, deface, forge, counterfeit, or duplicate any precious metal precious metal dealer business license issued by the city. 
(Ord. No. 11-59, § 2, 10-27-2011)  
Sec. 54-2261. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person, firm, association, partnership or corporation violating any provision of this article shall be fined not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. Every day that a violation exists constitutes a separate offense. 
(b)  Proceedings to enforce violations of this article may be initiated and conducted in accordance with and pursuant to the provisions of the Municipal Code of the city providing for administrative adjudication of code violations or by any other means provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 11-59, § 2, 10-27-2011)  
Chapter 58 - MOBILE HOME PARKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Planning, ch. 66; solid waste, ch. 74; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78; utilities, ch. 94; subdivisions, app. A; zoning, app. B. 
State Law reference— Power of city to regulate mobile home parks, 65 ILCS 5/11-42-8. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 58-1—58-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - MOBILE HOME PARKS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 58-31. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter the following terms shall mean as follows: 
Mobile home means a detached single-family dwelling unit which possesses all of the following characteristics: 
(1)  It is designed for long-term occupancy, and containing sleeping accommodations, a flush toilet, a tub or shower bath, and kitchen facilities, with plumbing and electrical connections provided for attachment to outside systems. 
(2)  It is designed to be transported after fabrication on its own wheels, or on flatbed or other trailers or detachable wheels. 
(3)  It arrives at the site where it is to be occupied as a dwelling complete, including major appliances and furniture, and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, location on foundation supports, connection to utilities and the like. 
Mobile home stand means the part of an individual lot which has been reserved for the placement of the mobile home. 
(Code 1980, § 16-1; Ord. of 12-15-1969, § 1(A) (6))  
Sec. 58-32. - Use required. 
It shall be unlawful for any property owner, tenant, lessee or administrator of any real estate in the city to rent, lease or to allow any mobile home that is to be used as a dwelling or living quarters to be parked on the land under their supervision, unless it is in a legal mobile home park licensed by the city and maintained in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1980, § 16-2; Ord. of 12-15-1969, § 1(AA))  
Sec. 58-33. - Furnishing electrical service to units not in park. 
It shall be unlawful for any electric company to furnish electricity to any mobile home that is to be used as a dwelling or living quarters in the city unless it is parked in a mobile home park licensed by the city. 
(Code 1980, § 16-3; Ord. of 12-15-1969, § 1(Z))  
Sec. 58-34. - Application of chapter to existing parks. 
(a)  Any mobile home park in operation on December 26, 1969, may be continued in operation, provided that driveways are constructed therein to a minimum surfaced width of twenty (20) feet in accordance with the requirements for surfacing of the subdivision regulations, not later than January 1, 1971. 
(b)  Whenever a mobile home is moved from any existing mobile home park in existence on December 26, 1969, the lot or space left vacant shall not again be occupied by another mobile home except that the lot or space be made to meet the requirements of this chapter. Permits may be issued for alterations which tend to make the mobile home park conform with this chapter. 
(Code 1980, § 16-4; Ord. of 12-15-1969, § 1(B), (C))  
Sec. 58-35. - Certificate of use and occupancy required. 
No mobile home park shall be occupied until a certificate of use and occupancy shall have been issued by the building commissioner to the effect that the mobile home park or the portion thereof for which such certificate is requested is in compliance with all applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1980, § 16-5; Ord. of 12-15-1969, § 1(Y))  
Sec. 58-36. - Minimum standards. 
(a)  The minimum standards for plumbing, heating and electrical systems as defined by the American Standards Association Project A119.1 (1963) are hereby made a part of and incorporated by reference into this Code, and mobile homes occupied as a dwelling unit shall comply with same; provided, however, that this requirement will not apply to occupied mobile homes in the city prior to December 15, 1969, or to units built prior to March 12, 1963. 
(b)  Mobile homes that display the official seal and register number of the Mobile Home Manufacturing Association and the Trailer Coach Association will be considered to comply with the American Standards Association standard A119.1. 
(c)  Mobile homes that do not meet these minimum standards for plumbing, heating and electrical systems will not be issued a certificate of use and occupancy permit by the building commissioner. 
(Code 1980, § 16-6; Ord. of 12-15-1969, § 1)  
Sec. 58-37. - Attendant required; duties generally. 
Each mobile home park licensed or to be constructed under the provisions of this chapter shall provide a responsible attendant, caretaker or agent whose duty it shall be to maintain the park, its facilities and equipment in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition. 
(Code 1980, § 16-16; Ord. of 12-15-1969, § 1(C))  
Sec. 58-38. - Minimum area. 
The minimum area for each mobile home park shall be twenty (20) acres. 
(Code 1980, § 16-17; Ord. of 12-15-1969, § 1(D))  
Sec. 58-39. - Maximum unit density. 
The total density of any mobile home park shall not exceed eight (8) units per gross acre and the net density on any particular acre within such park shall not exceed twelve (12) units per net acre. 
(Code 1980, § 16-18; Ord. of 12-15-1969, § 1(E))  
Sec. 58-40. - Minimum lot size. 
The minimum area for individual mobile home space shall be three thousand (3,000) square feet. 
(Code 1980, § 16-19; Ord. of 12-15-1969, § 1(F))  
Sec. 58-41. - Maximum homes on lot. 
No person shall place more than one (1) mobile home upon any lot in a mobile home park. 
(Code 1980, § 16-20; Ord. of 12-15-1969, § 1(F))  
Sec. 58-42. - Maximum lot coverage. 
The lot coverage of a mobile home, together with an expansion or accessory structure allowed by the provisions of this chapter shall not exceed forty (40) percent of the total mobile home lot area. 
(Code 1980, § 16-21; Ord. of 12-15-1969, § 1(V))  
Sec. 58-43. - Minimum lot width. 
The minimum average width for each mobile home lot shall be forty (40) feet. This average shall be maintained between points ten (10) feet in front of the mobile home stand and five (5) feet to the rear of the stand. 
(Code 1980, § 16-22; Ord. of 12-15-1969, § 1(H))  
Sec. 58-44. - Minimum distance between homes. 
No mobile home shall be placed within ten (10) feet of another, and in no case shall the mobile home be located closer than five (5) feet of the side or rear lot lines. 
(Code 1980, § 16-23; Ord. of 12-15-1969, § 1(I))  
Sec. 58-45. - Location of unit to property line. 
No mobile home shall be placed a lesser distance from the mobile home park boundary than the side yard width required in the zoning district in which the property is located, but in no case shall any mobile home be placed less than fifteen (15) feet from the mobile home park boundary. 
(Code 1980, § 16-24; Ord. of 12-15-1969, § 1(J))  
Sec. 58-46. - Lot markers and number. 
Every mobile home lot shall be clearly defined on the ground by permanent markers. There shall be posted and maintained in a conspicuous place on each lot a number corresponding to the number of each lot as shown on the plot plan submitted as required in section 58-82 of this Code so that each lot may be easily identified. 
(Code 1980, § 16-25; Ord. of 12-15-1969, § 1(K))  
Sec. 58-47. - Tenant storage facilities. 
All tenant storage shall provide storage facilities on or conveniently near each mobile home lot for the active storage of outdoor equipment, furniture or tools, and for the inactive storage of such other materials as are used only seasonally or infrequently by the typical tenant and cannot be conveniently stored in the typical mobile home. Such storage facilities shall be furnished by the tenant, but the operator of a mobile home park may require of tenants who choose to purchase storage facilities that all such storage facilities in the mobile home park be uniform. 
(Code 1980, § 16-26; Ord. of 12-15-1969, § 1(K))  
Sec. 58-48. - Office structures. 
If an office structure is provided as an accessory structure in a mobile home park its construction shall comply with all applicable laws and ordinances. 
(Code 1980, § 16-27; Ord. of 12-15-1969, § 1(V))  
Sec. 58-49. - Additions to mobile homes. 
No permanent or semipermanent structure shall be affixed to any mobile home as an addition to such mobile home, nor shall any accessory structure be permitted on any mobile home lot or in any mobile home park except those accessory structures required by this chapter and a structure to house an office. The prohibition herein against any addition or accessory to a mobile home shall not apply to a canopy or awning designed for use with a mobile home, or to any expansion unit or accessory structure specifically manufactured for mobile homes. 
(Code 1980, § 16-28; Ord. of 12-15-1969, § 1(V))  
Sec. 58-50. - Base enclosure. 
All mobile homes which are placed on foundations or piers shall have the entire perimeter enclosed. The enclosure shall be of a material approved by the building commissioner. The metal panels manufactured for mobile home enclosures shall be considered to meet these requirements. 
(Code 1980, § 16-29; Ord. of 12-15-1969, § 1(G))  
Sec. 58-51. - Fuel storage facilities. 
No individual storage facilities for gasoline, oil, gas, liquefied petroleum or other fuels shall be placed within a mobile home park. 
(Code 1980, § 16-30; Ord. of 12-15-1969, § 1(T))  
Sec. 58-52. - Parking spaces. 
Parking spaces shall be provided for not less than one (1) car per mobile home lot. Each such parking space shall be not less than nine (9) feet wide and twenty (20) feet deep and shall be surfaced for its entire area with durable, hard material, suitable for all-weather use. 
(Code 1980, § 16-31; Ord. of 12-15-1969, § 1(M))  
Sec. 58-53. - Water supply generally. 
An adequate supply of potable water shall be furnished from a public water supply system or from a private water system conforming to all applicable laws, regulations, resolutions and ordinances, with supply faucets located on each mobile home lot. An adequate supply of hot water shall be provided at all times to all hot water outlets required by this chapter. 
(Code 1980, § 16-32; Ord. of 12-15-1969, § 1(N))  
Sec. 58-54. - Sewage disposal. 
In each mobile home park, all waste or waste water, including such waste or waste water from mobile homes from a faucet, toilet, tub, shower, sink, slop sink, drain, washing machine, garbage disposal unit or laundry shall empty into an approved sewer system installed in accordance with the subdivision ordinance. 
(Code 1980, § 16-33; Ord. of 12-15-1969, § 1(O))  
Sec. 58-55. - Laundry facilities. 
(a)  When laundry facilities are provided by a mobile home park such facilities shall have hot and cold water outlets which equal not less than the number of laundry trays and washing machines provided, and an ample number of electrical outlets shall be provided supplying current sufficient to operate each such machine. 
(b)  The laundry facilities shall be in a separate service building or, if in the same building where sanitation facilities are housed, shall be separated from the area housing sanitation facilities by a soundproof wall. 
(Code 1980, § 16-34; Ord. of 12-15-1969, § 1(Q))  
Sec. 58-56. - Garbage and trash disposal. 
Corrosion-resistive metal garbage cans or other noncombustible containers, with tight-fitting covers, shall be provided in quantities adequate to permit disposal of all garbage and rubbish. Each mobile home lot shall have at least one (1) garbage can within one hundred (100) feet of it. The cans shall be kept in sanitary condition as determined by inspection of the health commissioner. Garbage and rubbish shall be collected and disposed of as frequently as may be necessary, but not less than weekly, to ensure that the garbage cans shall not overflow. 
(Code 1980, § 16-35; Ord. of 12-15-1969, § 1(R))  
Sec. 58-57. - Electric lighting and outlets. 
All entrances, exits and driveways to a mobile home park shall be lighted at night. Not less than a one hundred (100) watt electric light shall be provided for each two hundred (200) linear feet of private street and at each entrance and exit to the mobile home park. At least one (1) receptacle outlet for each mobile home space shall be provided; this receptacle and other electric wiring shall conform to the requirements of the electric code. Streetlighting on public streets shall conform to the requirements in the subdivision ordinance and electric code. 
(Code 1980, § 16-36; Ord. of 12-15-1969, § 1(S))  
Sec. 58-58. - Playgrounds. 
The size of the recreational area shall be not less than three (3) percent of the gross site area devoted to recreational facilities, generally provided in a central location, including suitable landscaping, fencing and benches. In larger courts, decentralization will be allowed. Recreation areas shall include space for community buildings and community use facilities, such as adult recreation, child playgrounds and natural open space. 
(Code 1980, § 16-37; Ord. of 12-15-1969, § 1(U))  
Sec. 58-59. - Service buildings. 
(a)  Each mobile home park may provide service buildings to house such toilet, bathing or other sanitation facilities as are prescribed. 
(b)  All service buildings shall be permanent structures complying with all applicable laws and ordinances regulating the construction of buildings. In addition all service buildings in a mobile home park shall be adequately lighted at all times of day and night and shall be well ventilated with screens on all openings. They shall be constructed of such moistureproof material, including painted woodwork, as shall permit repeated cleaning and washing and shall be maintained at a temperature of not less than sixty-eight (68) degrees Fahrenheit during the period from September first to May fifteenth. The floors of all service buildings shall be of water-impervious material and shall contain a drain and shall be so constructed as to assure efficient drainage to such drain. 
(c)  All service buildings and the grounds of a mobile home park shall be maintained in a clean, sightly condition and kept free of any condition that will menace the health of any occupant or the public or constitute a nuisance or fire hazard. 
(Code 1980, § 16-38; Ord. of 12-15-1969, § 1(P))  
Sec. 58-60. - Permitted obstructions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following shall not be considered as obstructions when located in the yards indicated: 
(1)  Any yard: Chimneys, overhanging roof eaves, open terraces and awnings adjoining the mobile home if they do not exceed ten (10) percent of the depth of the yard; ornamental light standards and flagpoles, fences, trees and shrubs, except that on corner lots, fences, trees and shrubs shall not be higher than thirty (30) inches above the center line grade of the intersecting streets if located in that portion of a required front or side yard situated within twenty (20) feet of the lot corner formed by the intersection of any two (2) street lines. 
(2)  Front yards: No other obstructions shall be permitted. 
(3)  Side yards: Open accessory off-street parking spaces, except in a side yard abutting a street. 
(4)  Rear yards: Private garages or carports, if attached or structurally a part of the mobile home, open accessory off-street parking spaces, accessory sheds, tool rooms, or other similar accessory buildings; private swimming pools in accordance with regulations of the city. Accessory buildings or structures may occupy not more than thirty (30) percent of a rear yard. 
(Code 1980, § 16-39; Ord. of 12-15-1969, § 1(W))  
Sec. 58-61. - Duties—Tenants, landlords, and owners. 
(a)  All mobile homes in the City of Calumet City as authorized in Chapter 58 shall be kept in good repair and be fit for human habitability. This includes, but is not limited to: (1) ensuring that the mobile home is structurally sound; (2) keeping the mobile home fit for human occupancy; (3) ensuring that the mobile home is kept in a sanitary condition; (4) keeping the exterior in good sanitary condition; (5) refraining from the storage of any inoperable vehicles; (6) refraining from the storage of any icebox, stove, building material, furniture or other similar items on the exterior premises; and (7) not allowing the property to fall into a state of disrepair. 
(b)  Additionally, any persons renting or leasing a mobile home in the City of Calumet City must, in addition to section (a) above, must adhere to the following: (1) keep the supplied basic facilities, including plumbing fixtures, refrigeration and cooking equipment and electrical fixtures in a leased mobile home unit in a clean and sanitary condition and be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in their proper use and operation; (2) not deliberately or negligently destroy, deface, damage, impair or remove any part of the premises or knowingly permit any person to do so; (3) conduct himself and require other persons on the premises with his consent to conduct themselves in a manner that will not affect or disturb his neighbors peaceful enjoyment of the premises; (4) abide by all the rules or regulations concerning the use, occupation and maintenance of the premises; and (5) not allowing the property to fall into a state of disrepair. 
(c)  The Department of Inspectional Services of the City of Calumet City shall hereby inspect all mobile homes and mobile home parks on a biannual basis. Any mobile homes or mobile home parks found to not be in compliance shall be subject to a fine no less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and no more that seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) to be paid by either the owner of that mobile home or the licensee and that party shall be ordered to take whatever measures necessary to ensure that the mobile home or mobile home park complies with the provisions of the Municipal Code or their license may be subject to revocation. 
(d)  All persons owning, leasing or renting a mobile home in the City of Calumet City shall comply with the laws of the State of Illinois, the County of Cook, and the City of Calumet City. This included but is not limited to the Mobile Home Landlord Tenants Rights Act, 765 ILCS 745. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 1, 5-26-2005)  
Sec. 58-62. - Attendant or caretaker. 
Every mobile home park shall be in the charge of a responsible attendant or caretaker whose name shall be on file at all times with the city clerk. It shall be the duty of that attendant or caretaker to maintain the mobile home park, it facilities and equipment in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition and shall be responsible, with the licensee, for any violations of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 2, 5-26-2005)  
Sec. 58-63. - Cleanliness and sanitation; responsibilities of licensees, tenants, caretakers and/or attendants. 
(a)  The licensee or permittee, tenant, or a duly authorized attendant or caretaker, shall, at all times, keep the mobile home park and its facilities and equipment in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition. The attendant or caretaker of the mobile home park shall be answerable, with the licensee, permittee, or tenant, for a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter to which the licensee, permittee, or tenant is subject. 
(b)  The Department of Inspectional Services of the City of Calumet City shall hereby inspect all mobile homes and mobile home parks on a biannual basis. Any mobile homes or mobile home parks found to not be in compliance shall be subject to a fine no less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and no more that seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) to be paid by either the owner of that mobile home or the licensee and that party shall be ordered to take whatever measures necessary to ensure that the mobile home or mobile home park complies with the provisions of the Municipal Code or their license may be subject to revocation. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 3, 5-26-2005)  
Sec. 58-64. - Landlord and Tenant Act. 
The City of Calumet City encourages all landlords to distribute a copy of the Landlord Tenant Act, 765 ILCS 705, to all tenants, leasees, or renters in order to keep all parties involved informed of their rights based on this act. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 4, 5-26-2005)  
Sec. 58-65. - Mobile Home Landlord Tenant Rights Act. 
(a)  The City of Calumet City encourages all Landlords to distribute a copy of the Mobile Home Landlord Tenant Rights Act, 765 ILCS 745, to all tenants, leasees, or renters in order to keep all parties involved informed of their rights based on this act. 
(b)  No person shall rent or lease or offer for rent or lease any mobile home that does not conform to the sanitation, housing, and health codes of the State of Illinois, the County of Cook, the City of Calumet City, and the subdivision, if any, in which the mobile home is located. 
(c)  A landlord of a mobile home park must offer to all present and future tenants a copy of a written lease with a term not less than twelve (12) months. 
(d)  If a tenant fails to sign said written lease which has been signed by the landlord and tendered to the tenant, that tenant must provide written notification of their rejection of said lease. If the tenant continues possession of the property and continues to pay rent without reservation, that tenant shall be deemed to have accepted the terms of the written lease with the same effect as if it had been signed by the tenant. 
(e)  Every lease of a mobile home or lot in a mobile home park shall contain an option which automatically renews the lease, unless: (1) the tenant shall notify the owners thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the lease that he does not intend to renew the lease; or (2) the park owner shall notify the tenant thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the lease that the lease will not be renewed and specify in writing the reasons, such as violations of park rules, health and safety codes or irregular or non-payment of rent; or (3) the park owner elects to cease the operation of either all or a portion of the mobile home park. The tenants shall be entitled to at least twelve (12) months' notice of such ceasing of operations. If twelve (12) months or more remain on the existing lease at the time of notice, the tenant is entitled to the balance of the term of his lease. If there is less than twelve (12) months remaining in the term of his lease, the tenant is entitled to the balance of his lease plus a written month-to-month tenancy, at the expiring lease rate to provide him with a full twelve (12) months' notice. 
(f)  The terms for payment of rent shall be clearly set forth and all charges for services, ground or lot rent, unit rent, or any other charges shall be specifically itemized in the lease and in all billings of the tenant by the park owner. 
(g)  The owner shall not change the rental terms nor increase the cost of fees, except as provided herein. 
(h)  The park owner shall not charge a transfer or selling fee as a condition of sale of a mobile home that is going to remain within the park unless a service is rendered. 
(i)  Rents charged to a tenant by a park owner may be increased upon the renewal of a lease. Notification of an increase shall be delivered sixty (60) days prior to expiration of the lease. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 5, 5-26-2005)  
Sec. 58-66. - Security Deposit Return Act. 
The City of Calumet City encourages all landlords to distribute a copy of the Security Deposit Return Act, 765 ILCS 710, to all tenants, leasees, or renters in order to keep all parties involved informed of their rights based on this act. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 6, 5-26-2005)  
Sec. 58-67. - Security Deposit Interest Act. 
The City of Calumet City encourages all landlords to distribute a copy of the Security Deposit Interest Act, 765 ILCS 715, to all tenants, leasees, or renters in order to keep all parties involved informed of their rights based on this act. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 7, 5-26-2005)  
Sec. 58-68. - Rent Concession Act. 
The City of Calumet City encourages all landlords to distribute a copy of the Rent Concession Act, 765 ILCS 730, to all tenants, leasees, or renters in order to keep all parties involved informed of their rights based on this act. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 8, 5-26-2005)  
Sec. 58-69. - Duties of health inspector. 
The city health inspector or his designee shall be responsible for the final approval of applications and permits and shall make all inspections and orders necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. The health inspector or his designee shall also direct the duties of other department heads whose services are required for additional inspection. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 9, 5-26-2005)  
Sec. 58-70. - Right of city to enter property. 
Whenever the city determines that there is a danger to the health, safety, and welfare of any resident or guest of a mobile home park, it may enter the property in order to inspect and/or take corrective action to remedy the problem. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 10, 5-26-2005)  
Sec. 58-71. - Point of sale inspection. 
(a)  A point-of-sale inspection shall be required relative to any transfer of any interest in property, which is subject to this section, except as exempted herein. 
(b)  At the point of sale of any mobile home within the city, the seller shall apply for a "certificate of compliance" to the department of inspectional services or to any department so designated by the department of inspectional services in order to comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  All structures shall be in a good state of repair as to general building maintenance, including on-site sidewalks and accessory structures, including any legal nonconforming use structures, and in full compliance with city building and zoning ordinances, including any B.O.C.A. codes adopted by the city. 
(2)  All mobile homes shall be in compliance with all current building codes, housing codes and fire code requirements and regulations, including, but not limited to, the installation and maintenance of smoke detectors. This provision is specifically subject to all other provisions of this section heretofore and hereinafter delineated. 
(3)  After the initial inspection as provided herein, the director of inspectional services may require additional independent certification by a contractor who has registered with the department of inspectional services. Wherever possible, all contractors registered with the department of inspectional services shall be bonded and shall make available, upon request, copies of errors and omissions insurance policies which cover city inspections. 
(4)  In the event the inspection reveals any violation of any applicable provision of this section or any building and/or zoning or other code adopted by the city and in lieu of immediate compliance by the seller, the buyer and the seller agree, and the buyer accepts the responsibility, to bring the structure into compliance with all applicable code requirements within a period not to exceed one hundred twenty (120) working days after the closing of the transaction, and a conditional certificate of compliance shall be issued in order to allow the transaction (closing) to be completed. Said conditional certificate of compliance shall be issued by the department of inspectional services or the department's designees and said certificate shall terminate and be held for naught on the one hundred twenty-first day after closing and no extensions will be granted. A buyer who elects to accept the premises, subject to the inspection, with existing violations, and who agrees, in order to close the transaction, to be responsible as provided herein, shall execute a sworn affidavit satisfactory to the director of inspectional services, which will clearly indicate that the buyer is fully aware of the existing violations and any violations which may subsequently occur prior to the expiration of the conditional certificate and further agrees to accept the requirement and obligation to bring the structure into compliance within the one hundred twenty (120) working day requirement. Further, in the event the buyer fails to complete said obligation, the buyer hereby agrees to submit to the jurisdiction and venue of the circuit court of the county and to waive service of summons subject only to the notice requirement as required by law in order to enable the city to expeditiously obtain an order of compliance with this section. 
(5)  A certificate of compliance issued to the seller shall be valid for one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of issuance. 
(c)  Transfer stamps, as required by sections 82-321 et seq. of the Calumet City Municipal Code, shall not be issued by the clerk until a point-of-sale inspection has been completed and a "certificate of compliance," as well as the required paid water bill, has been issued to the seller by the director of inspectional services and appropriate personnel of the water department. 
(d)  In issuing a certificate of compliance, whether temporary or permanent, the city does not make any warranty, representation or statement nor does it intend to insure or guarantee to either buyer or seller of the property subject to the point-of-sale inspection or any of their designees, agents, representatives, heirs or assigns or any other interested party, including mortgage companies, insurance companies, banks or any other party which may have any interest relative to the property subject to the point-of-sale inspection, nor does the city affirm that there are no additional unnoted violations relative to any other provisions of any of the codified ordinances of the city, the B.O.C.A. Code or relevant statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations of the County of Cook, the State of Illinois or the United States of America. 
(e)  Inspection fee schedule. 
(1)  The fee for a point-of-sale inspection shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) for all residential and multifamily inspections for the initial inspection and one (1) follow-up inspection. Additional required follow-up inspections shall be at the rate of fifty dollars ($50.00) each. The failure of an owner/seller or his designee to appear at the time of inspection shall result in a fifty-dollar ($50.00) penalty. 
(2)  In the event additional inspections are required as per subsection (b)(4) of this section, the cost of the additional inspections shall be borne by the owner/seller. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 11, 5-26-2005)  
Secs. 58-72—58-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE AND PERMIT 
 
Sec. 58-81. - License and permit required. 
No person shall construct or alter a mobile home park without a permit to do so, or operate a mobile home park without a license. 
(Code 1980, § 16-7; Ord. of 12-15-1969, § 1(C))  
Sec. 58-82. - Permit and license applications. 
In order to obtain a permit to construct, or an original license to operate, a mobile home park, a person shall file with the building commissioner a written application setting forth: 
(1)  The full name and address of the applicant, or the names and addresses of the partners if the applicant is a partnership, or the names and addresses of the officers if the applicant is a corporation, and the present or last occupation of the applicant at the time of the filing of the application. 
(2)  The location and legal description of the tract of land upon which it is proposed to operate and maintain the mobile home park. 
(3)  The proposed and existing facilities in the mobile home park for water supply, sewage, garbage and waste disposal, fire protection and for a community building which shall include a description of toilets, urinals, sinks, wash basins, slop sinks, showers, drains and laundry facilities, the proposed alterations therein and the maintenance thereof. 
(4)  The proposed method of lighting the structures and land upon which the mobile home park is to be located. 
(5)  The site plans of the mobile home park, the plans and specifications for new buildings and facilities or the proposed alterations in existing facilities as may be required by the rules and regulations of the city under the provisions of this chapter. 
(6)  A statement of the fire-fighting facilities, public or private, which are available to the mobile home park. 
An affidavit of the applicant as to the truth of the matters contained in the application shall be attached thereto. Where a permit to construct as well as an original license to operate is sought by the applicant, a request therefor shall be made in the same application. 
(Code 1980, § 16-8; Ord. of 12-15-1969, § 1(C))  
Sec. 58-83. - Permit and license fee. 
Each application for a permit to construct a mobile home park or a license to operate and maintain same shall be accompanied by an application fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). Each application fee shall be paid to the city by a separate certified check or U.S. money order in amount of the application fee only and said application fee once paid to the city shall not be refunded. 
(Code 1980, § 16-9; Ord. of 12-15-1969, § 1(C); Ord. No. 05-87, § 2, 12-8-2005)  
Sec. 58-84. - Permit or license issuance or denial generally; inspection of certain facilities. 
(a)  Upon receipt of an application for a permit to construct a mobile home park, or an application for a license to operate and maintain the same, the building commissioner shall, if the park is, or the proposed park will be, in conformity with this chapter and the rules and regulations adopted by the building commissioner pursuant thereto, issue a permit to construct or an original license, as the case may be. If the application for a permit to construct or an original license is declined, the building commissioner shall give the reasons therefor in writing to the applicant, and if the objection can be corrected, the applicant may amend his application and resubmit it for approval. 
(b)  If a permit to construct a mobile home park has been issued, the holder thereof upon completion thereof shall notify the building commissioner. The building commissioner shall then inspect the mobile home park and if completed in accordance with the accepted license application, the building commissioner shall then issue the license. 
(Code 1980, § 16-10; Ord. of 12-15-1969, § 1(C))  
Sec. 58-85. - Transfer of license. 
Any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be transferable only upon the written consent of the city; provided, however, that the city may not withhold such consent where the provisions of this chapter have been complied with in all other respects. 
(Code 1980, § 16-11; Ord. of 12-15-1969, § 1(C))  
Sec. 58-86. - Permit or license display. 
All permits to construct, all licenses to operate, and all permits to make alterations therein shall be prominently displayed in the office of the mobile home park. 
(Code 1980, § 16-12; Ord. of 12-15-1969, § 1(C))  
Sec. 58-87. - Changes to sanitary water or waste facilities or plot plan; permit. 
(a)  No person shall make change in any sanitary facilities, methods of water supply, sewer, drainage, garbage or waste disposal, and no change in the plot plan submitted to the city shall be made without first making a written application to the city and receiving a written permit therefrom. Such application shall be made in the way and manner hereinbefore set forth; such change or changes shall comply with such safety and sanitary code, codes, rules and regulations as are applicable thereto. 
(b)  Such a permit shall not relieve the applicant from securing building permits or from complying with any other ordinances applicable thereto. 
(Code 1980, § 16-13; Ord. of 12-15-1969, § 1(C))  
Sec. 58-88. - License fee. 
(a)  In addition to the required license application fee provided for herein, a person holding a license under the provisions of this chapter shall pay to the city clerk on or before first of January of each year an annual license fee of six hundred dollars ($600.00) plus sixty dollars ($60.00) for each trailer space in the mobile home park; provided, however, that any applicant for an original license to operate a new mobile home park shall be required to pay one-half (½) of the annual fee if such mobile home park begins operation after the last day of June. 
(b)  Each such license fee shall be paid to the city by a separate certified check or U.S. money order in the amount of the license fee only and any license fee or any part thereof, once paid to and accepted by the city shall not be refunded. 
(Code 1980, § 16-14; Ord. of 12-15-1969, § 1(C); Ord. No. 05-87, § 2, 12-8-2005)  
Sec. 58-89. - License suspension or revocation; abatement of violations. 
Any license granted pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to revocation or suspension by the city; however, the building commissioner shall first serve or cause to be served upon the licensee a written notice in which shall be specified the way in which such licensee has failed to comply with this chapter, or any rules or regulations promulgated by the city pertaining thereto. Said notice shall require the licensee to remove or abate such nuisance, insanitary or objectionable condition specified in such notice within ten (10) days or within a longer period of time as may be allowed by the building commissioner. If the licensee fails to comply with the terms and conditions of said notice, within the time specified or such extended period of time, the building commissioner may revoke or suspend such license. 
(Code 1980, § 16-15; Ord. of 12-15-1969, § 1(C))  
Secs. 58-90—58-110. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - MOBILE HOME STANDS 
 
Sec. 58-111. - Generally. 
The placement of a mobile home stand shall provide for the practical placement on and removal from the lot of both the mobile home and its appurtenant structures, and the retention of the home on the lot in a stable condition and in satisfactory relationship to its surroundings. 
(Code 1980, § 16-51; Ord. of 12-15-1969, § 1(G))  
Sec. 58-112. - Size. 
The size of a mobile home stand shall be suitable for the general market to be served by the individual proposal and suitable to fit dimensions of mobile homes anticipated, including mobile home appurtenant structures or appendages. 
(Code 1980, § 16-52; Ord. of 12-15-1969, § 1(G))  
Sec. 58-113. - Location. 
The location of each mobile home stand shall be at such elevation, distance and angle in relation to the access street and the mobile home accessway that placement and removal of the mobile home is practical. 
(Code 1980, § 16-53; Ord. of 12-15-1969, § 1(G))  
Sec. 58-114. - Construction. 
A mobile home stand shall be composed of appropriate material, properly graded, which is placed and compacted so as to be durable and adequate for the support of the maximum anticipated loads during all seasons, and protected against the action of frost or freezing. 
(Code 1980, § 16-54; Ord. of 12-15-1969, § 1(G))  
Sec. 58-115. - Gradient. 
There shall be a minimum of two (2) percent longitudinal and adequate crown or cross-gradient for surface or drainage for a mobile home stand. 
(Code 1980, § 16-55; Ord. of 12-15-1969, § 1(G))  
Sec. 58-116. - Distance from certain property. 
(a)  The distance from the line or corner of the mobile home stand to a private access drive, a common parking area, a common walk or other common area shall be ten (10) feet minimum. Patios, carports and individual storage facilities shall be disregarded in determining yard widths. 
(b)  The distance from the line or corner of the mobile home stand to a public street shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet. 
(Code 1980, § 16-56; Ord. of 12-15-1969, § 1(J))  
Secs. 58-117—58-140. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - PATIOS 
 
Sec. 58-141. - Required. 
Each mobile home lot shall provide an appropriate outdoor living space to supplement the limited interior space of a mobile home. 
(Code 1980, § 16-68; Ord. of 12-15-1969, § 1(K))  
Sec. 58-142. - Construction. 
(a)  Any subgrading in connection with a patio required by this article shall be well drained, uniformly graded and compacted. 
(b)  A patio required by this article shall be constructed so as to provide a useful outdoor surface constructed or formed either monolithically or in movable units with weather-resistant materials placed sufficiently close together to create a paved area. 
(Code 1980, § 16-69; Ord. of 12-15-1969, § 1(K))  
Sec. 58-143. - Location. 
Every patio location shall be convenient to the entrance of the mobile home, appropriately related to open areas of the lot and other facilities, fitted to terrain and natural features and related to anticipated mobile home models. 
(Code 1980, § 16-70; Ord. of 12-15-1969, § 1(K))  
Sec. 58-144. - Elevation. 
Where practical, the patio required by this article shall be at an elevation at least as high as the elevation of its mobile home stand. Where topographical conditions permit, the patio and adjoining yard areas on the entry side of the mobile home stand may be as much as two (2) feet higher than the mobile home stand in order that the level of the patio and outdoor living areas will be close to the floor level of an in-place mobile home. The grade difference between the patio and the stand may be taken up by a retaining wall or cribbing or by an earth slope. Where the patio is higher than the mobile home stand, adequate surface drainage of the mobile home stand shall be provided across the other side or ends of the stand. 
(Code 1980, § 16-71; Ord. of 12-15-1969, § 1(K))  
Secs. 58-145—58-170. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - STREETS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78. 
 
Sec. 58-171. - Compliance with subdivision ordinance. 
All streets in a mobile home park shall conform to the requirements of the subdivision ordinance. 
(Code 1980, § 16-83; Ord. of 12-15-1969, § 1(L))  
Sec. 58-172. - Minimum size. 
Where private streets are provided within a mobile home park the minimum private street on which an individual mobile home lot fronts shall be thirty (30) feet in width, and shall be located approximately in the center of a parcel of property equal to the width of right-of-way for a local residential street (sixty-six (66) feet); provided, however, that this shall not apply to mobile home parks existing on December 26, 1969. Private streets in such existing mobile home parks shall be not less than twenty (20) feet in width. 
(Code 1980, § 16-84; Ord. of 12-15-1969, § 1(L))  
Sec. 58-173. - Obstructions. 
All private streets in a mobile home park shall have unobstructed access to a public street or highway. 
(Code 1980, § 16-85; Ord. of 12-15-1969, § 1(L))  
Secs. 58-174—58-190. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - WALKS 
 
Sec. 58-191. - Required. 
Walks shall be provided in a mobile home park for safe, convenient, all-season pedestrian access; of adequate width for intended use; durable and convenient to maintain. There shall be: 
(1)  Individual walks to each mobile home stand from a paved driveway or parking space connecting to a paved street. 
(2)  Common walks in locations where pedestrian traffic is concentrated; for example, at the court entrance and to the court office and other important facilities. 
(Code 1980, § 16-93; Ord. of 12-15-1969, § 1(L))  
Sec. 58-192. - Construction specifications. 
Walks shall be constructed of concrete in accordance with the subdivision ordinance. The width shall be generally at least three (3) feet for entrance walks on individual lots and at least five (5) feet for common walks. Sudden changes in alignment and gradient shall be avoided. Required walks are not to be used on drainageways. 
(Code 1980, § 16-94; Ord. of 12-15-1969, § 1(L))  
Chapter 62 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Law enforcement, ch. 46; traffic and vehicles, ch. 90. 
State Law reference— Police power of city, 65 ILCS 5/11-1-1. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 62-1. - Violation; penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, where no other penalty is specifically provided, shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. 
(Code 1980, § 18-82; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-2. - Anti-loitering and/or trespassing program. 
(a)  The police department shall implement and enforce a program designed to maintain peace and discourage trespassing and other illegal activity within the program area. 
(b)  The program area shall include only commercial property adjacent to State Street between Freeland Avenue and State Line Boulevard and State Line Boulevard between State Street and Pulaski Road. 
(c)  Any person owning or controlling property in the program area shall erect and maintain signs stating "No Loitering" and in parking areas and open spaces, "No Trespassing." The signs shall be displayed in a manner that makes them clearly visible from the sidewalk or street. The police department shall enforce such signs at all times. 
(d)  No person may park a motor vehicle on any private property within the program area, including any parking lot of a business establishment, without the express or implied consent of the person who owns or controls the property. 
(e)  Any person who violates this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(Code 1980, § 18-43; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-3. - Electronic paging devices on school property. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to use or have in his possession an electronic paging device while on school property. This section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Law enforcement, firefighting or health care personnel; and 
(2)  Any person eighteen (18) years of age or older who is not a student at the school, who requires the device for a legal business, professional or medical purpose, and who is legally entitled to be on the school property. 
As used in this section, the term "school property" means any property on which there is a school building used primarily for teaching students under eighteen (18) years of age. 
(b)  Any person found in violation of this section shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Code 1980, § 18-45; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-4. - Recruitment restrictions. 
(a)  No person shall force, threaten to use force, intimidate or coerce another to join any group, club or organization. This section shall not apply to persons engaged in lawful concerted activities governed and protected by the federal statute commonly known as the "National Labor Relations Act." 
(b)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be fined not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense or shall be punished by imprisonment for a period of not more than six (6) months or both. 
(Code 1980, § 18-55; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-5. - Ragpicking; peddling; junk collection. 
No person shall engage in the occupation of ragpicking, the peddling of any article or thing, or the purchasing or collection of junk by handcart, automobile or other vehicle in any public alley. Any person violating this section shall be fined not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense. 
(Code 1980, § 18-73; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-6. - Deceptive advertising. 
No person shall, with intent to sell or in anyway dispose of merchandise, securities, service, or anything offered directly or indirectly to the public for sale or distribution, or with intent to increase the consumption thereof, or to induce the public in any manner to enter into any obligation relating thereto, or to acquire title thereto or any interest therein, make, publish, disseminate, circulate, or place before the public, or cause directly or indirectly to be made, published, disseminated, circulated, or placed before the public, in this city, in any newspaper or other publication sold or offered for sale upon any public way, or other public place, or on any sign upon any public way or other public place, or in any handbill or advertisement posted upon any public way or public place, or on any placard, advertisement, or handbill exhibited or carried in any public way or public place, or on any banner or sign flying across the public way or from any house, an advertisement of any sort regarding merchandise securities, service, or anything so offered to the public, which advertisement contains any assertion, representation, or statement which is untrue, deceptive, or misleading. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense. 
(Code 1980, § 18-76; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-7. - Removal of sod along public way. 
No person shall dig, cut or remove any sod or earth from any property adjoining or contiguous to a public way in such a manner as to leave said property in an unsafe or unsanitary condition or in such condition as will constitute a public nuisance. 
(Code 1980, § 18-78; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-8. - Vehicle impoundment. 
(1)  The owner of a vehicle seized and impounded pursuant to section 62-9, driving while intoxicated; section 62-10, unlawful drugs in motor vehicle; section 62-11, use of vehicle for prostitution; section 62-12, unlawful firearm in motor vehicle; section 62-13, illegal dumping; section 62-14, sound device restrictions; section 62-15, unlawful fireworks in motor vehicle; or section 62-16, false, stolen, or altered state registration or temporary state registration; or section 62-18, driving on a suspended or revoked license; of this Code and pursuant to any section of this Code which expressly makes this section applicable, shall be assessed an administrative penalty in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00), towing and storage fees, any other fees deemed applicable and shall have the right to request a preliminary hearing in person and in writing at the city police department within fifteen (15) days after the vehicle is seized and impounded. A towing adjudicator, appointed by the mayor or the chief of the police department, shall conduct such preliminary hearing within forty-eight (48) hours of the request, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays, unless the vehicle was seized and impounded pursuant to section 62-10 and the police department determines that it must retain custody of the vehicle under applicable state or federal forfeiture law or if the vehicle is being held pending an investigation. If, after the preliminary hearing, the towing adjudicator determines that there is probable cause to show that the vehicle was used in violation of this Code, the towing adjudicator shall order the continued impoundment of the vehicle unless the owner of the vehicle pays to the city the amount of the administrative penalty, plus fees for towing and storing the vehicle, and any other fees deemed applicable. If the vehicle is also subject to immobilization for unpaid final determinations of parking and/or compliance violations, the owner of the vehicle must also pay the amounts due for all such outstanding violations prior to the release of the vehicle. If the towing adjudicator determines that there is no such probable cause the vehicle shall be returned without penalty or other fees. 
(2)  Within ten (10) days after a vehicle is seized and impounded, the police department shall notify, by personal service or certified mail, the owner of record and any lien holder of record of the owner's right to request a hearing before an administrative hearing officer, as appointed by section 2-943, on the seizure and impoundment of the vehicle. The notice shall state the penalties which may be imposed if no hearing is requested or where penalty and fees assessed remain unpaid, include the city's right to sell such vehicle and apply all proceeds from the sale thereof to the payment of all penalties and fees due and owing. The owner of record seeking a hearing must file a written request for a hearing with the city police department no later than fifteen (15) days after the date of the notice was mailed. The hearing date must be no more than thirty (30) days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays, after a request for a hearing has been filed. If, after the hearing, the administrative hearing officer determines by a preponderance of the evidence that the vehicle was used in violation of this Code the administrative hearing officer shall enter an order finding the owner of record liable to the city for the amount of the administrative penalty, plus towing and storage fees, and any other applicable fees. If, after a hearing, the administrative hearing officer does not determine by a preponderance of the evidence that the vehicle was used in such a violation, the administrative hearing officer shall enter an order finding for the owner and for the return of the vehicle or previously paid penalty and fees; provided that if the vehicle was seized and impounded pursuant to an investigation the vehicle shall not be returned unless and until permitted by investigating division; and provided that the vehicle was seized and impounded pursuant to section 62-10, the vehicle shall not be returned unless and until the city receives notice from the appropriate state, or where applicable, federal officials that (i) forfeiture proceedings will not be instituted; or (ii) forfeiture proceedings have concluded and there is a settlement or a court order providing that the vehicle shall be returned to the owner of record. 
(3)  If the owner of record requests a full hearing before an administrative hearing officer but fails to appear at the hearing; fails to request a hearing in a timely manner; or signs a waiver to the right to an administrative hearing, the owner of record shall be deemed to have waived his or her right to a hearing and an administrative hearing officer of the city shall enter a default order in favor of the city in the amount of the administrative penalty prescribed hereinafter for the violation, plus towing and storage fees, and any applicable fees. 
(4)  When a vehicle violates this section the administrative penalty, plus towing and storage fees, and any applicable fees shall constitute a debt due and owing to the city. Any such fine, other sanction or costs imposed by an administrative hearing officer's order that remain unpaid after the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, judicial review procedures shall be a debt due and owing the city and, as such, may be collected in accordance with applicable law. After the expiration of the period in which judicial review may be sought, unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, the findings, decision and order of an administrative hearing officer may be enforced in the same manner as a judgment entered by a court of competent jurisdiction. Upon being recorded in the manner required by Article XII of the Code of Civil Procedure or by the Uniform Commercial Code, a lien shall be imposed on the real estate or personal estate, or both, of the respondent in the amount of a debt due and owing the city. The lien may be enforced in the same manner as a judgment lien pursuant to a judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction. Nothing in this section shall prevent the city from enforcing or seeking to enforce any order of an administrative hearing officer in any manner which is in accordance with applicable law. Any amounts paid pursuant to this section shall be applied to the penalty. 
(5)  Except as provided otherwise in this section, a vehicle shall continue to be impounded until (1) the administrative penalty, plus any applicable fees including towing and storage fees are paid to the city, in which case possession of the vehicle shall be given to the person who is legally entitled to possess the vehicle; or (2) the vehicle is sold or otherwise disposed of to satisfy a judgment or enforce a lien as provided by law. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, whenever a person with a lien of record against a vehicle impounded under this section has commenced foreclosure proceedings, possession of the vehicle shall be given to that person if he or she pays the applicable fees including towing and storage fees and agrees in writing to refund to the city the net proceeds of any foreclosure sale, less any amounts necessary to pay all lien holders of record, up to the total amount of penalties imposed under this section. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, no vehicle that was seized and impounded pursuant to an investigation be returned unless and until permitted by investigating division. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, no vehicle that was seized and impounded pursuant section 62-10 shall be returned to the record owner unless and until the city has received notice from the appropriate state, or where applicable, federal officials that (i) forfeiture proceedings will not be instituted; or (ii) forfeiture proceedings have concluded and there is a settlement or a court order providing that the vehicle shall be returned to the owner of record. 
(6)  Any motor vehicle that is not reclaimed within ten (10) days after the expiration of the time during which the owner of record may seek judicial review of the city's action under this section; or, if judicial review is sought, the time at which a final judgment is rendered in favor of the city; or the time a final administrative decision is rendered against an owner of record who is in default may be disposed of as an unclaimed vehicle as provided by law; provided that, if the vehicle was seized and impounded pursuant to Sec. 62-10 and proceedings have been instituted under state or federal drug asset forfeiture laws, the vehicle may not be disposed of by the city except as consistent with those proceedings. 
(7)  As used in this section, the "owner of record" of a vehicle means the record titleholder. 
(8)  In a hearing on the propriety of impoundment under said section 62-9, any sworn or affirmed report, including a report prepared in compliance with Section 11-501.1 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, that (a) is prepared in the performance of a law enforcement officer's duties and (b) sufficiently describes the circumstances leading to the impoundment, shall be admissible evidence of the vehicle owner's liability under section 62-9 of this Code, and shall support a finding of the vehicle owner's liability under section 62-9, unless rebutted by clear and convincing evidence. 
(9)  For purposes of this section, a vehicle is not considered to have been used in a violation that would render the vehicle eligible for towing if: (1) the vehicle used in the violation was stolen at the time and the theft was reported to the appropriate police authorities within 24 hours after the theft was discovered or reasonably should have been discovered; (2) the vehicle was operating as a common carrier and the violation occurred without the knowledge of the person in control of the vehicle; or (3) the alleged owner provides adequate proof that the vehicle had been sold to another person prior to the violation. 
(Ord. No. 07-48, § I, 5-10-2007; Ord. No. 12-49, § I, 10-11-2012; Ord. No. 12-59, § I, 12-13-2012)  
Sec. 62-9. - Driving while intoxicated and vehicle impoundment. 
(a)  No person shall drive or be in actual physical control of a motor vehicle within the City of Calumet City while under the influence of alcohol, other drug or drugs, intoxicating compound or compounds or any combination thereof, as defined in paragraph 5/11-501 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/11-501, as amended). 
(b)  Any vehicle used in a violation of subsection (a) of this section shall be subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to section 62-8. 
(c)  Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle is subject to seizure and pursuant to this section, the police officer shall provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility controlled by the city or its agents. When the vehicle is towed, the police officer shall notify the person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation, if there is such a person, of the fact of the seizure and of the vehicle owner's right to request a preliminary hearing to be conducted under section 62-8 of this Code. 
(d)  This subsection shall not apply: (1) if the vehicle used in the violation was stolen at the time and the theft was reported to the appropriate police authorities within twenty-four (24) hours after the theft was discovered or reasonably should have been discovered; or (2) the alleged owner provides adequate proof that the vehicle had been sold to another person prior to the violation. 
(e)  The provisions of section 62-8 of this Code shall apply whenever a motor vehicle is seized and impounded pursuant to this section. 
(f)  For purposes of this section, the "owner of record" of a vehicle is the record titleholder. 
(Ord. No. 07-49, § I, 5-17-2007)  
Sec. 62-10. - Unlawful drugs in motor vehicle and vehicle impoundment. 
(a)  The owner of record of any motor vehicle that contains cannabis as defined by the Illinois Cannabis Act (720 ILCS 550/1, et seq.) or a controlled substance as defined by the Illinois Controlled Substances Act (720 ILCS 570/100, et seq.) or that is used in the purchase, attempt to purchase, sale, or attempt to sell such controlled substances or cannabis shall be subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant section 62-8. 
(b)  Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle is subject to seizure and pursuant to this section, the police officer shall provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility controlled by the city or its agents. When the vehicle is towed, the police officer shall notify the person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation, if there is such a person, of the fact of the seizure and of the vehicle owner's right to request a preliminary hearing to be conducted under section 62-8 of this Code. 
(c)  This subsection shall not apply: (1) if the vehicle used in the violation was stolen at the time and the theft was reported to the appropriate police authorities within twenty-four (24) hours after the theft was discovered or reasonably should have been discovered; (2) if the vehicle is operating as a common carrier and the violation occurs without the knowledge of the person in control of the vehicle; or (3) the alleged owner provides adequate proof that the vehicle had been sold to another person prior to the violation; or (4) if the owner proves that the presence of the controlled substance or cannabis was authorized under the Controlled Substances Act or the Cannabis Control Act. 
(d)  The provisions of section 62-8 shall apply whenever a motor vehicle in seized and impounded pursuant to this section. 
(e)  For purposes of this section, the "owner of record" of a vehicle is the record titleholder. 
(Ord. No. 07-50, § I, 5-17-2007)  
Sec. 62-11. - Use of vehicle for prostitution; impoundment. 
(a)  A motor vehicle that is used in violation of article VI, division 2 of this chapter, in the commission of prostitution as defined in the Criminal Code of 1961, or soliciting for a prostitute as defined in said Code, shall be subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to section 62-8. 
(b)  Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle is subject to seizure and pursuant to this section, the police officer shall provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility controlled by the city or its agents. When the vehicle is towed, the police officer shall notify the person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation, if there is such a person, of the fact of the seizure and of the vehicle owner's right to request a preliminary hearing to be conducted under section 62-8 of this Code. 
(c)  This subsection shall not apply: (1) if the vehicle used in the violation was stolen at the time and the theft was reported to the appropriate police authorities within twenty-four (24) hours after the theft was discovered or reasonably should have been discovered; (2) if the vehicle is operating as a common carrier and the violation occurs without the knowledge of the person in control of the vehicle; or (3) the alleged owner provides adequate proof that the vehicle had been sold to another person prior to the violation. 
(d)  The provisions of section 62-8 of this Code shall apply whenever a motor vehicle is seized and impounded pursuant to this section. 
(e)  For purposes of this section, the "owner of record" of a vehicle is the record titleholder. 
(Ord. No. 07-51, § I, 5-17-2007)  
Sec. 62-12. - Unlawful firearm in motor vehicle; impoundment. 
(a)  The owner of record of any motor vehicle; (1) used in connection with a violation of Article 24 of the Illinois Criminal Code of 1961 (720 ILCS 5/34-1 et seq.) or section 62-141; or (2) that contains a firearm or ammunition for which a Firearm Owner's Identification Card is required under the Illinois Owner's Identification Card Act (430 ILCS 65/0.01 et seq.) and one is not presented; or (3) an unregistered firearm; or (4) a firearm that is not broken down in a nonfunctioning state shall be subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to section 62-8. 
(b)  Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle is subject to seizure and pursuant to this section, the police officer shall provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility controlled by the city or its agents. When the vehicle is towed, the police officer shall notify the person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation, if there is such a person, of the fact of the seizure and of the vehicle owner's right to request a preliminary hearing to be conducted under section 62-8 of this code. 
(c)  This subsection shall not apply: (1) if the vehicle used in the violation was stolen at the time and the theft was reported to the appropriate police authorities within twenty-four (24) hours after the theft was discovered or reasonably should have been discovered; or (2) if the vehicle is operating as a common carrier and the violation occurs without the knowledge of the person in control of the vehicle; or (3) the alleged owner provides adequate proof that the vehicle had been sold to another person prior to the violation. 
(d)  The provisions of section 62-8 of this Code shall apply whenever a motor vehicle is seized and impounded pursuant to this section. 
(e)  For purposes of this section, the "owner of record" of a vehicle is the record titleholder. 
(Ord. No. 07-52, § I, 5-17-2007)  
Sec. 62-13. - Illegal dumping; nuisance; violation; penalty; costs recoverable; and impoundment. 
(a)  No person shall dump, deposit or place or cause to be dumped, deposited or placed on any lot or parcel of improved or unimproved real estate within the city the following materials: abandoned vehicles; ashes; construction or demolition debris; garbage; litter; manure; miscellaneous waste; refuse; trash; unrimmed tires; or any other substance that may contain disease and germs or may be scattered by the wind, or be decomposed, or become filthy, noxious or unhealthful; except when a permit is properly issued pursuant to the provisions of this code. Such dumping without a permit hereby is declared a nuisance. Any person violating this provision of this ordinance will be fined not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Offenses may also be punishable as a misdemeanor by incarceration in the Cook County jail for a term not to exceed six (6) months under the procedure set forth in Section 1-2-1.1 of the Illinois Municipal Code as amended, and in a separate proceeding. In addition to any other penalties imposed under this chapter, if any person or business performing work under any contract with the city is found guilty of violating this section, they may terminate the contract by giving written notice of the termination to the person or business. The contract shall be null and void upon delivery of such notice. Any business license issued by the city to any person who violates this section two (2) or more times within a five-year period shall be subject to revocation if the violation occurred in the course of the business for which the license was issued. 
(b)  A motor vehicle that is used in the violation of chapter 62 of this Code or in violation of any paragraph of the Illinois Environmental Protection Act (415 ILCS 5/1, et seq.) and the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/4-200, et seq.) shall be subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to section 62-8. 
(c)  Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle is subject to seizure and pursuant to this section, the police officer shall provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility controlled by the city or its agents. When the vehicle is towed, the police officer shall notify the person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation, if there is such a person, of the fact of the seizure and of the vehicle owner's right to request a preliminary hearing to be conducted under section 62-8 of this Code. 
(d)  This subsection shall not apply: (1) if the vehicle used in the violation was stolen at the time and the theft was reported to the appropriate police authorities within twenty-four (24) hours after the theft was discovered or reasonably should have been discovered; or (2) if the vehicle is operating as a common carrier and the violation occurs without the knowledge of the person in control of the vehicle; or (3) the alleged owner provides adequate proof that the vehicle had been sold to another person prior to the violation. 
(e)  The provisions of section 62-8 of this Code shall apply whenever a motor vehicle is seized and impounded pursuant to this section. 
(f)  For purposes of this section, the "owner of record" of a vehicle is the record titleholder. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, § I, 5-17-2007)  
Sec. 62-14. - Sound device restrictions; violation and impoundment. 
(a)  No person shall play, use, operate or permit to be played, used or operated, any radio, tape recorder, cassette player or any other device for receiving broadcast sound or reproducing recorded sound if the device is located: 
1.  On the public way; or 
2.  In any motor vehicle on the public way; 
and if the sound generated by the device is clearly audible to a person with normal hearing at a distance greater than 75 feet. This section shall not apply to any person participating in a parade or public assembly for which a permit has been obtained pursuant to this Code. 
(b)  A motor vehicle that is used in violation of subsection (a) of this section shall be subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to section 62-8. 
(c)  Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle is subject to seizure and pursuant to this section, the police officer shall provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility controlled by the city or its agents. When the vehicle is towed, the police officer shall notify the person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation, if there is such a person, of the fact of the seizure and of the vehicle owner's right to request a preliminary hearing to be conducted under section 62-8 of this Code. 
(d)  This subsection shall not apply: (1) if the vehicle used in the violation was stolen at the time and the theft was reported to the appropriate police authorities within twenty-four (24) hours after the theft was discovered or reasonably should have been discovered; or (2) if the vehicle is operating as a common carrier and the violation occurs without the knowledge of the person in control of the vehicle; or (3) the alleged owner provides adequate proof that the vehicle had been sold to another person prior to the violation. 
(e)  The provisions of section 62-8 of this Code shall apply whenever a motor vehicle is seized and impounded pursuant to this section. 
(f)  For purposes of this section, the "owner of record" of a vehicle is the record titleholder. 
(Ord. No. 07-54, § I, 5-17-2007)  
Sec. 62-15. - Unlawful fireworks in motor vehicle; impoundment. 
(a)  The owner of record of any motor vehicle that contains any illegal fireworks shall be subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this section 62-8. 
(b)  Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this subsection, the police officer shall provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility controlled by the city or its agents when the vehicle is towed, the police officer shall notify the person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation, if there is such a person, of the fact of the seizure and of the vehicle owner's right to request a preliminary hearing to be conducted under section 62-8 of this Code. 
(c)  This subsection shall not apply: (1) if the vehicle used in the violation was stolen at the time and the theft was reported to the appropriate police authorities within twenty-four (24) hours after the theft was discovered or reasonably should have been discovered; or (2) if the vehicle is operating as a common carrier and the violation occurs without the knowledge of the person in control of the vehicle; or (3) the alleged owner provides adequate proof that the vehicle had been sold to another person prior to the violation; or (4) if the owner proves that the presence of the fireworks was permissible pursuant to subsection (f). 
(d)  The provisions of section 62-8 of this Code shall apply whenever a motor vehicle is seized and impounded pursuant to this section. 
(e)  As used in this section, the "owner of record" of a vehicle means the record titleholder. 
(f)  Nothing contained in this part of this chapter dealing with fireworks shall be construed as applying to the transportation of any article or thing shipped in conformity with the regulations prescribed by the Interstate Commerce Commission, nor as applying to the military or naval forces of the United States. 
(Ord. No. 07-55, § I, 5-17-2007)  
Sec. 62-16. - False, stolen, or altered state registration or temporary state registration. 
(a)  No person shall operate or park on the public way any vehicle bearing false, stolen or altered state registration or temporary state registration. A vehicle operated or parked in violation of this section shall be subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to section 62-8. 
(b)  Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this subsection, the police officer shall provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility controlled by the city or its agents when the vehicle is towed, the police officer shall notify the person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation, if there is such a person, of the fact of the seizure and of the vehicle owner's right to request a preliminary hearing to be conducted under section 62-8 of this Code. 
(c)  If the vehicle is unattended, notice shall be sent to the last registered owner of the vehicle at the address indicated in the last valid registration of the vehicle. The notice provisions of section 62-8 shall apply whenever a motor vehicle is seized and impounded pursuant to this section. 
(d)  This subsection shall not apply: (1) if the vehicle used in the violation was stolen at the time and the theft was reported to the appropriate police authorities within twenty-four (24) hours after the theft was discovered or reasonably should have been discovered; or (2) if the vehicle is operating as a common carrier and the violation occurs without the knowledge of the person in control of the vehicle; or (3) the alleged owner provides adequate proof that the vehicle had been sold to another person prior to the violation. 
(e)  The provisions of section 62-8 of this Code shall apply whenever a motor vehicle is seized and impounded pursuant to this section. 
(f)  As used in this section, the "owner of record" of a vehicle means the record titleholder. 
(Ord. No. 07-56, § I, 5-17-2007)  
Sec. 62-17. - Multiple violations. 
Nothing in this Code shall prohibit the issuance of more than one (1) administrative penalty in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) on a single owner of record or vehicle impounded pursuant to section 62-8. 
(Ord. No. 07-57, § I, 5-17-2007)  
Sec. 62-18. - Driving on a suspended or revoked license; impoundment. 
(a)  A motor vehicle that is used in the commission of the offense of driving on a suspended or revoked license in violation of Section 6-303 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/6-303) shall be subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to section 62-8. This section shall not apply: (1) if the vehicle used in the violation was stolen at the time and the theft was reported to the appropriate police authorities within twenty-four (24) hours after the theft was discovered or reasonably should have been discovered; (2) if the suspension was imposed due to a violation of Section 13B-55 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/13B-55); or (3) if the suspension was imposed pursuant to Section 6-306.5 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/6-306.5). 
(b)  Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this section, the police officer shall provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility controlled by the city or its agents. When the vehicle is towed, the police officer shall notify the person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation, if there is such a person, of the fact of the seizure and of the vehicle owner's right to request a preliminary hearing to be conducted pursuant to section 62-8 of the Code. 
(c)  The provisions of section 62-8 of this Code shall apply to any motor vehicle seized and impounded pursuant to this section. 
(d)  For purposes of this section, the "owner of record" of a vehicle is the record titleholder. 
(Ord. No. 09-37, § 2, 8-13-2009)  
Sec. 62-19. - Administrative processing fee. 
(1)  The police department shall charge a thirty dollar ($30.00) administrative processing fee for posting bail or bond in any legal process, civil or criminal, or on any bookable arrest, including a warrant, to be levied and paid at the time of posting said bail or bond. 
(2)  In order for the administrative processing fee to be assessed, the subject must be processed in the police department booking area and post bond at the police department. 
(3)  The administrative processing fee shall not be charged to a subject if the individual is incurring an administrative vehicle impoundment fee. 
(4)  If the administrative processing fee is imposed pursuant to this section, such fee shall constitute a debt due and owing to the city, and the city may seek to obtain a judgment on the debt and enforce such judgment as provided by law. Failure to pay the administrative processing fee shall not, by itself, constitute grounds for holding any subject. 
(Ord. No. 09-44, § 2, 8-27-2009)  
Secs. 62-20—62-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES INVOLVING THE PERSON 
 
Sec. 62-31. - Definitions; assault against the elderly, developmentally disabled, handicapped defined; mandatory sentence. 
(a)  Definitions. The following definitions are applicable strictly in the context of this section: 
Battery means as defined in Illinois Revised Statutes Chapter 38-12-3. 
Developmentally disabled means as defined in Illinois Revised Statutes Chapter 91-½, Section 1-106. 
Elderly refers to any person sixty years of age or older. 
Handicapped means as defined in Illinois Revised Statutes Chapter 68, section 1-103 (1). 
(b)  Assault against the elderly, developmentally disabled, handicapped. There is hereby created the offense of assault against the elderly, developmentally disabled, or handicapped. A person commits assault against the elderly, developmentally disabled, or handicapped when he engages in conduct which places a person defined in this section in reasonable apprehension of receiving a battery. 
(c)  Mandatory sentence. Upon conviction of this offense, a mandatory sentence of imprisonment shall be imposed, not to be less than ninety (90) days nor more than one hundred eighty (180) days. 
(Code 1980, § 18-49; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991; Ord. No. 04-34, § 2, 5-27-2004)  
Sec. 62-32. - Hate crimes. 
(a)  No person shall, by reason of any motive or intent relating to, or any antipathy, animosity or hostility based upon, the actual or perceived race, color, sex, religion, national origin, age, ancestry, sexual orientation or mental or physical disability of another individual or group of individuals: 
(1)  Commit assault as defined in Section 12-1 of the Illinois Criminal Code of 1961 (720 ILCS 5/12-1); or 
(2)  Deface, mar, injure, destroy or remove property in violation of section 62-68 of this Code; or 
(3)  Commit trespass as defined in section 62-61 of this Code; or 
(4)  Commit vandalism as defined in section 62-91 of this Code; or 
(5)  Disturb a place of worship in violation of section 62-254 of this Code; or 
(6)  Engage in harassment by telephone as defined in 65 ILCS 135/1-1. 
(b)  Any person who violates this section shall be subject to a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or may be imprisoned for not more than six (6) months, or may be subject to both such fine and imprisonment. In addition to such penalty, any person found guilty of violating this section may be ordered to pay restitution to the aggrieved party, and may be ordered to perform community service pursuant to section 62-91 of this Code. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any conduct in violation of this section that is punishable under state or federal law by a term of imprisonment in excess of six (6) months shall not be prosecuted under this section. 
(d)  As used in this section, "sexual orientation" means heterosexuality, or bisexuality. 
(Code 1980, § 18-50; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-33. - Intimidation. 
(a)  Intimidation defined. A person commits intimidation when, with intent to cause another to perform or to omit the performance of any act, he communicates to another, whether in person, by telephone or by mail, a threat to perform without lawful authority any of the following acts: 
(1)  Inflict physical harm on the person threatened or any other person or on property; 
(2)  Subject any person to physical confinement or restraint; 
(3)  Commit any criminal offense; 
(4)  Accuse any person of an offense; 
(5)  Expose any person to hatred, contempt or ridicule; 
(6)  Take action as a public official against anyone or anything, or withhold official action, or cause such action or withholding; or 
(7)  Bring about or continue a strike, boycott or other collective action. 
(b)  Compelling organization membership of persons. It shall be unlawful for a person to expressly or impliedly threaten to do bodily harm or do bodily harm to an individual or to that individual's family or use any other criminally unlawful means to solicit or cause any person to join such organization or association regardless of the nature of such organization or association. 
(c)  Compelling confession or information by force or threat. A person who, with intent to obtain a confession, statement or information regarding any offense, inflicts or threatens to inflict physical harm upon the person threatened or upon any other person commits the offense of compelling a confession or information by force or threat. 
(d)  Ethnic intimidation. 
(1)  A person commits ethnic intimidation when, by reason of the race, color, creed, religion or national origin of another individual or group of individuals, he commits assault, criminal trespass to real property or mob action. 
(2)  Independent of any criminal prosecution or the result thereof, any person suffering injury to his person or damage to his property as a result of ethnic intimidation may being a civil action for damages, injunction or other appropriate relief. The court may award actual damages, including damages for emotional distress, or punitive damages. A judgment may include attorney's fees and costs. The parents or legal guardians, other than guardians appointed pursuant to the Juvenile Court Act or the Juvenile Court Act of 1987, of an unemancipated minor shall be liable for the amount of any judgment for actual damages rendered against such minor under this subsection (d)(2). 
(e)  Educational intimidation. 
(1)  A person commits educational intimidation when he knowingly interferes with the right of any child who is or is believed to be afflicted with a chronic infectious disease to attend or participate in the activities of an elementary or secondary school in this state: 
a.  By actual or threatened physical harm to the person or property of the child or the child's family; 
b.  By impeding or obstructing the child's right of ingress to, egress from, or freedom of movement at school facilities or activities; or 
c.  By exposing or threatening to expose the child, or the family or friends of the child, to public hatred, contempt or ridicule. 
(2)  Subsection (e)(1) of this section does not apply to the actions of school officials or the school's infectious disease review team who are acting within the course of their professional duties and in accordance with applicable law. 
(3)  Independent of any criminal prosecution or the result thereof, any person suffering injury to his person or damage to his property as a result of educational intimidation may being a civil action for damages, injunction or other appropriate relief. The court may award actual damages, including damages for emotional distress, or punitive damages. A judgment may include attorney's fees and costs. The parents or legal guardians of an unemancipated minor, other than guardians appointed pursuant to the Juvenile Court Act or the Juvenile Court Act of 1987, shall be liable for the amount of any judgement for actual damages awarded against such minor under this subsection (3). 
(f)  Utilization of section. This section is to be utilized only in those incidents in which the Cook County state attorney's office declines felony prosecution for any of the above. 
(Code 1980, § 18-59; Ord. No. 91-42, §§ 1, 2, 9-26-1991)  
Secs. 62-34—62-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PROPERTY RIGHTS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 62-61. - Trespassing. 
(a)  A person commits trespass when he knowingly: 
(1)  Enters the property, or any part thereof, of another when, immediately prior to such entry, he receives notice, either oral or written, from the owner or occupant that such entry is forbidden; or 
(2)  Remains upon the property, or any part thereof, of another after receiving notice, either oral or written, from the owner or occupant to depart; or 
(3)  Enters upon property open to the public, or any part thereof, and remains thereon with a malicious and mischievous intent after receiving notice, either oral or written, from the owner or occupant to depart; 
(4)  Wilfully defaces, mars, injures or destroys any building or part of any building or any property of another with paint, tar, acid, grease, oil, or other such substance which would detrimentally alter the outer face or substance of such building or any property of another, or any fence, tree, shrub or plant appurtenant thereto. 
(5)  An entry upon the premises or any part thereof along the southern boundary of the city along the banks of the Little Calumet River and the public and private property adjacent thereto. 
(b)  Any person convicted of trespass shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Code 1980, § 18-42; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991; Ord. No. 92-25, § 1, 7-9-1992)  
Sec. 62-62. - Trespassing on property. 
(a)  No person shall enter into or upon any lot, block, or tract of ground in the city which is under cultivation, unless such person be an owner, lessee, or person entitled so to enter, or the duly authorized agent thereof, and any person found by the police in and upon any such premises shall be treated as a trespasser unless he can produce satisfactory evidence of ownership or right to be in and upon any such premises. 
(b)  Any person who shall violate the provisions of this section shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense. 
(Code 1980, § 18-74)  
Sec. 62-63. - Removing sod or earth. 
No person shall dig, cut, or remove any sod or earth from any public way or other public place within the city without a permit from the commissioner of public works, or from any premises not his own without the consent of the owner, under a penalty of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense. 
(Code 1980, § 18-77; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-64. - Possessing burglar's tools. 
(a)  A person possesses burglary tools when he possesses any tool, key, instrument, device, or any explosive suitable for use in breaking into any building, housetrailer, watercraft, aircraft, vehicle, railroad car, or any depository designed for the safekeeping of property, or any part thereof, with intent to enter any such place and with intent to commit therein a felony or theft. 
(b)  A person convicted of this possession of burglary tools shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Code 1980, § 18-68; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-65. - Defacing and injuring house of worship and cemeteries. 
Any person who wilfully defaces, mars, injures, destroys or removes any vault, tomb, monument, gravestone, memorial of the dead, church, synagogue, or any other structure constituting a place of worship of any religion, sect or group, or any part of any contents thereof, or any fence, tree, shrub or plant appurtenant thereto, shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisoned for not more than six (6) months, or both such fine and imprisonment, for each offense. Each such act of marring, injuring, destroying or removal shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1980, § 18-41; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-66. - Property owner responsibilities. 
Any property bearing graffiti of a street gang, words associated with gang membership or any word inflammatory or defaming in nature must be cleaned or repainted within seventy-two (72) hours of appearance of the markings, writing or insignia. 
(Code 1980, § 18-48; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-67. - Damage to public property. 
(a)  No person shall cut, injure, mark, or deface any public building, sewer, water pipe, hydrant, or other city property, or any tree, grass, shrub, or walk, in any public way or public park. 
(b)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall be fined not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense. 
(Code 1980, § 18-53; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-68. - Vandalism. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully destroy, deface or otherwise injure any public or private property not his own. 
(Code 1980, § 18-60; Ord. No. 91-43, § 1, 10-26-1991)  
Sec. 62-69. - Possession of paint or marker with intent to deface unlawful. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess a spray paint container, liquid paint or any marker containing a fluid which is not water soluble and has a point, brush, applicator or other writing surface of three-eighths of an inch or greater, on the property of another or in any public building or upon any public facility. 
(b)  It shall be a defense to an action for violation of this section that the owner, manager or other person having control of the property, building or facility consented to the presence of the paint or marker containing a fluid which is not water soluble and has a point, brush, applicator or other writing surface of three-eighths of an inch or greater, or any etching equipment or etching materials, on the public way with intent to use the same to deface any building, structure or property. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, "etching equipment" and "etching materials" include any tool, device, equipment or substance that can be used to make permanent marks on metal, glass, plastic, concrete or stone. 
(d)  Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. 
(Code 1980, § 18-65; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991; Ord. No. 04-34, § 5, 5-27-2004)  
Sec. 62-70. - Injuring or obstructing signal systems. 
(a)  No person, unless duly authorized, shall open any signal box, unless it be to give an alarm of fire or to communicate with the police on necessary business, nor break, cut, injure, deface, or in any manner meddle or interfere with any signal box or the fire alarm or police telegraph wires, or with any municipal electric wires, poles, conduits, or apparatus. Any person violating any of the foregoing provisions of this section shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense. 
(b)  Any person who shall scratch, stencil, or post placards or bills on any of the poles used for wires of the police and fire alarm telegraph, or in any other manner deface or injure the same, shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense. 
(Code 1980, § 18-66; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-71. - Advertising and signs on buildings. 
No person shall post, stick, stamp, tack, paint, or otherwise fix, or cause the same to be done by another person, any notice, placard, bill, handbill, sign, poster, card advertisement, or other device calculated to attract the attention of the public, upon any building or part thereof, wall or part thereof, or window, without first obtaining the authority of the city council and the written consent of the owner, agent, lessee, or occupant of such premises or structure; and provided, further, that this section shall not apply to advertising matter upon billboards owned or controlled by private individuals. 
(Code 1980, § 18-75; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991) 
Cross reference— Signs, ch. 70.  
Secs. 62-72—62-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - VANDALISM 
 
Sec. 62-91. - Defined. 
(a)  A person commits vandalism when he engages in the willful or malicious destruction, injury, disfigurement, or defacement of any public or private property. This offense includes, but is not limited to, cutting, tearing, breaking, marking, drawing or painting when these actions are intended to or have the effect of causing damage to property. 
(b)  Any person who violates the provisions of this section, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00). Any such offense may also be punished as a misdemeanor by incarceration in a penal institution other than a penitentiary for a term of up to thirty (30) days or by a requirement to perform up to one hundred twenty (120) hours of community service under the procedures set forth in 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1.1) and in the Illinois Code of Criminal Procedure, 720 ILCS 5/100-1 et seq., in a separate proceeding. All actions seeking the imposition of fines only shall be filed as quasicriminal actions subject to the provisions of the Illinois Code of Civil Procedure, 735 ILCS 5/1-101, et seq. 
(Code 1980, § 18-46; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-92. - Restitution; financial responsibility. 
(a)  In lieu of or in addition to a fine or incarceration any person found guilty of violating section 62-91, or any parent or legal guardian of any unemancipated minor residing with such parent or legal guardian found in such violation, may be required to submit full restitution to the victim or victims of such vandalism by monetary payment or property repairs. 
(b)  In the case of an unemancipated minor accused of violating section 62-91 and residing with a parent or legal guardian at the time of such violation, the department of police shall within three (3) days notify such parent or legal guardian in writing, either by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, that said minor has been accused of vandalism, and that said parent or legal guardian may be held financially responsible for any fines or restitution resulting from such vandalism. 
(Code 1980, § 18-47; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Secs. 62-93—62-110. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - DECEPTIVE PRACTICES 
 
Sec. 62-111. - Definition. 
A person commits a "deceptive practice" when, with the intent to defraud and with an attempt to obtain control over property or to pay for property, labor or services of another he issues or delivers a check or other order upon a real or fictitious depository for the payment of money knowing that it will not be paid by the depository. 
(Code 1980, § 18-150; Ord. No. 93-44, § 1, 12-20-1993)  
Sec. 62-112. - Penalty. 
A person who issues a check or order to pay in violation of the above provision and fails to pay the amount of the check or order to the payee within thirty (30) days following a written demand delivered by payee by certified mail to the person's last known address shall be deemed to have committed a "deceptive practice" and shall be prosecuted in the following manner: 
The payee of the check or other order shall swear out a complaint, the form of which shall be provided by the city. The complainant shall provide the necessary information and shall agree to appear in court at the prescribed time and place to prosecute said complaint. A person found guilty may be punishable by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Code 1980, § 18-151; Ord. No. 93-44, § 1, 12-20-1993)  
Secs. 62-113—62-140. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC SAFETY  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 62-141. - Discharge of firearm. 
It shall be unlawful to discharge any firearms or air gun in the city or so that the bullet therefrom enters the city; provided that this section shall not be construed to prohibit any officer of the law to discharge a firearm in the performance of his duties or to persons defending their person or property. 
(Code 1980, § 18-38; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-142. - Inciting riots, etc. 
(a)  It is unlawful to create a clear and present danger of a riot or assault, battery, or other unlawful trespass against any person or group of persons because of his race, religion, color, national origin, or ancestry, or to create a clear and present danger of arson, vandalism, defacement, or other unlawful trespass against property because of the race, religion, color, national origin, or ancestry of the owner, possessor, or authorized user or users of said property, or, in the case of a cemetery, of the decedent buried therein. 
(b)  The term "person" as used in this section shall include one or more individuals, copartnership, corporations, firms, organizations, associations, leagues, or other bodies. 
(c)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) or imprisoned for not less than ten (10) days or more than six (6) months, or both, for each offense. 
(Code 1980, § 18-39; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-143. - Throwing objects on athletic fields. 
No person shall throw, drop, or place upon any baseball park, athletic field, or other place where games are played any bottle or other glass receptacle or any broken bottle or other broken instrument or thing. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense. 
(Code 1980, § 18-69; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-144. - Spikes in railings and fences. 
No owner, lessee, or person in possession of any building in this city shall erect, maintain, or permit to be erected or maintained on or about the stairway in, or the entrance to, such building, or on or about its exterior building line, or upon any portion of the sidewalk adjacent to such building, any railing, fence, guard, or protection of any kind, upon which there shall be affixed or in any manner attached so as to protrude therefrom any spike, nail, or other pointed instrument of any kind or description, unless such protrusion shall be an integral part of the fencing located entirely on private property; and unless any such protrusion, projecting vertically upward, shall be at least six (6) feet in height above the ground; and unless any such protrusion, projecting vertically downward, shall be not more than six (6) inches from the ground. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense; and each day any such person shall fail or neglect to remove from such railing, fence, or other projection, any such spike, nail, or other pointed instrument after notice in writing from the commissioner of buildings so to do, shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(Code 1980, § 18-71; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-145. - Clay holes and excavations. 
The owner, lessee or person in possession of any real estate within the city upon which are located or situated any clay holes or other similar excavations is hereby required to cause such clay holes or other excavations to be enclosed with wooden or wire fences, of not less than six (6) feet in height. When such fences are of wire only smooth or nonbarbed wire shall be used below a height of six (6) feet above the established grade or above the ground where no grade has been established, and such fence or fences shall consist of not less than eight (8) rows of wire, and such rows of wire shall not be more than nine (9) inches apart. 
(Code 1980, § 18-72; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-146. - Obstructing stairways or exits. 
It shall be unlawful to obstruct or permit the obstruction of any stairway, aisle, corridor or exit in any office building, factory, hotel, school, church, assembly hall, lodge or other public hall, or any building used by two (2) or more tenants or families in such a manner that it interferes with the free use of such stairway, aisle, corridor or exit. 
(Code 1980, § 18-84; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-147. - Storage of explosives. 
Except as otherwise provided, all explosives must be kept or stored in accordance with the rules of the state fire marshal. 
(Code 1980, § 18-85; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-148. - Nitroglycerine, TNT. 
It shall be unlawful to keep or store any nitroglycerine or the explosive commonly known as TNT in the city in any quantities, excepting for medicinal or laboratory purposes, and for such purpose no more than one-quarter (¼) ounce shall be stored in any one (1) building or premises. 
(Code 1980, § 18-86; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-149. - Abandoned refrigerators. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or for any owner, lessee or manager of any place to abandon, or discard in any place accessible to children, any refrigerator, icebox or ice chest, of a capacity of one and one-half (1½) cubic feet or more, which has an attached lid which may be opened or fastened shut by means of an attached latch. 
(Code 1980, § 18-87; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-150. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 08-9, adopted Feb. 14, 2008, deleted § 62-150 which pertained to gang loitering and derived from Ord. No. 04-35, adopted May 27, 2004. See § 62-220 et seq. for similar provisions.  
Sec. 62-151. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 3 of Ord. No. 08-9, adopted Feb. 14, 2008, deleted § 62-151 which pertained to narcotics-related loitering and derived from Ord. No. 04-34, adopted May 27, 2004. See § 62-220 et seq. for similar provisions.  
Secs. 62-152—62-170. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - FIREWORKS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 30. 
 
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 62-171. - Sale or possession. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, keep, expose for sale, loan or give away any toy pistol, toy gun, toy cannon, blank cartridge, or any fireworks, firecrackers, torpedoes, bombs, squibs, rockets, pinwheels, fire balloons, roman candles, detonating canes or ammunition therefor, or any substance of articles of any explosive nature designed or intended to be used as fireworks, anywhere in the city. 
(Code 1980, § 18-95; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Secs. 62-172—62-190. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Discharge Permit 
 
Sec. 62-191. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be possessed of or to discharge anywhere in the city any of the items enumerated in section 62-171 of this Code; provided, however, that the mayor and city council may issue a permit for the discharge of fireworks and for pyrotechnical displays. 
(Code 1980, § 18-96; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-192. - Application. 
Application for permits for the discharge of fireworks or for pyrotechnical displays shall be made to the city council in writing, and shall state the name of the person, place of residence and age, the place where it is proposed to give such public display of fireworks, and what experience the applicant has had, if any, in the discharge of fireworks. 
(Code 1980, § 18-97; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-193. - Insurance. 
No exhibition for which a permit may be granted pursuant to this article shall be held unless the proprietor thereof has in force a public liability insurance policy in the amount of at least fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00); a certificate showing such insurance shall be filed with the clerk at least five (5) days prior to such exhibitions. 
(Code 1980, § 18-98; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Secs. 62-194—62-210. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - AIR RIFLES 
 
Sec. 62-211. - Definitions. 
As used in this division, the following words and terms shall have the meaning ascribed thereto: 
Air rifle means and includes any air gun, air pistol, spring gun, spring pistol, B-B gun, paint ball gun, pellet gun or any implement that is not a firearm which impels a breakable paint ball containing washable marking colors or, a pellet constructed of hard plastic, steel, lead or other hard materials with a force that reasonably is expected to cause bodily harm. 
Dealer means any person, copartnership, association or corporation engaged in the business of selling at retail or renting any of the articles included in the definition of "air rifle." 
(Code 1980, § 18-140; Ord. No. 92-28, § 1, 7-23-1992)  
Sec. 62-212. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  Any dealer violating any provision of section 62-213 commits a petty offense. 
(b)  Any person violating any other provision of this division commits a petty offense and shall pay a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Code 1980, § 18-146; Ord. No. 92-28, § 1, 7-23-1992)  
Sec. 62-213. - Selling, renting or transferring to children; prohibition. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any dealer to sell, lend, rent, give or otherwise transfer an air rifle to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years where the dealer knows or has cause to believe the person to be under eighteen (18) years of age or where such dealer has failed to make reasonable inquiry relative to the age of such person and such person is under eighteen (18) years of age. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to sell, give, lend or otherwise transfer any air rifle to any person under eighteen (18) years of age except where the relationship of parent and child, guardian and ward or adult instructor and pupil, exists between such person and the person under eighteen (18) years of age, or where such person stands in loco parentis to the person under eighteen (18) years of age. 
(Code 1980, § 18-141; Ord. No. 92-28, § 1, 7-23-1992)  
Sec. 62-214. - Carrying or discharging on public streets. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person under eighteen (18) years of age to carry any air rifle on the public streets, roads, highways or public lands within this city, unless such person under eighteen (18) years of age carries such rifle unloaded. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to discharge any air rifle from or across any street, sidewalk, road, highway or public land or any public place except on a safely constructed target range. 
(Code 1980, § 18-142; Ord. No. 92-28, § 1, 7-23-1992) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78.  
Sec. 62-215. - Permissive possession. 
Notwithstanding any provision of this article, it is lawful for any person under eighteen (18) years of age to have in his possession any air rifle if it is: 
(1)  Kept within his house of residence or other private enclosure; 
(2)  Used by the person under eighteen (18) years of age and he is a duly enrolled member of any club, team, or society organized for educational purposes and maintaining as part of its facilities or having written permission to use an indoor or outdoor rifle range under the supervision, guidance and instruction of a responsible adult and then only if said air rifle is actually being used in connection with the activities of said club, team or society under the supervision of a responsible adult; or 
(3)  Used in or on any private grounds or residence under circumstances when such air rifle is fired, discharged or operated in such a manner as not to endanger persons or property and then only if it is used in such manner as to prevent the projectile from passing over any grounds or space outside the limits of such grounds or residence. 
(Code 1980, § 18-143; Ord. No. 92-28, § 1, 7-23-1992)  
Sec. 62-216. - Permissive sales. 
The provisions of this article do not prohibit sales of air rifles: 
(1)  By wholesale dealers or jobbers; 
(2)  To be shipped out of the state; 
(3)  To be used at a target range operated in accordance with section 62-215 or by members of the armed services of the United States or veterans organizations. 
(Code 1980, § 18-144; Ord. No. 92-28, § 1, 7-23-1992)  
Secs. 62-217—62-219. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - GANG AND NARCOTICS-RELATED LOITERING 
 
Sec. 62-220. - Title. 
This division shall be known as the "Anti-Gang and Narcotics-Related Loitering Act." 
(Ord. No. 08-9, § 4, 2-14-2008)  
Sec. 62-221. - Gang loitering. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, and the interpretation and application thereof, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein, unless the context in which they are used shall indicate otherwise. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the singular number include the plural number and words in the plural number include the singular number. Words or phrases not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Criminal gang activity means the commission, attempted commission or solicitation of the following offenses, provided that the offenses are committed by two (2) or more persons, or by an individual at the direction of, or in association with, any criminal street gang, with the specific intent to promote, further or assist in any criminal conduct by gang members: the following sections, as from time to time supplemented or amended, of the Criminal Code of 1961: 9-1 (murder), 9-3.3 (drug-induced homicide), 10-1 (kidnapping), 10-4 (forcible detention), subsection (a)(13) of Section 12-2 (aggravated assault—discharging firearm), 12-4 (aggravated battery), 12-4.1 (heinous battery), 12-4.2 (aggravated battery with a firearm), 12-4.3 (aggravated battery of a child), 12-4.6 (aggravated battery of a senior citizen), 12-6 (intimidation), 12-6.1 (compelling organization membership of persons), 12-11 (home invasion), 12-14 (aggravated criminal sexual assault), 18-1 (robbery), 18-2 (armed robbery), 19-1 (burglary), 19-3 (residential burglary), 19-5 (criminal fortification of a residence or building), 20-1 (arson), 20-1.1 (aggravated arson), 20-2 (possession of explosives or explosive or incendiary devices), subsections (a)(6), (a)(7), (a)(9) or (a)(12) of Section 24-1 (unlawful use of weapons), 24-1.1 (unlawful use or possession of weapons by felons or persons in the custody of the department of corrections facilities), 24-1.2 (aggravated discharge of a firearm), subsection (d) of Section 25-1 (mob action —violence), 33-1 (bribery), 33A-2 (armed violence), Sections 5, 5.1, 7 or 9 of the Cannabis Control Act where the offense is a felony (manufacture or delivery of cannabis, cannabis trafficking, calculated criminal cannabis conspiracy and related offenses), or Sections 401, 401.1, 405, 406.1, 407 or 407.1 of the Illinois Controlled Substances Act (illegal manufacture or delivery of a controlled substance, controlled substance trafficking, calculated criminal drug conspiracy and related offenses). 
Criminal street gang means any ongoing organization, association in fact or group of three (3) or more persons, whether formal or informal, having as one (1) of its substantial activities the commission of one (1) or more of the criminal acts enumerated in the definition of criminal gang activity, as herein defined, and whose members individually or collectively engage in or have engaged in a pattern of criminal gang activity, as herein defined. 
Gang loitering means remaining in any one (1) place under circumstances that would warrant a reasonable person to believe that the purpose or effect of that behavior is to enable a criminal street gang to establish control over identifiable areas, to intimidate others from entering those areas or to conceal illegal activities. 
Pattern of criminal gang activity means two (2) or more acts of criminal gang activity of which at least two (2) such acts were committed within five (5) years of each other. 
Public place means the public way and any other location open to the public, whether publicly or privately owned. 
(b)  Whenever a police officer observes a member of a criminal street gang engaged in gang loitering with one (1) or more other persons in any public place designated for the enforcement of this section under subsection (c), the police officer shall, subject to all applicable procedures promulgated by the police chief: 
(1)  Inform all such persons that they are engaged in gang loitering within an area in which loitering by groups containing criminal street gang members is prohibited; 
(2)  Order all such persons to disperse and remove themselves from within sight and hearing of the place at which the order was issued; and 
(3)  Inform those persons that they will be subject to arrest if they fail to obey the order promptly or engage in further gang loitering within sight or hearing of the place at which the order was issued during the next eight (8) hours. 
(c)  The police chief shall by written directive designate areas of the city in which the police chief has determined that enforcement of this section is necessary because gang loitering has enabled criminal street gangs to establish control over identifiable areas, to intimidate others from entering those areas, or to conceal illegal activities. Prior to making a determination under this subsection, the police chief shall consult, as he or she deems appropriate, with persons who are knowledgeable about the effects of gang activity in areas in which this section may be enforced. Such persons may include, but need not be limited to, members of the department of police with special training or experience related to criminal street gangs; other personnel of that department with particular knowledge of gang activities in the proposed designated area; elected and appointed officials of the area; community-based organizations; or others identified by the department who are familiar with the area. The police chief shall develop and implement procedures for the periodic review and update of designations made under this subsection. 
(d)  The police chief shall by written directive promulgate procedures to prevent the enforcement of this section against persons who are engaged in collective advocacy activities that are protected by the Constitution of the United States or the State of Illinois. 
(e)  Any person who fails to obey promptly an order issued under subsection (b), or who engages in further gang loitering within sight or hearing of the place at which such an order was issued during the eight-hour period following the time the order was issued, shall be guilty of a violation punishable as follows: 
(1)  A fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense or the performance of up to sixty (60) hours of community service for each offense, or both; or imprisonment for not more than six (6) months for each offense; 
(2)  A second or subsequent offense shall be punishable by a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and not more than one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for each offense or a mandatory minimum performance of 40 hours of community service but not more than one hundred twenty (120) hours of community service for each offense, or both; or imprisonment for not more than six (6) months for each offense; 
(3)  Upon a third or subsequent conviction for a violation of this subsection or section 62-222, or any combination thereof, within any 12-month period, a court, in addition to imposing the penalties prescribed in this subsection, shall enter an order requiring the convicted person to refrain, for a mandatory period of thirty (30) days, from gang loitering as herein described, or narcotics-related loitering as defined in section 62-222, within sight and hearing of the place of the police officer's order issued under this section or section 62-222, which served as the basis for the person's most recent conviction, unless circumstances strongly mandate that such period should be shorter. Such an order must be obeyed regardless of whether any additional warning or notice is given to the person. Any person who violates an order issued by a court under this subsection or section 62-222 shall be subject to a mandatory minimum sentence of not less than five (5) days imprisonment but not more than six (6) months imprisonment for each violation or a mandatory minimum performance of sixty (60) hours of community service but not more than one hundred twenty (120) hours of community service for each violation, plus a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and not more than one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00), for each violation. 
(Ord. No. 08-9, § 4, 2-14-2008)  
Sec. 62-222. - Narcotics-related loitering. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, and the interpretation and application thereof, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein, unless the context in which they are used shall indicate otherwise. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the singular number include the plural number and words in the plural number include the singular number. Words or phrases not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Narcotics-related loitering means remaining in any one (1) place under circumstances that would warrant a reasonable person to believe that the purpose or effect of that behavior is to facilitate the distribution of substances in violation of the Cannabis Control Act or the Illinois Controlled Substances Act, as such acts are from time to time supplemented or amended. 
Public place means the public way and any other location open to the public, whether publicly or privately owned. 
(b)  Whenever a police officer observes one (1) or more persons engaged in narcotics-related loitering in any public place designated for the enforcement of this section under subsection (c), the police officer shall: 
(1)  Inform all such persons that they are engaged in loitering within an area in which such loitering is prohibited; 
(2)  Order all such persons to disperse and remove themselves from within sight and hearing of the place at which the order was issued; and 
(3)  Inform those persons that they will be subject to arrest if they fail to obey the order promptly or engage in further narcotics-related loitering within sight or hearing of the place at which the order was issued during the next eight (8) hours. 
(c)  The police chief shall by written directive designate areas of the city in which enforcement of this section is necessary because the areas are frequently associated with narcotics-related loitering. Prior to making a determination under this subsection, the police chief shall consult, as he or she deems appropriate, with persons who are knowledgeable about the effects of narcotics-related activity in areas in which this section may be enforced. Such persons may include, but need not be limited to, members of the department of police with special training or experience related to narcotics-related activity; other personnel of that department with particular knowledge of narcotics-related activities in the proposed designated area; elected and appointed officials of the area; community-based organizations; and others identified by the department who are familiar with the area. The police chief shall develop and implement procedures for the periodic review and update of designations made under this subsection. 
(d)  Any person who fails to obey promptly an order issued under subsection (b), or who engages in further narcotics-related loitering within sight or hearing of the place at which such an order was issued during the eight-hour period following the time the order was issued, shall be guilty of a violation punishable as follows: 
(1)  A fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense or the performance of up to sixty (60) hours of community service for each offense, or both; or imprisonment for not more than six (6) months for each offense; 
(2)  A second or subsequent offense shall be punishable by a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and not more than one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for each offense or a mandatory minimum performance of forty (40) hours of community service but not more than one hundred twenty (120) hours of community service for each offense, or both; or imprisonment for not more than six (6) months for each offense; 
(3)  Upon a third or subsequent conviction for a violation of this subsection or section 62-221, or any combination thereof, within any 12-month period, a court, in addition to imposing the penalties prescribed in this subsection, shall enter an order requiring the convicted person to refrain, for a mandatory period of thirty (30) days, from narcotics-related loitering as herein defined, or gang loitering as defined in section 62-221, within sight and hearing of the place of the police officer's order issued under this section or section 62-221, which served as the basis for the person's most recent conviction, unless circumstances strongly mandate that such period should be shorter. Such an order must be obeyed regardless of whether any additional warning or notice is given to the person. Any person who violates an order issued by a court under this subsection or section 62-221 shall be subject to a mandatory minimum sentence of not less than five (5) days' imprisonment but not more than six (6) months' imprisonment for each violation or a mandatory minimum performance of sixty (60) hours of community service but not more than one hundred twenty (120) hours of community service for each violation, plus a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and not more than one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00), for each violation. 
(Ord. No. 08-9, § 4, 2-14-2008)  
Secs. 62-223—62-250. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC PEACE AND ORDER  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 62-251. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  A person commits disorderly conduct when he knowingly: 
(1)  Does any act in such unreasonable manner as to provoke, make or aid in making a breach of peace; 
(2)  Does or makes any unreasonable or offensive act, utterance, gesture or display which, under the circumstances, creates a clear and present danger of a breach of peace or imminent threat of violence; 
(3)  Refuses or fails to cease and desist any conduct or activity likely to produce a breach of peace where there is an imminent threat of violence, and where the police have made all reasonable efforts to protect the otherwise peaceful conduct and activity, and have requested that such conduct and activity be stopped and explained the request if there be time; 
(4)  Fails to obey a lawful order of dispersal by a person known by him to be a peace officer under circumstances where three (3) or more persons are committing acts of disorderly conduct in the immediate vicinity, which acts are likely to cause substantial harm or serious inconvenience, annoyance or alarm; 
(5)  Assembles with three (3) or more persons for the purpose of using force or violence to disturb the public peace; 
(6)  Disturbs any lawful assemblage or gathering in the city; 
(7)  Commits any assault or battery or to fight in a public place in the city; 
(8)  Goes about begging or soliciting funds on the public ways, except as provided in sections 54-1011 and 54-1041 of this Code; 
(9)  Appears in any public place manifestly under the influence of alcohol, narcotics or other drug, not therapeutically administered, to the degree that he may endanger himself or other persons or property, or annoy persons in his vicinity; 
(10)  Carries in a threatening or menacing manner, without authority of law, any pistol, revolver, dagger, razor, dangerous knife, stiletto, knuckles, slingshot, an object containing noxious or deleterious liquid, gas or substance or other dangerous weapon, or conceals said weapon on or about the person or vehicle; 
(11)  Pickets or demonstrates on a public way within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any primary or secondary school building while the school is in session and one-half hour after the school session has been concluded, provided that this subsection does not prohibit the peaceful picketing of any school involved in a labor dispute; or 
(12)  Pickets or demonstrates on a public way within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any church, temple, synagogue or other place of worship while services are to be conducted and one-half (½) hour after services have been concluded, provided that this subsection does not prohibit the peaceful picketing of any church, temple, synagogue or other place of worship involved in a labor dispute. 
(b)  A person convicted of disorderly conduct shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. 
(c)  The enumeration of the aforesaid acts shall not be construed as excluding any other acts and any act wherein the peace and quietude of the community is invaded shall be considered disorderly conduct. 
(Code 1980, § 18-37; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-252. - Noise. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to make or cause to be made any noise or sound of such volume or of such a nature, including the use or operation of any radio, tape recorder, cassette player or other device for receiving broadcast sound or producing recorded sound, as to cause annoyance to residents of the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to disturb the peace by the making of any unnecessary noise. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to operate any pneumatic hammer, grinding or crushing machinery, mixing or loading machine, or any other machinery equipment or device in the city which makes or causes a noise in violation of any of the provisions of this article. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to operate any commercial or construction equipment or device or lawnmowing or landscaping device within any residential district or within fifty (50) feet of any residential district before 7:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. Monday through Friday and before 9:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. on weekends. This prohibition shall include, but not be limited to, scavenger services, construction contractors, landscaping contractors and residential inhabitants. 
(Code 1980, § 18-83; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991; Ord. No. 96-54, § 1, 8-8-1996; Ord. No. 98-54, § 1, 8-20-1998)  
Sec. 62-252.5. - Drug and gang houses, houses of prostitution and other disorderly houses declared public nuisance. 
(a)  Any premises used for prostitution, illegal gambling, illegal drug trafficking, possession or delivery of or trafficking in controlled substances, or any other activity that constitutes a felony, misdemeanor, business offense or petty offense under federal, state or municipal law is hereby declared to be a public nuisance; provided that no public nuisance or violation of this section shall be deemed to exist unless: 
(1)  The property is used for more than one (1) such offense within any six-month period; or 
(2)  The offense for which the property is used is punishable by imprisonment for one (1) year or more. 
(b)  Any person who owns, manages, or controls any premises and who encourages or permits an illegal activity described in subsection (a) of this section to occur or continue on such premises shall be subject to a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Each day that a violation of this subsection continues shall be considered a separate and distinct offense. A person may be found in violation of this section regardless of whether an order of abatement is issued under subsection (c) of this section or whether a notice has been given under subsection (d) of this section. A fine in accordance with this subsection may be assessed in a court of competent jurisdiction or in the code enforcement bureau of the department of buildings. If a judgment is secured in the circuit court, the prosecutor may ask such court, in addition to any penalty herein imposed, to order the placement of a sign by the city for no more than five (5) days on the public right-of-way adjacent to such premises to advise residents that the premises has been found to be a public nuisance in violation of this section of the City Code. 
(c)  The building commissioner or other authorized representative of the city may bring an action to abate a public nuisance described by this section in a court of competent jurisdiction or in the code enforcement bureau of the department of buildings. An order of abatement shall be issued whenever a person who owns, manages or controls any premises encourages or permits any of the illegal activity described in subsection (a) of this section on those premises. The order of abatement shall require the taking of reasonable measures designed to prevent the recurrence of the illegal activity. Those measures may include, but are not limited to, making improvements to real estate and installing lighting to enhance security, the hiring of security personnel, the hiring of a receiver, or the initiation and execution of eviction proceedings against tenants engaged in illegal activity. The order of abatement may also authorize the issuance of ex parte administrative search warrants reasonably calculated to determine whether the nuisance has been abated or whether the order of the court or hearing officer has been obeyed. 
(d)  Whenever the building commissioner, the chief of police or other authorized representative of the city reasonably believes that any premises constitutes a public nuisance as described in this section, he or she may given written notice to the person who owns or controls the premises stating that a nuisance exists and identifying reasonable abatement measures that must be taken within thirty (30) days of the notice. The notice shall be in writing and may be served in person or sent by certified mail, return receipt requested. This notice shall provide the recipient a reasonable opportunity to meet with a representative of the city to discuss allegations in the notice and the need for abatement measures. In any proceeding held according to this section, when the city establishes by a preponderance of the evidence that the premises for which a notice has been sent is a nuisance as subsequently agreed to within the thirty-day period following the notice, or within any other agreed upon period, shall create a presumption that the person who owns, manages, or controls the premises has encouraged or permitted illegal activity in violation of subsection (b) of this section. The presumption may be rebutted only by a preponderance of the evidence. 
(e)  For purposes of this section, "premises" includes any parcel of property and the building or structure, if any, which is situated on the property, and any portion of the public way that abuts the parcel of property when it is used in conjunction with the abutting property for the commission of illegal activity. 
(Ord. No. 04-34, § 3, 5-27-2004; Ord. No. 10-35, § 2, 6-24-2010)  
Sec. 62-253. - Frequent requests for police/ambulance service for disorderly houses. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any property owner, lessee or tenant to maintain, keep, lease or allow a house, room or other premises, including commercial premises, to be disruptive to the peace and well-being of the surrounding community. Houses, rooms or other premises, including commercial premises, are deemed to be a public nuisance and disruptive where frequent requests for police/ambulance service for noise, assaults, batteries, drinking of intoxicating beverages, loitering, gaming, fornication or other misbehavior can be documented. For purposes of this section, noise or sound, including music, of such volume as is clearly audible to a person with normal hearing at a distance greater than seventy-five (75) feet from the premises lot line or measured at a level greater than sixty-five (65) decibels from the premises lot line shall constitute a public nuisance. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section "frequent requests for police/ambulance service" will be more than three (3) responses to the same address in the preceding sixty-day period. 
(c)  It shall be the responsibility of the chief of police to notify the property resident or owner, in writing by certified mail or posting, that charges will be initiated and allow an opportunity to appeal such action at the time of the third incident. The keeper and all parties connected with the maintenance thereof and all parties patronizing or frequenting the same shall be fined not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense. In addition, the owner of a commercial premises which has been deemed a nuisance under this section may be subject to the revocation of his business and/or liquor license. 
(Code 1980, § 18-51; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991; Ord. No. 98-79, §§ 1, 2, 12-21-1998)  
Sec. 62-254. - Disturbing places of worship. 
Any person who shall disquiet or disturb any congregation or assembly met for religious worship by making a noise, or by rude and indecent behavior or profane discourse within the place of worship, or so near to the same as to disturb the order and solemnity of the meeting, shall be fined not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense. 
(Code 1980, § 18-52; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-255. - Drinking in public ways. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drink any alcoholic liquor as defined by law on any public way or in or about any motor vehicle upon a public way in the city. This section shall not apply to portions of the public way occupied by a sidewalk cafe licensed pursuant to chapter 6 of this Code which is properly licensed to sell alcoholic liquor. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to transport, carry, possess or have any alcoholic liquor in or upon or about any motor vehicle upon any public way in the city except in the original package and with the seal unbroken. 
(c)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) or shall be punished by imprisonment for a period of six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Code 1980, § 18-40; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-256. - Sound-emitting devices on public conveyances. 
It is unlawful for any person to make use of any portable entertainment appliance, radio, used exclusively for entertainment, or musical instrument (and other sound-emitting devices), which are audible to others, in any streetcar, elevated train or subway and in any other public conveyance having a capacity of more than seven (7) passengers operating within the city limits of the City of Calumet City. Any person violating this section shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each offense. 
(Code 1980, § 18-44; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-257. - Outdoor basketball. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to engage in the playing of basketball within residential districts between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to use portable basketball hoops unless: 
(1)  Such portable basketball hoops are being used on private property situated at least twenty (20) feet from the public right-of-way; and 
(2)  The name and address of the owner is permanently affixed to such portable basketball hoop. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to use portable basketball hoops on public property, in public rights-of-way or in public alleyways. Any person found in violation of any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(Code 1980, § 18-63; Ord. No. 98-22, § 1, 4-30-1998)  
Sec. 62-258. - Masking in public. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to appear in public in any mask, cap, cowl, hood or other thing concealing the identity of the wearer; provided, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to persons attending or taking part in carnivals, mask balls, public shows, entertainments, or celebrations in the city, or under permission of the proper authorities of said city, nor to any person holding a written permit issued by the mayor. 
(Code 1980, § 18-67; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-259. - Vagrancy. 
All persons who are idle and dissolute, or who go about begging; all persons who use any shell game, sleight-of-hand or juggling trick, or other unlawful game to cheat, defraud, or unlawfully obtain money or other valuable thing; pilfers; confidence men; common drunkards, common night walkers, persons lewd, wanton, or lascivious in speech or behavior; common brawlers; persons who are habitually neglectful of their employment or their calling, and do not lawfully provide for themselves or for the support of their families; and all persons who are idle or dissolute and who neglect all lawful business, and who habitually misspend their time in frequenting houses of ill-fame or gaming houses; all persons lodging in or found in the nighttime in sheds, barns, or unoccupied buildings or lodging in the open air, and not giving a good account of themselves; and all persons who are known to be thieves, burglars, or pickpockets, either by their own confession or otherwise, or by having been convicted of larceny, burglary, or other crime against the laws of the state punishable by imprisonment in the state prison or in a house of correction of any city, and having no lawful means of support, are habitually found prowling around any steamboat landing, railroad depot, banking institution, broker's office, place of public amusement, auction room, store, shop, or crowded public way, public conveyance, or at any public gathering or assembly, or lunging about any court room, private dwelling houses, or are found in any house of ill-fame or gambling house, are hereby declared to be vagabonds, and shall be fined not to exceed five hundred ($500.00) for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 04-35, § 4, 5-27-2004)  
Sec. 62-260. - Prohibited manner of managing or controlling real estate. 
It shall be a violation of this section and this chapter when any person who, when having management authority over or control of residential real estate, whether as a legal or equitable owner or as a managing agent or otherwise permits the physical condition or facilities of the residential real estate to become or remain in any condition which endangers the health or safety of any person. Such conduct shall include, but not be limited to: 
(a)  Allowing property to be improperly secured (i.e., locks not secure, windows broken, doors not secure, etc.), which may result in the commission of a crime against a resident of the property or against any other person on or about the property; 
(b)  Allowing property to collapse or partially collapse, which may result in injury to a person inside or outside of a structure; 
(c)  Allowing property to remain in violation of applicable building code, fire code, or other applicable code provisions; 
(d)  Failing to respond to reasonable requests by the city to repair a property that is in violation of an applicable provision of the Municipal Code; 
(e)  Recklessly endangering the health and safety of any person by illegally altering or modifying a structure to increase the number of dwelling units or living spaces within the structure, or by allowing any such alteration or modification to continue or to be used; or 
(f)  Allowing a resident or guest on the property to engage in criminal and any activity that violates any municipal ordinances of the city or state or federal statute on or about the property. 
(Ord. No. 05-44, § 1, 7-14-2005)  
Sec. 62-261. - Renting or leasing to a minor. 
It shall be a violation of this section and this chapter for any person, who owns or has management authority or control of residential real estate, whether as a legal or equitable owner or as a managing agent or otherwise, to rent or lease any real property to a minor. This provision shall not apply to minors who have been legally emancipated. 
(Ord. No. 05-44, § 2, 7-14-2005)  
Sec. 62-262. - Violations and fines. 
(a)  The fines relative to sections 62-260 and 62-261 shall be as follows: any person found to have violated this ordinance shall be subject to a fine of no less than two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) and no more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each occurrence. 
(b)  The fines found in sections 62-251 through 62-259 shall be amended to strike the maximum specified and to insert one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each occurrence. 
(c)  If no fine is specified in the above sections, the fine shall be a minimum of two hundred dollars ($200.00) and a maximum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each occurrence. 
(Ord. No. 05-44, § 3, 7-14-2005)  
Sec. 62-263. - Enforcement. 
The chief of police or his designee as well as the director of inspectional services or his designee shall be charged with the duty to enforce all provisions contained in article V of the Municipal Code of the City of Calumet City. 
(Ord. No. 05-44, § 4, 7-14-2005)  
Sec. 62-264. - Liens and other methods of collection. 
Once fines have been assessed, the city comptroller shall provide written notice to the person or property owner to whom the fines were assessed along with a demand for payment within thirty (30) days of the notice. The notice shall also contain a provision wherein a hearing may be requested. If no hearing is requested, the fine shall stand. If the property owner or person in violation of this article requests a hearing, payment shall not be required until after a hearing on the violation has concluded and judgment has been entered. If payment is not received within thirty (30) days of the issuance of the invoice or after the hearing, the city comptroller shall cause to be filed a notice of lien in the office of the county recorder of deeds, causing such costs and expenses to be a lien upon the real estate affected, superior to all subsequent liens, except tax liens. The notice of lien shall consist of a sworn statement setting out a description of the real estate sufficient for identification thereof, the amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for the service, and the date or dates when such costs were incurred by the city or person authorized by the city. This lien shall not be valid as to any purchaser whose rights in and to said real estate have arisen after the citation was issued and prior to the filing of the lien notice. The lien shall further not be valid as to any mortgagee, judgment creditor, or other lien holder whose rights in said real estate arise prior to the filing of the lien notice. Upon payment of the costs and expenses by the owner or person interested in said property after the notice of lien has been filed, the lien shall be released by the city and the release may be filed of record as the lien itself has been filed. 
In the event that the citation is issued to a person who is not the owner of the property on which the violation occurred or the citation was not directed to the owner of the property, the city comptroller shall have the authority to forward said fine to the city's debt collection agency, or other persons authorized to collect debts on the city's behalf. 
(Ord. No. 05-44, § 4, 7-14-2005; Ord. No. 18-48, § 2, 8-23-2018)  
Sec. 62-265. - Possession of cannabis. 
(a)  Definitions. All terms and phrases used herein shall have the same meaning as ascribed to them in the Cannabis Control Act (720 ILCS 550/1, et seq.) and amendments thereto; except, should the term "person" or "persons" be limited therein to a natural person who has attained the age of seventeen (17) years or more, said limitation is specifically excluded herein, and the term "person" or "persons" is made applicable to all natural persons. 
(b)  Offense of possession of cannabis. A person commits the offense of possession of cannabis by knowingly possessing thirty (30) grams or less of any substance containing cannabis unless permitted or authorized to do so pursuant to the Cannabis Control Act (720 ILCS 550/1 et seq.). 
(c)  Penalty. Any person violating subsection 62-265(b) shall be subject to a mandatory fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), plus court costs. Any person violating subsection 62-265(b), as a second offense, shall be subject to a mandatory fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), plus court costs. Any person violating subsection 62-265(b) as a third or subsequent offense, shall be subject to a mandatory fine of not less than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), plus court costs. 
(Ord. No. 08-4, § 2, 1-24-2008; Ord. No. 15-15, § 2, 5-14-2015)  
Secs. 62-266—62-280. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SOUND AMPLIFIERS  
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 62-281. - Prohibited noise. 
No licensee under this division shall cause or permit to be emanated or omitted from any such device any lewd, obscene, profane or indecent language or sounds, or any false representation of any matter, product or project advertised thereby, the sale of which is prohibited by ordinance or statute. 
(Code 1980, § 18-125; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Secs. 62-282—62-300. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - License 
 
Sec. 62-301. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful to maintain or operate any loudspeaker or amplifier connected with any radio, phonograph, microphone, or other device by which sounds are magnified and made heard over any public street or public place without a license. 
(Code 1980, § 18-120; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-302. - License application. 
Any person desiring the license required by this article shall file an application therefor with the city clerk, upon a form provided by him, setting forth the name and address of the applicant, the name of the owner of such device, the date upon which it is intended to be used, and such other information as may be prescribed. 
(Code 1980, § 18-121; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-303. - License fee. 
The fee for such license shall be thirty dollars ($30.00) per day. 
(Code 1980, § 18-122; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-304. - Issuance of license. 
The license required by this article shall be issued upon the payment of the required license fee to the city clerk, and shall permit the use of any such device subject to the terms and conditions of this article, only upon the date specified on such license and no other. 
(Code 1980, § 18-123; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-305. - Location and use restrictions. 
(a)  No licensee under this article shall use or operate or employ any such device within the city limits on Sunday or at any time while religious ceremonies are being held or after the hours of 8:00 p.m. of any day, or before the hour of 8:00 a.m. of any day; no licensee shall use, operate or employ any such device within a radius of two (2) blocks from any hospital or within the radius of two (2) blocks from any church while services are being held there. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to radios in homes or in motor vehicles, when the same are operated in such a manner as not to be audible at a distance of seventy-five (75) feet from such vehicle, nor to noise devices, bands or other musical devices used in any public parade or procession which is operated under a permit in accordance with this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 18-124; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991; Ord. No. 96-52, § 1, 8-8-1996)  
Secs. 62-306—62-314. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PUBLIC SPACES 
 
Sec. 62-315. - Short title. 
This division regulating the use of the public spaces and facilities owned, controlled or maintained by the city shall be known and may be cited as the Public Space Ordinance of the City of Calumet City. 
(Ord. No. 12-22, § 2, 5-10-2012)  
Sec. 62-316. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this division, and the interpretation and application thereof, the following words, terms, and phrases shall have the meanings given herein, unless the context in which they are used shall indicate otherwise. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the singular number include the plural number and words in the plural number include the singular number, words or phrases not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Alcoholic liquor means as defined as provided in the Illinois Liquor Control Act (235 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.). 
Amplified sound means any sound projected or transmitted by artificial means, including, but not limited to, loudspeakers, amplifiers, powered megaphones or similar device. 
Cannabis means as defined as provided in the Illinois Cannabis Control Act (735 ILCS 550/1 et seq.). 
City means the City of Calumet City, Cook County, Illinois. 
Controlled substance means as defined as provided in the Illinois Controlled Substance Act (720 ILCS 570/101 et seq.) as amended from time to time hereafter. 
Public facilities means any buildings located within the city which are owned by the city. 
Public space means any real property or structure on real property located within the city which is owned by the city and is normally accessible to the public, including but not limited to, parks, recreation areas and public facilities. 
(Ord. No. 12-22, § 2, 5-10-2012)  
Sec. 62-317. - Specific restriction on conduct and behavior. 
(a)  Advertising. No person shall post, display, or distribute any placard, handbill, pamphlet, circular, book, notice or other writing containing commercial advertising on or within any public space except with the proper permit as specified in the Municipal Code. 
(b)  Alcoholic liquors. 
(1)  No person under the influence of alcoholic liquor shall enter or remain on or within any public space. 
(2)  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, delivered, given away, or consumed on or within public space. 
(c)  Animals. 
(1)  No owner or person having control of any animal shall cause or permit such animal to be on or within any public space without being leashed, except in connection with city-sponsored activities, programs, or events where it is specifically allowed by the city. No leash shall be longer than eight (8) feet, and retractable leashes shall not be extended more than eight (8) feet. Unless specified, animals are not permitted on or within any public space. 
(2)  Any animal found on or within a public space in violation of subsection (c)(1) may be apprehended, removed to an animal shelter, public pound or other place provided for that purpose, and dealt with pursuant to the laws or ordinances of the city, all at the expense of the owner or person responsible for such animal. 
(3)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city may designate certain public spaces as "no animal" areas or events, respectively, in which cases no owner or person having control of any animal shall cause or permit such animal to be in such areas or present at such events. 
(4)  The owner or person having control of any animal shall remove and dispose of any excrement deposited by his animal anywhere on [or] within any public space. 
(5)  The provisions of subsections (c)(1) through (4) above, shall not apply to a blind person or a seeing-eye dog which is under the control of a blind person, or any recognized assistance animal for the disabled, or any service animals performing law enforcement duties. 
(6)  No person shall trap, catch, wound, kill, treat cruelly, or attempt to trap, catch, wound, or kill any animal, or rob any nest of any animal on or within any public space. 
(d)  Assault or bodily injury. No person shall engage in conduct which places another person in reasonable apprehension of receiving bodily harm or physical contact of an insulting or provoking nature, nor shall any person intentionally or knowingly by any means cause bodily harm or make physical contact of an insulting or provoking nature with another person on or within any public space. 
(e)  Begging and soliciting contributions. No person shall beg or panhandle on or within any public space. No person shall take up any collection or solicit or receive contributions of money or anything else of value on or within any public space except with the proper permit as specified in the Municipal Code. 
(f)  Camping. No person shall place, erect, or use any hammock, swing, tent, shelter or any other type of temporary or permanent camping equipment on or within any public space, or otherwise camp in any manner on or within any public space. 
(g)  Controlled substances. No person under the influence of cannabis or any controlled substance shall enter into, be or remain on or within any public space, nor shall any person bring into, possess, take, use, sell or transfer on or within any public space any cannabis or controlled substance. 
(h)  Disorderly conduct. No person while on or within any public space shall either by word or act: 
(1)  Indulge or engage in any loud, unusual, improper or boisterous noise, amplified sound or activity, including without limitation the loud playing of record players, televisions, radios, tape recorders, noisemakers, musical instruments or sound equipment; 
(2)  Indulge or engage in any threat of violence or injury to the person or property of others; 
(3)  Indulge or engage in any riot, quarrel, fight, disturbance, nuisance, breach of peace or diversion tending to a breach of peace or disturbance of the peace and quiet; 
(4)  Behave in any reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger the person or property of others; 
(5)  Collect with other persons, in bodies or crowds, for unlawful purposes, or for any purpose of annoyance, disturbance or obstruction of the lawful activities of other persons; or 
(6)  Disturb, obstruct or interfere unreasonably with the lawful activities of other persons. 
(i)  Dumping, polluting and littering. 
(1)  No person shall place, pile or otherwise dump, leave or deposit in any manner any kind of dirt, rubbish, refuse, ashes, garbage, grass clippings and other yard waste, snow, ice or other substance, whether liquid or solid, on or within any public space except as specifically permitted by the city. Any person violating this subsection may be assessed the cost to the city of removing any such improperly deposited substance or material and such charge shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any other penalties provided for herein. 
(2)  No person shall litter, cast, throw, drop or otherwise deposit or leave any garbage, refuse or other material of any kind on or within any public space nor shall any person spit upon or otherwise defile any property located on or within any public space. Paper, glass, cans, garbage and other refuse resulting from the lawful use of a public space may and shall be deposited in receptacles provided by city for that purpose. Where receptacles are not so provided, are missing or are full to capacity, all such garbage, refuse or other material shall be carried away from the area of use by the person(s) responsible for the presence and properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(j)  Erection of structures. No person shall construct, build or erect any building, tent or structure of whatever kind, whether permanent or temporary in character, or construct, run or string any public service or private utility into, upon, or across any public space. 
(k)  Fires. No person shall light or make use of any fire on or within any public space. 
(l)  Gambling and games of chance. No person while on or within a public space shall play or engage in selling routines or futures, games of chance or in any other device or game of chance, hazard or skill, either as bookmaker, dealer, player or otherwise, for the purpose of gaming or gambling for money or other valuable things. 
(m)  Interference with other users. No person shall walk, act or conduct himself upon a portion of a public space in such a way as to interfere with the use of such public space by other persons who are properly using public space for the purpose for which it has been designated. No person shall engage in any activity on or within any public space in a manner calculated or likely to endanger, injure or damage persons or property in any way. 
(Ord. No. 12-22, § 2, 5-10-2012)  
Sec. 62-318. - Construction and scope. 
In the interpretation of this division, its provisions shall be construed as follows: 
(1)  No provision hereof shall make unlawful any act necessarily performed by any officer, employee or agent of the city when acting within the scope of his authority or in his line of duty or work as such or any other person summoned by any such person to assist him in such endeavor; 
(2)  This division is in addition to and supplemental to all applicable state, federal and local laws and ordinances including without limitation; and 
(3)  An attempt to commit an act or engage in an activity prohibited under this division shall likewise be deemed prohibited in the same manner as the commission of such act or engaging in such activity and subject to the same penalties. 
(Ord. No. 12-22, § 2, 5-10-2012)  
Sec. 62-319. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person, firm, association, partnership or corporation violating any provision of this division shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. Every day that a violation exists constitutes a separate offense. 
(b)  Proceedings to enforce violations of this division may be initiated and conducted in accordance with and pursuant to the provisions of the Municipal Code of the city providing for administrative adjudication of code violations or by any other means provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 12-22, § 2, 5-10-2012)  
Secs. 62-320—62-330. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC MORALS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 62-331. - Violation, penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article, where no other penalty is provided, shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense. 
(Code 1980, § 18-17; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-332. - Indecent acts and words. 
Any person who shall commit any indecent, lewd, or filthy act in any public place in the city; who shall utter any lewd or filthy words, sing any song the words of which are suggestive of indecency or immorality, or use any threatening or abusive language in the hearing of other persons; who shall make any obscene gesture in the presence of other persons; or, who shall make any overture of lewdness, tending to pervert the morals of any person, upon or in the public ways or other public places or in any public conveyance in the city, is hereby declared to be a common nuisance and shall be fined not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense. 
(Code 1980, § 18-7; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-333. - Indecent exposure or dress. 
Any person who shall appear, bathe, sunbathe, walk or be in any public park, playground, beach or the waters adjacent thereto, or any school facility and the area adjacent thereto, or any municipal building and the areas adjacent thereto, or any public way within the city in such a manner that the genitals, vulva, pubis, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anus, anal region, or pubic hair region of any person, or any portion of the breast at or below the upper edge of the areola thereof of any female person, is exposed to public view or is not covered by an opaque covering, shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more that five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense.  
Sec. 62-334. - Bathing suits. 
(a)  No person shall swim or bathe in the waters of a public swimming pool in the city, unless such person is clothed in a suitable bathing dress. 
(b)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be fined not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. 
(Code 1980, § 18-8; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-335. - Artificially affecting prices. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to buy up, or cause to be bought up, any foodstuffs or provisions required for human consumption with intent to withhold the same from sale in the open market in order to create a scarcity of such article or for the purpose of controlling or artificially fixing the market value of the same by hindering or delaying the sale thereof, or by any other means. It shall likewise be unlawful to make any agreement with, or offer any inducement to, any other person for the purpose of creating a scarcity of any such foodstuffs or provisions or to create an artificial or unnatural rise in the price of same, or to do anything which will prevent or delay the placing on the market by any other person of such articles in the natural course of trade. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any such foodstuffs or provisions to store, or to arrange with any other person for the storage thereof, in any public or private warehouse or storeroom with intent to withhold the same from the open market and to create a scarcity therein or to raise the price of the same. 
(c)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense, and each day that such violation shall continue shall be regarded as a distinct and separate offense. 
(Code 1980, § 18-15; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-336. - Manipulating telephone coin boxes. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to insert, or to attempt to insert, into the coin box or money receptacle of any telephone, any slug, button, or other substance, or to manipulate or operate, or to attempt to manipulate or operate, in any manner whatever, any telephone instrument or any mechanism or device connected or commonly used therewith, with the intent to obtain telephone service without paying therefor. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to insert, or to attempt to insert, into the coin box or money receptacle of any telephone, any slug, button, wire, hook, or other implements or substances with the intent to obtain from such coin box or money receptacle a legal tender coin of the United States. 
(Code 1980, § 18-16; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-337. - Fraud through spiritualism. 
(a)  No person shall hold or give any public or private meeting, gathering, circle, or seance of any kind in the name of spiritualism, or of any other religious body, society, cult, or denomination, and therein practice, or permit to be practiced, fraud or deception of any kind. No person shall obtain money or property from another by fraudulent devices and practices in the name of, or by means of, spirit mediumship, palmistry, card reading, astrology, seership, or like crafty science, or fortune-telling of any kind. 
(b)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense. 
(Code 1980, § 18-79; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-338. - Charitable entertainments; restriction on promotional materials. 
No person shall use any ticket, poster, placard, badge, or other advertisement in the promotion of any dance, bazaar, picnic, game, theater, or other entertainment or performance purporting to be given for charitable purposes unless the names of the persons or organizations intended to be benefitted by the receipts from such entertainment or performance are stated on such ticket, poster, placard, badge, or other advertisement. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be fined no less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense. 
(Code 1980, § 18-81; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Secs. 62-339—62-360. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PROSTITUTION AND RELATED OFFENSES 
 
Sec. 62-361. - Directing persons to houses of ill-fame. 
(a)  No person knowingly shall direct, take, transport, or offer to direct, take, or transport, any person for immoral purposes to any other person, or assist any person by any means to seek or to find any prostitute or other person engaged in immoral practices, or any brothel, bawdy house, or any other place of ill-fame. 
(b)  Any person that shall violate the provisions of this section shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense. 
(Code 1980, § 18-2; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-362. - Prostitution or lewdness in conveyances. 
(a)  No person shall knowingly receive any person for purposes of lewdness, assignation, or prostitution into or upon any vehicle or other conveyance or permit any person to remain for any of such purposes in or upon any such vehicle or other conveyance. 
(b)  Any person that shall violate the provisions of this section shall be fined not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. 
(Code 1980, § 18-3; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-363. - Revocation of license. 
The business/liquor license of any such person or employees thereof directly involved in the violation of section 62-361 may be revoked, and also the license of the vehicle or conveyance used may be revoked at the discretion of the mayor. No license so revoked hereunder shall be reinstated until the lapse of a period of one (1) year after such revocation. 
(Code 1980, § 18-4; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-364. - Soliciting; penalty. 
(a)  Any person who by any overt acts in or upon the public ways or in any hotel, motel or other public place of accommodation or on public conveyances or in any establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages, offers to perform or who solicits for another person to perform any act of prostitution shall upon conviction be fined not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the first offense and not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the second offense and shall be punished as a misdemeanor for each subsequent offense by incarceration in the county jail for a term not to exceed six (6) months under procedures set forth in 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1.1, or by both fine and imprisonment. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section acts of prostitution include but are not limited to oral copulation, fornication, anal penetration or any sexual penetration to any degree. 
(Code 1980, § 18-5; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-365. - Street solicitation for prostitution. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, "public place" means any street, sidewalk, bridge, alley or alleyway, plaza, park, driveway, parking lot, or transportation facility or the doorways and entranceways to any building which fronts on any of the aforesaid places, or a motor vehicle in or on any such place, or any other public way. 
(b)  Any person who remains or wanders about in a public place on the public way and repeatedly beckons to, or repeatedly attempts to engage passersby in conversation, or repeatedly interferes with the free passage of other persons, for the purpose of prostitution as defined in 720 ILCS 5/11-14, or of soliciting for a prostitute, as defined in 720 ILCS 5/11-15, shall be guilty of a violation of this section and upon conviction be fined not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00), or be imprisoned for a period of ten (10) days, or be penalized by both such fine and imprisonment if such a person has previously been convicted of a violation of this section. 
(c)  Any person who remains or wanders about in a public place and repeatedly beckons to, or repeatedly stops, or repeatedly attempts to stop, or repeatedly attempts to engage passersby in conversation, or repeatedly stops or attempts to stop motor vehicles, or repeatedly interferes with the free passage of other persons, for the purpose of pandering as that term is defined in 720 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq., shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be prosecuted in accordance with the terms of C65 ILCS 5/1-2-1.1, for a misdemeanor. Upon conviction such person shall be incarcerated in a penal institution other than the penitentiary for not less than ninety (90) days and not more than six (6) months. 
(d)  If any provision or part of this section shall be found unconstitutional or outside the corporate powers of the city, the remaining provisions shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Code 1980, § 18-6; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Secs. 62-366—62-390. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - OBSCENITY AND RELATED OFFENSES 
 
Sec. 62-391. - Indecent publications and exhibitions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to exhibit, sell, print, offer to sell, give away, circulate, publish, distribute, or attempt to distribute any obscene book, magazine, pamphlet, paper, writing, card, advertisement, circular, print, picture, photograph, motion picture film, play, image, instrument, statue, drawing, or other article which is obscene. Any person violating any provisions of this section shall be fined not less than twenty dollars ($20.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section the term "obscene" is defined as follows: whether to an average person, applying contemporary community standards, the dominant theme of the material taken as a whole appeals to prurient interests. 
(Code 1980, § 18-9; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-392. - Sale of literature represented as immoral. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, or to offer or to exhibit for sale, in sealed form, or in any form which indicates that the sale thereof is surreptitious or contrary to law, any book, pamphlet, or literature of any kind bearing the title of some well-known book of salacious character, or bearing the title of a book of which the sale is prohibited, or bearing the title of a book of which the contents are actually lewd, lascivious, obscene, immoral or indecent. It shall likewise be unlawful to sell, or to offer or exhibit for sale, any book, pamphlet, or literature of any kind having anything about it which indicated that its contents are of an obscene, immoral, lewd, lascivious, or indecent character, or to sell, or to offer or exhibit for sale, any book, pamphlet, or literature of any kind under the guise or pretense that the same is obscene, immoral, lewd, lascivious, or indecent, or in a manner that indicated concealment of anything as contrary to law or immoral contained therein, or to use any pretense, trick, fraud, artifice, or device to convey the impression that such book, pamphlet, or literature is lewd, lascivious, indecent, obscene, or immoral, whether such pretense, trick, fraud, artifice or device is a misrepresentation in regard to the contents of the same or not. 
(Code 1980, § 18-10; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-393. - Material harmful to minors unlawful. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section the following words shall be defined as follows: 
Harmful to minors means that quality of any description or representation in whatever form, or nudity, sexual conduct, or sexual excitement, when it: 
(1)  Predominantly appeals to the prurient, shameful, or morbid interest of minors in sex; and 
(2)  Is patently offensive to contemporary standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what is suitable sexual material for minors; and 
(3)  Taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. 
Knowingly means having general knowledge of, or reason to know, or a belief or ground for belief which warrants further inspection or inquiry or both. 
Minor means any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
Nudity means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of the female breast with less than a full opaque covering of any portion thereof below the top of the nipple, or the depiction of covered male genitals in a discernible turgid state. 
Sexual conduct includes any of the following depicted sexual conduct: 
(1)  Any act of sexual intercourse, actual or simulated, including genital, anal-genital, or oral-genital intercourse, whether between human being or between a human being and an animal; 
(2)  Sadomasochistic abuse, meaning flagellation or torture by or upon a person who is nude or clad in undergarments or in a revealing costume or the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restricted on the part of one so clothed; 
(3)  Masturbation or lewd exhibitions of the genitals including any explicit, closeup representation of a human genital organ; 
(4)  Physical contact or simulated physical contact with the clothed or unclothed pubic areas or buttocks of a human male or female, or the breasts of the female, whether alone or between members of the same or opposite sex or between humans and animals in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification; 
(5)  An act of sexual assault where physical violence or drugs are employed to overcome the will of or achieve the consent of a person to an act of sexual conduct and the effects or results of the violence or drugs are shown. 
Sexual excitement means the condition of human male or female genitals when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person knowingly to sell or loan for monetary consideration to a minor any written, photographic, printed, sound, published material or videotape, or similar visual representation or image of a person or portion of the human body which depicts nudity, sexual conduct, or sexual excitement and which is harmful to minors. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person commercially and knowingly to exhibit, display, sell, offer to sell, lend, give away, circulate, distribute, or attempt to distribute any written, photographic, printed, sound, published material or videotape which is harmful to minors in its context in any place where minors are or may be present or allowed to be present and where minors are able to view such material unless each item of such material is at all times kept in a sealed wrapper. 
(d)  It is also unlawful for any person commercially and knowingly to exhibit, display, sell, offer to sell, give away, circulate, distribute, or attempt to distribute, any written, photographic, printed, sound, published material or videotape whose cover, covers, or packaging, standing alone, is harmful to minors, in any place where minors are to be present and where minors are able to view such material unless each item of such material is at all times blocked from view by an opaque cover. The requirement of an opaque cover shall be deemed satisfied concerning such material if those portions of the cover, covers, or packaging containing such material harmful to minors are blocked from view by an opaque cover. 
(e)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to distribution or attempt to distribute the exhibition, display, sale, offer of sale, circulation, giving away of material harmful to minors where such material is sold, exhibited, displayed, offered for sale, given away, circulated, distributed, or attempted to be distributed under circumstances where minors are not present, not allowed to be present, or are not able to view such material or the cover, covers, or packaging of such material. Any business may comply with the requirements of this clause by physically segregating such material in a manner so as to physically prohibit the access to and view of the material by minors, by prominently posting at the entrance to such restricted area "Adults Only—you must be 18 to enter" and by enforcing such restrictions. 
(Code 1980, § 18-11; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-394. - Violation, penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of section 62-395 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in the amount not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) or be imprisoned for a period not exceeding six (6) months or be both so fined and imprisoned. Each day that such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. If more than one (1) written, photographic, printed, sound, published material or videotape shall knowingly be sold, lent, displayed, offered to be sold, given away, circulated, distributed or in any way furnished or attempted to be furnished to any such person in violation of this section, the sale, loan, display, offer to sell, giving away, circulation, distribution or in any way furnishing or attempting to furnish to any such person of each separate written, photographic, printed, sound published material or videotape shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punished as such hereunder. 
(Code 1980, § 18-12; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-395. - Museums of anatomy. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own or operate any exhibition commonly known as a museum of anatomy, or other exhibition, show, or place of amusement which is open to the general public, whether or not admission thereto is restricted by sex and age, or whether or not a fee for admission thereto is charged, wherein the principal part of the exhibition is illustrative of the human anatomy, or wherein are exhibited any books, pamphlets, circulars, pictures, charts, diagrams, models, casts, or other articles, paintings, drawings, or designs of any kind illustrating or describing the genital organs or containing any other obscene, lewd, indecent, or immoral exhibition of any kind, when such museum or other exhibition is conducted for gain or profit, either directly or indirectly, or for the purpose of advertising, or in connection with a place where medical treatment is offered or medicine is sold, or for any immoral purpose. 
(b)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense, and each day's continuance of any violation of the same shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 1980, § 18-13; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Secs. 62-396—62-420. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - GAMBLING 
 
Sec. 62-421. - Violation, penalty. 
Any person violating any provision of this division, where no other penalty is specified, shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense. 
(Code 1980, § 18-33; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-422. - Duty of police. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of all members of the department of police to give information to the mayor of every house, room, yard, boat, vessel, or other structure or premises within the city wherein any such game or device or policy shop tickets or lists are or may be set up, kept, or maintained. Such members of the department of police shall take all lawful means to suppress and prevent the playing at or use of any faro table, roulette wheel, or the playing of any game or the use of any device herein before mentioned. For this purpose, when and as often as any such member of the department of police shall have reasonable cause to suspect that any such table, wheel, game or device is set up, kept, or maintained anywhere within the city, he shall forthwith make complaint thereof before some judge of the municipal court and obtain a warrant authorizing him to enter such house, room, yard, boat, vessel, or other structure, place, or premises, or any part of the same. Such member of the department of police shall thereupon have the authority to demand entry thereto. No person shall refuse or fail to open the door or entrance thereto, or shall obstruct or do anything tending to obstruct or prevent the entry of such member of the department of police to any such house, room, yard, boat, vessel, or other structure, place or premises, or any part thereof, when such member of the department of police shall have a warrant. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of every member of the department of police to seize any such table, wheel, instrument, device, or thing. All such tables, instruments, devices, or things when seized shall be destroyed. 
(c)  No person shall obstruct or resist any member of the police department in the performance of any act herein authorized. 
(Code 1980, § 18-30; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-423. - Gambling prohibited. 
No person shall play or engage in faro, roulette, or gambling for money or other valuable thing, or in any other device or game of chance, hazard, or skill, either as bookmaker, dealer, keeper, player, or otherwise, for the purpose of gaming or gambling for money or other valuable thing. Nothing in this division shall be construed to prevent eleemosynary, religious or charitable institutions from conducting raffles, the proceeds of which benefits persons by enhancing their opportunity for religious or educational advancement; by relieving or protecting them from disease, suffering or distress; by contributing to their physical well-being; by assisting them in establishing themselves in life as worthy and useful citizens; or by increasing their comprehension of and devotion to the principles upon which this nation was founded. 
Nothing in this division shall prohibit any person from playing, using, owning, maintaining or transporting a video gaming terminal as authorized in a licensed establishment which is licensed pursuant to the Illinois Video Gaming Act 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq., as hereinafter amended from time to time; or engaging in or conducting gaming or gambling for money or other valuable thing should any statute be hereafter enacted or amended by the State of Illinois authorizing a land- or river-based casino in the city. 
(Code 1980, § 18-25; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991; Ord. No. 12-24, § 2, 5-24-2012)  
Sec. 62-424. - Lottery and policy games. 
(a)  No person shall keep, occupy or use, or permit to be kept, occupied or used, a place, building, room, establishment, table, or apparatus for policy playing or for the purchase, sale, exchange, or redemption of what are commonly called lottery tickets or policy tickets. 
(b)  No person shall deliver or receive money or other valuable consideration in playing policy or in aiding in the playing thereof, or for lottery or policy tickets, or for any writing, paper, or document in the nature of a bet, wager, or insurance upon the drawing or drawn numbers of any lottery or policy game, whether such drawing be real or imaginary. 
(c)  No person, except a public officer, shall have in his possession or control any writing, paper, or document representing or being a record of any chance, share, or interest in numbers sold, drawn, or to be drawn, in what is commonly called policy, or in the nature of a bet, wager, or insurance upon the drawing or drawn numbers of any public or private lottery or policy game, whether such drawing be real or imaginary. 
(d)  No person, other than a public officer, shall have in his possession or control any paper, print, writing, numbers, device, policy slip, policy sheet, or article of any kind such as is commonly used in carrying on, promoting, or playing the game commonly called policy. 
(e)  No person shall sell, offer for sale, barter, exchange, give away, or in any way dispose of or redeem any ticket, order, slip, or device of any kind for or representing any number of shares or any interest in any lottery, policy, or scheme of chance of any kind or description by whatever name, style, or title the same may be denominated or known, and whether located or drawn, or to be drawn, paid, or carried on within or without the limits of the city, or whether such purported drawings be real or imaginary. 
(f)  No person shall either publicly or privately, as owner or agent, establish, carry on, promote, make, draw, or act as "backer" or "vender" for or on account of any lottery, policy, or scheme of chance described in the previous subsection; nor shall any person be in any way concerned in any such lottery, policy, or scheme of chance. 
(g)  No person who is the owner, lessor, lessee, agent, superintendent, janitor, or caretaker of any place, building, or room shall permit policy playing or the barter, sale, exchange, or redemption of what are commonly called lottery or policy tickets or slips, or the sale of any chances in alleged drawings in lotteries or policies to be carried on in such place, building, or room, whether such drawings be real or imaginary. 
(h)  No person shall patronize, frequent, or be found in any place, building, room or establishment kept, occupied, or used for policy playing, for policy or lottery drawings, or for the sale of what are commonly called lottery or policy tickets or slips, or in which are kept any paper, prints, writings, numbers, devices, policy tickets, policy sheets or articles of any kind, such as are commonly used in carrying on, promoting, or playing the game or scheme commonly called policy. 
(i)  No person shall write, print, publish, circulate, or distribute in any way an account of any lottery, policy, or scheme of chance of any kind or description by whatsoever name, style, or title the same may be denominated or known, and no person shall write, print, publish, circulate, or distribute any book, pamphlet, circular, sheet or paper whatsoever containing or purporting to contain information concerning any lottery, policy, or scheme of chance, or where the same is to be or has been drawn, or the prizes therein, or the price of a ticket, or where any such ticket may be or has been obtained, or in any way giving publicity to any such lottery, policy, or scheme of chance, whether the drawings therein referred to be real or imaginary. 
(j)  No person shall aid, assist, or abet in any manner, or be a party to any of the offenses, acts, or matters hereinbefore specified. 
(k)  Nothing in this section applies to those lottery tickets sold according to law and approved by the state lottery commission. 
(Code 1980, § 18-26; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-425. - Places for gambling. 
(a)  Every house, room, yard, boat, vessel, or other structure of premises kept or used for the purpose of permitting persons to gamble for any valuable thing within the city is hereby declared to be a common nuisance. 
(b)  No person shall own, maintain, manage, or conduct, or be interested in owning, maintaining, managing, or conducting, any such place. 
(c)  No person shall patronize, visit, frequent, or be connected with the management or operation, or shall act as the doorkeeper, solicitor, runner, agent, abettor, or pimp of any such house, room, yard, boat, vessel, or other structure, place or premises. 
(Code 1980, § 18-27; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-426. - Devices for gambling. 
(a)  No person shall expose any table, wheel, or device of any kind whatsoever, intended, calculated, or designed to be used for gaming or gambling or for playing any game for chance or hazard, in, upon or along any of the public ways or other public places of the city. 
(b)  No person shall bring into the city or have in his possession within the city, for the purpose of gaming or gambling for money or other valuable thing, any table, wheel or other device of any kind or character whatsoever whereon or with money or any other valuable thing may in any manner be played or gambled. 
(Code 1980, § 18-28; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-427. - Slot and tape machines. 
(a)  No person shall keep, own, operate, use, or cause to be kept, operated or used, in any room, inn, tavern, shed, booth, building, enclosure, or upon any premises, or any part thereof, any clock, "joker," tape or slot machine, or other device of any kind or nature whatsoever, upon, in by, or through which money is staked or hazarded, or into which money is paid or played upon chance, or upon the result of the action of which clock, "joker," tape or slot machine, or other device, money or other valuable thing is staked, bet, hazarded, won, or lost. 
(b)  Each day which any person shall operate, keep, own, or have in his charge, possession or control any such clock, "joker," tape or slot machine, or other such gambling device, in violation of the provisions of this section, shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. 
(Code 1980, § 18-29; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-428. - Taking bets or pool-selling. 
(a)  No person shall keep, occupy, or control any room, shed, tenement, tent, booth, building, or other structure, or any part thereof, or occupy any place anywhere within the city, with any book instrument, or device for the purpose of taking, recording, or registering bets or wagers or of selling pools, or take record, or register bets or wagers, or sell pools. Upon the result or alleged result of any actual, supposed, alleged, or fictitious trial or test of skill, speed, or power of endurance of man or beast, or upon the result or alleged result of any actual, supposed, alleged, or fictitious political nomination, appointment, or election. Any person, being the owner, lessee, or occupant of any room, shed, tenement, tent, booth, building, or other structure, or part thereof, who shall knowingly permit the same to be used or occupied for any such purpose or shall therein keep, exhibit, or employ any device or apparatus for the purpose of taking, recording, or registering such bets or wagers, or selling such pools, or shall become the custodian or depositary for hire or reward of any money, property, or thing of value staked, wagered, or pledged upon any such result or alleged result, shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense. 
(b)  In prosecutions under this section, proof of the taking, recording, or registering or such bet or wager or pool-selling, shall be prima facie evidence of the violation of this section, and proof shall not be required that there was any actual, supposed, alleged, or fictitious trial or test of skill, speed, or power of endurance of man or beast, or that there was any actual, supposed, alleged, or fictitious political nomination, appointment, or election to which such bet, wager, or pool-selling may appertain. 
(Code 1980, § 18-31; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-429. - Publishing or circulating information. 
(a)  No person shall insert, or cause to be inserted, or print or publish, or cause to be printed or published in any newspaper or other publications printed, published, or circulated in the city, any notice, advertisement, or mention giving or purporting to give information of where or with whom bets or wagers may be made or placed, or where or by whom pools are sold upon the result of any trial or test of skill, speed, or power of endurance of man or beast, or upon the result of any political nomination, appointment or election. 
(b)  No person shall display or exhibit, or distribute or cause to be distributed, any circular, blank, handbill, pamphlet, or other thing containing any such notice, advertisement, or mention described in subsection (b) of this section. 
(c)  No person shall sell, offer for sale, give away, exhibit, distribute, or cause to be distributed, any newspaper or other publication, circular, blank, handbill, pamphlet, or other written or printed matter giving or purporting to give information concerning the rates at which bets are being offered or taken in the city or elsewhere, or the odds being given or taken on bets within the city or elsewhere, or advice as to betting or the ratio at which bets should be made upon the result of any trial or test of skill, speed, or power of endurance of man or beast, or upon the result of any political nomination, appointment, or election. 
(d)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(Code 1980, § 18-32; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Secs. 62-430—62-460. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - OFFENSES INVOLVING GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS 
 
Sec. 62-461. - Interference or hampering city employees. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, hamper or harass any city officer or employee who is engaged in the official performance of his duties. 
(Code 1980, § 18-54; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-462. - False fire alarms. 
Whoever, without reasonable cause, by outcry or otherwise, makes or circulates, or causes to be made or circulated, any false alarm of fire, shall be fined not less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. 
(Code 1980, § 18-56; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-463. - Forging signatures. 
Whenever it may be necessary, in order to produce a license, permit, grant, or privilege of any kind or to obtain a referendum vote on any proposition, to secure signatures to a petition for the same under the provisions of this code or under any law or ordinance affecting the whole or any part of the city, it shall be unlawful for any person, individually, or any firm or corporation by its members, officers or agents, to forge the signature or procure the forging of the signature to the same of any person who is by law qualified to sign such petition, or to sign or procure the signing of a fictitious name to such petition, or to procure the signature to the same of the person qualified to sign such petition by payment of money or other valuable thing to the person so signing. Any person that shall violate the provisions of this section by forging a signature, signing a fictitious name, or purchasing a signature, or by procuring the doing of same, shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) dollars for each offense, and the signing or procuring of each false or fraudulent name to such petition shall be regarded as a distinct and separate offense. 
(Code 1980, § 18-80; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Secs. 62-464—62-480. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - OFFENSES INVOLVING UNDERAGE PERSONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 62-481. - Parental responsibility. 
(a)  Failure to exercise parental responsibility. It shall be unlawful for the parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor residing with such parent or legal guardian to fail to exercise proper parental responsibility by allowing or permitting such minor to commit any violation of a city ordinance or state statute concerning battery, curfew, disorderly conduct, fireworks, indecent exposure, intimidation, possession of spray paint or permanent markers, obscene conduct, vandalism, trespass, truancy, loitering, use or possession of tobacco products, possession of alcoholic beverages, cannabis, controlled substance or air rifle. 
(b)  Presumption. A parent or legal guardian shall be presumed to have allowed or permitted the minor to have committed a violation of a city ordinance or state statute under all of the following conditions: 
(1)  The minor has been either adjudicated to be in violation of any ordinance or state statute as described in subsection (a) of this section; or has been charged with the violation of any ordinance or state statute as described in subsection (a) of this section (except if found to be not guilty); or has incurred nonjudicial sanctions from any peace officer, police officer, or conservator of the peace resulting from an admission of guilt to an offense of an ordinance or state statute as described in subsection (a) of this section; and 
(2)  The parent or legal guardian has received a written notice by certified mail (return receipt requested) or by personal service in substantially the following form: 
LEGAL NOTICE 
TO: (Parents' Names) 
FROM: Calumet City Police Department 
You are hereby notified that (minor's name) has been involved in the commission of (specify offense), which is a violation of a state statute or city ordinance. If your minor child is again involved in a violation of state statutes or city ordinances involving battery, curfew, disorderly conduct, fireworks, indecent exposure, intimidation, possession of spray paint or permanent markers, obscene conduct, vandalism, trespass, truancy, loitering, possession of alcoholic beverages, cannabis, or controlled substance, or any other offense of willful or malicious nature to persons or property within the next two (2) years, you will be charged with parental irresponsibility. 
Conviction for said offense can result in a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). You are hereby notified that you must exercise proper parental responsibility over said minor by controlling his unlawful conduct. 
(3)  The minor, within two (2) years of the receipt of the notice by the parent or legal guardian, has been either adjudicated to have committed, has been charged with the violation (except if found to be not guilty), or has admitted to have committed any violation of any ordinance or state statute as described in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Definitions. The following terms shall have the meaning ascribed to them for the purposes of this section: 
(1)  Legal guardian means a person appointed guardian or given custody of a minor by a court, but it does not include a person appointed guardian or given custody of a minor under the Juvenile Court Act, as amended, in the State of Illinois. 
(2)  Minor means any person who has not yet attained the age of eighteen (18). 
(d)  Supervision. It is the policy of the city to permit the city prosecutor to use the provisions of the Unified Code of Corrections, as amended, of the state pertaining to supervision in order to further the ends of justice, restitution, and purposes of this section. 
(e)  Court appearance of parents. It is the policy of the city that a parent or legal guardian of the minor be notified and required to appear in court whenever that minor is charged with a violation of an ordinance or state statute which requires a minor's appearance in court. To this end it is hereby directed that a notice in substantially the following form be sent to the parents or legal guardians of the minor: 
LEGAL NOTICE 
TO: (Parents' Names) 
FROM: Calumet City Police Department 
You are hereby notified that (minor's name) has been charged with an offense which is a violation of a city ordinance or state statute, and which required the appearance of said minor in court. You are further notified that one of the parents of said minor must appear in court before the case will be tried or be disposed. 
If you fail to appear, the city prosecutor has been directed to have issued a subpoena to bring you into court. Failure to obey a subpoena can result in contempt of court, with a fine or imprisonment as the penalty. 
The city prosecutor is hereby directed to have subpoenas issued whenever a parent or legal guardian of a minor does not appear in court after the first two (2) times said case has been before the court. 
(f)  Penalties. Any person convicted of any violation of the provisions of this section shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00), nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and in addition may be sentenced to probation or conditional discharge with the conditions being that the parent or legal guardian make restitution or reparation in an amount not to exceed actual loss or damage to property or pecuniary loss. The court shall determine the amount and conditions of payment. Where the conditions of payment have not been satisfied, the court may, at any time prior to the expiration or termination of the period of probation or of conditional discharge, impose an additional fine. The city attorney, at his discretion, shall seek to nonsuit and ask for dismissal of charge upon satisfactory termination of the conditions of conditional discharge as set forth by the trial judge. In addition to and in lieu of penalties set forth above, a period of community service not to exceed one hundred sixty (160) hours may be imposed on the minor and parent or legal guardian who violate any provision of this section. Community service may consist of manual labor provided at the school in which the child attends, the city or it may include library work, documented written projects being submitted by both parent and child, parent effective training, or any other suitable project that the parent and child might participate in that will cause a positive behavioral change. The court is asked to be firm but flexible in the assigning of community service with the intent to quickly modify negative behavioral traits. 
(Code 1980, § 18-57; Ord. No. 91-40, § 1, 9-26-1991; Ord. No. 92-26, § 1, 7-9-1992; Ord. No. 96-49, § 1, 7-25-1996)  
Sec. 62-482. - Truancy. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given in this subsection: 
Legal guardian means any foster parent, person appointed guardian or given custody of a minor by a circuit court of this state, or person appointed guardian or given custody of a minor under the Illinois Juvenile Court Act, but shall not include any person appointed guardian only to the estate of a minor. 
Minor, minor child or ward means any person over five (5) years but not yet eighteen (18) years of age. 
Parents includes the father and/or the mother of a minor child, whether by birth or adoption, or shall be deemed to be the parent having legal custody of the minor in the event the parents are divorced or separated. The term "parent" as used in this section shall also be deemed to mean legal guardian. 
Valid cause, for absence, includes illness, observance of a religious holiday, death in the immediate family, family emergency, and shall include such other situations beyond the control of the student as determined by the board of education in each district, or such other circumstances which cause reasonable concern to the parent for the safety or health of the student. 
(b)  Truancy prohibited. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any minor enrolled in a public, private or parochial school within the corporate limits of the city to absent himself from attendance at such without permission of his parent or legal guardian for absences for valid cause as defined by the school in which the minor is enrolled. 
(2)  Emergency or unforeseen absences due to illness or other causes beyond the control of the person so absenting himself from school without permission of his parent or legal guardian shall not constitute truancy if permission for such absence has in substance been for valid cause as defined by the school in which the minor is enrolled. 
(c)  Parental responsibility. It shall be unlawful for a parent or legal guardian to suffer or permit his minor child or ward to violate subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  Penalty. Any person that shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to the penalties set forth below: 
(1)  The first incident of truancy shall be handled according to the policy and procedure of the school and by the school authorities in which the minor is enrolled. 
(2)  When sufficient times have occurred and upon the request of the school, the parent and minor will be brought to the attention of the police department. Minor will be required to either appear before the court on a quasi-criminal complaint or complete twenty-four (24) hours community service. The police department will notify the parent or legal guardian in writing and by personal service or certified mail, return receipt requested, that any further violation will result in charges of parental irresponsibility being brought before the court. 
(3)  Any subsequent violation will result in the minor and the parent or legal guardian being brought before the court. Conviction for the offense can result in a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Any fine rendered against the minor will also be rendered against the parent or legal guardian. 
(4)  In addition to or in lieu of penalties set forth above, a period of community service not to exceed one hundred sixty (160) hours may be imposed on the minor and parent nor legal guardian who violate any provision of this section. Community service may consist of manual labor provided at the school in which the child attends, the city or it may include library work, documented written projects being submitted by both parent and child, parent effective training, or any other suitable project that the parent and child might participate in that will cause a positive behavioral change. The court is asked to be firm but flexible in the assigning of community service with the intent to quickly modify negative behavioral traits. 
(Code 1980, § 18-58; Ord. No. 91-41, § 1, 9-26-1991)  
Sec. 62-483. - Loitering by minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) to loiter on the premises of any business, city street or alley. Loitering does not include the legitimate exercise of purchasing items at a business or completing a meal purchased at a business. For the purposes of this section loitering will include any person under the age of eighteen (18) found to be on any city street, sidewalk or alley, or business during the hours of the school day to which the person should be in attendance. The fact that a person is suspended or expelled from that school is not a defense to this section. Travel to and from the school with the knowledge or permission of the school or parent is not included. 
(Code 1980, § 18-61; Ord. No. 91-56, § 1, 12-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-484. - Curfew for minors. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Curfew hours means: 
(1)  Weeknights, during the school year, generally, September 1—June 15, 9:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday, inclusive to 6:00 a.m. the following day. 
(2)  Weeknights, when schools are not in session, generally June 16—August 30, 10:00 p.m., Sunday to Thursday, inclusive to 6:00 a.m. the following day. 
(3)  Friday 11:00 p.m. to Saturday 6:00 a.m. and Saturday 11:00 p.m. to Sunday 6:00 a.m. 
Emergency means an unforseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
Establishment means any privately-owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to any place of amusement or entertainment. 
Guardian means: 
(1)  A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or 
(2)  A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court. 
Minor means any person under seventeen (17) years of age. 
Operator means any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a corporation. 
Parent means a person who is: 
(1)  A natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of another person; or 
(2)  At least eighteen (18) years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor. 
Public place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, and shops. 
Remain means to: 
(1)  Linger or stay; or 
(2)  Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the premises. 
Serious bodily injury means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. 
(b)  Offenses. 
(1)  A minor commits an offense if he remains in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours. 
(2)  A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he knowingly permits, or by insufficient control allows, the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours. 
(3)  The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment commits an offense if he knowingly allows a minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours. 
(c)  Defenses. 
(1)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (b) of this section that the minor was: 
a.  Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian; 
b.  On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, without any detour or stop; 
c.  In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
d.  Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning from an employment activity, without any detour or stop; 
e.  Involved in an emergency; 
f.  On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the police department about the minor's presence; 
g.  Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civil organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civil organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor; 
h.  Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly; or 
i.  Married or had been married or is an emancipated minor under the Emancipation of Mature Minors Act, as amended. 
(2)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (b)(3) of this section that the owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly notified the police department that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave. 
(d)  Enforcement. Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances, no defense set out in subsection (c) is present. 
(e)  Penalties generally. A person who violates a provision of this section is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is committed, continued or permitted. Each offense, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(f)  Community service. In addition to or instead of the above penalties, any person who violates this section may be required to perform up to one hundred twenty (120) hours of community service pursuant to the Municipal Code of Calumet City. 
(Code 1980, § 18-62; Ord. No. 91-54, § 1, 12-12-1991; Ord. No. 04-33, §§ 2—7, 5-27-2004)  
Secs. 62-485—62-510. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - TOBACCO 
 
Sec. 62-511. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this division, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Parents means one (1) or both of a minor's natural parents, step-parent, legal guardian, or other responsible adult, institution or agency legally and principally responsible for the care, custody and control of the minor. 
Tobacco products means any substance containing tobacco leaf, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, or dipping tobacco, and also paper products, such as rolling paper, for the creation of tobacco products. 
(Code 1980, § 18-153; Ord. No. 96-46, § 1, 7-25-1996)  
Sec. 62-512. - Finding and declaration. 
The mayor and the city council expressly find and declare that: 
(1)  Cigarette smoking is dangerous to human health. 
(2)  There exists substantial scientific evidence that the use of tobacco products causes cancer, heart disease and various other medical disorders. 
(3)  The Surgeon General of the United States has declared that nicotine addiction from tobacco is similar to addiction to cocaine, and is the most widespread example of drug dependence in this country. 
(4)  The director of the National Institute on Drug Abuse concluded that the majority of the three hundred twenty thousand (320,000) Americans who die each year from cigarette smoking became addicted to nicotine as adolescents before the age of legal consent. 
(5)  The National Institute on Drug Abuse found that cigarette smoking precedes and may be predictive of adolescent illicit drug use. 
(6)  The present legislative scheme of prohibiting sales of tobacco products to persons under the age of eighteen (18) has proven ineffective in preventing such persons from using tobacco products. 
(7)  The enactment of this article directly pertains to and is in furtherance of the health, welfare and safety of the residents of the city, particularly those residents under eighteen (18) years of age. 
(Code 1980, § 18-152; Ord. No. 96-46, § 1, 7-25-1996)  
Sec. 62-513. - Licenses. 
(a)  License requirements and fees to sell tobacco products as stated in section 54-1071 et seq., and section 54-1701 et seq., of this Code shall be adhered to and applications for licenses thereunder shall be made and processed in accordance with the provisions of chapter 54 of this Code. 
(b)  The mayor shall be charged with the administration of this division. The mayor may suspend or revoke any license issued under the provision of this division, if he determines that the licensee has violated any of the provisions of this division. In lieu of suspension or revocation of a license, the mayor may instead levy a fine on the licensee. The fine imposed shall not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation. Each day on which a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. However, no such license shall be suspended or revoked and no licensee shall be fined except after a public hearing by the mayor with a seven (7) day written notice to the licensee affording the licensee an opportunity to appear and defend against the charges contained in such notice. The seven (7) day notice provisions shall begin the day following delivery by certified mail or by personal service. 
(c)  The mayor shall within seven (7) days after such hearing, if he determines after such hearing that the license should be revoked or suspended, or that the licensee should be fined, state the reason for such determination in a written order and state either the amount of the fine, the period of suspension or the revocation of the license and serve a copy of such order within the seven (7) days upon the licensee. 
(d)  Any licensee determined by the mayor to have violated any of the provisions of this division shall pay to the city the costs of the hearing before the mayor on such violation. The mayor shall determine the costs incurred by the city for said hearing, including, but not limited to court reporter's fees, the costs of transcripts or records, attorneys' fees, the cost of preparing and mailing notices and orders and all other miscellaneous expenses incurred by the city or such less sum as the mayor may allow. 
(f)  The licensee shall pay said costs to the city within thirty (30) days of notification of the costs by the mayor. Failure to pay said costs within thirty (30) days of notification is a violation of this division and may be cause for license suspension or revocation, or the levy of a fine. 
(g)  Any person who violates sections 62-513, 62-514, 62-519, and/or 62-520 of this article shall pay a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) for a first offense and a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for any second or subsequent violation. 
(h)  For a first offense, any minor who violates sections 18-157 and/or 18-158 shall be issued a written police warning citation and his parents shall be notified. A second offense shall result in a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) with parent notification. A third or all subsequent offenses shall result in a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) with parent notification. 
(i)  When any license shall have been revoked for any cause, no license shall be granted to said licensee for the period of six (6) months thereafter for the conduct of the business of selling tobacco products as defined in section 18-153 in the premises described in such revoked license. 
(Code 1980, §§ 18-154, 18-155, 18-156; Ord. No. 96-46, § 1, 7-25-1996)  
Sec. 62-514. - Prohibited sales, delivery; signs. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, including any licensee, to sell, offer for sale, buy for, give away, furnish or deliver tobacco products to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. Unlawful acts constituting a violation of this provision by an officer, director, manager or other agent or employee of any licensee shall be deemed and held to be the act of such licensee; and such licensee shall be punishable in the same manner as if such act had been done by the licensee personally. 
(b)  Signs informing the public of the age restrictions provided for herein shall be posted by every licensee at or near every display of tobacco products and on or upon every vending machine which offers tobacco products for sale. Each such sign shall be plainly visible and shall state: 
"THE SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO PERSONS UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE IS PROHIBITED BY LAW." 
(Code 1980, § 18-155; Ord. No. 94-46, § 1, 7-25-1996)  
Sec. 62-515. - Minimum age to sell tobacco products. 
It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee, to engage, employ or permit any person under eighteen (18) years of age to sell tobacco products in any licensed premises. 
(Code 1980, § 18-156; Ord. No. 96-46, § 1, 7-25-1996)  
Sec. 62-516. - Purchase by minors prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to purchase tobacco products, or to misrepresent their identity or age, or to use any false or altered identification for the purpose of purchasing tobacco products. 
(Code 1980, § 18-157; Ord. No. 96-46, § 1, 7-25-1996)  
Sec. 62-517. - Possession by minors prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to possess any tobacco products. 
(Code 1980, § 18-158; Ord. No. 96-46, § 1, 7-25-1996)  
Sec. 62-518. - Confiscation and destruction. 
Any tobacco product found to be unlawfully in possession by a minor shall be confiscated by a police officer or school official and either held as evidence or destroyed. 
(Code 1980, § 18-158.1; Ord. No. 96-46, § 1, 7-25-1996)  
Sec. 62-519. - Proximity to certain institutions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, give away, furnish or deliver tobacco products within one hundred (100) feet of any school, child care facility or other building used for education or recreational programs for persons under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
(Code 1980, § 18-159; Ord. No. 96-46, § 1, 7-25-1996)  
Sec. 62-520. - Certain free distributions prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any person in the business of selling or otherwise distributing, promoting or advertising tobacco products, or any employee or agent of any such licensee or person, in the course of such licensee's or person's business, to distribute, give away, furnish or deliver tobacco products free of charge to any person on any right-of-way, park, playground or other property owned by the city, any school district, any park district or any public library. 
(Code 1980, § 18-160; Ord. No. 96-46, § 1, 7-25-1996)  
Secs. 62-521—62-540. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - PUBLIC GATHERINGS 
 
Sec. 62-541. - Compliance required. 
It shall be unlawful to hold, manage or conduct any meeting or entertainment of any kind in the city, in any premises other than a building constructed in full compliance with the ordinances and laws pertaining thereto for auditorium, theater or lodge room purposes, excepting compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1980, § 18-111; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-542. - Inspections. 
No such gathering or entertainment shall be held or presented in any premises other than a building as described in the preceding section, unless such premises have been examined by the fire marshal or building commissioner not more than three (3) days before the date of such gathering and found to be free from any fire hazard and found to be suitable for the purpose unless the same is constructed of nonflammable materials. Tents or structures covered by canvas or other material shall be properly treated so as to be rendered fire resistive. 
(Code 1980, § 18-112; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-543. - Exits. 
Adequate unobstructed exits shall be provided in all premises and used for such purposes to permit rapid egress of all persons attending, and there shall be at least two (2) separate exits located at least thirty (30) feet from each other. There shall be two (2) linear feet of doorway or exit space for each one hundred (100) people accommodated. 
(Code 1980, § 18-113; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-544. - Seats. 
(a)  Any stands or rows of seats used in such premises shall be so constructed as to be safe for the use designed, and shall be sufficiently strong to carry the same weight and stress as is required for the construction of the auditorium floors of theater buildings, not less than one hundred (100) pounds per square feet. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to admit to any such premises a number of persons to exceed the number of actual seats maintained for their accommodation. 
(Code 1980, § 18-114; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-545. - Doors. 
All doors or gates on exits from premises used for such purposes shall open outward and no such exit shall be so constructed or locked that egress from inside the premises is blocked. 
(Code 1980, § 18-115; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Sec. 62-546. - Notice to city. 
It shall be the duty of any person or persons conducting, calling for or managing any gathering in any premises other than a theater, lodge room or auditorium building constructed as provided in this article shall notify the city clerk of such intended use at least ten (10) days before such meeting is to take place; upon such notice the fire marshal and/or the building commissioner shall inspect the premises to determine whether or not they comply with the provisions hereof. Any permit issued for any such gathering shall be subject to the condition that this article be fully complied with whether or not such condition is embodied in the permit. 
(Code 1980, § 18-116; Ord. No. 91-35, § 1, 9-12-1991)  
Secs. 62-547—62-574. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - PROHIBITION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA 
 
Sec. 62-575. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Cannabis shall have the meaning ascribed to it in the Cannabis Control Act, as if that definition were incorporated herein. 
Controlled substance shall have the meaning ascribed to it in the Illinois Controlled Substances Act, as if that definition were incorporated herein. 
Deliver or delivery shall mean the actual, constructive or attempted transfer of possession, with or without consideration, whether or not there is an agency relationship. 
Drug paraphernalia shall mean all equipment, products and materials of any kind, other than methamphetamine manufacturing materials as defined in the Methamphetamine Control and Community Protection Act, which are peculiar to or marketed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body cannabis or a controlled substance in violation of the Cannabis Control Act, 720 ILCS 550/1 et seq., or the Illinois Controlled Substances Act, 720 ILCS 570/102. The term "drug paraphernalia" includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
(a)  Kits peculiar to or marketed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing cannabis or a controlled substance; 
(b)  Isomerization devices peculiar to or marketed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is cannabis or a controlled substance; 
(c)  Testing equipment peculiar to or marketed for private home use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of cannabis or controlled substances; 
(d)  Diluents and adulterants peculiar to or marketed for cutting cannabis or a controlled substance by private persons; 
(e)  Objects peculiar to or marketed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing cannabis, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body including, where applicable, the following items: 
(1)  Water pipes; 
(2)  Carburetion tubes and devices; 
(3)  Smoking and carburetion masks; 
(4)  Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials; 
(5)  Carburetor pipes; 
(6)  Electric pipes; 
(7)  Air-driven pipes; 
(8)  Chillums; 
(9)  Bongs; 
(10)  Ice pipes or chillers; 
(f)  Any item whose purpose, as announced or described by the seller, deliverer or possessor is for use as "drug paraphernalia" in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-112, § 2, 10-11-2007)  
Sec. 62-576. - Sale or delivery of drug paraphernalia; license revocation. 
Except as authorized by law, it shall be unlawful for any person to keep for sale, offer for sale, sell, deliver, furnish or transfer any item of drug paraphernalia. Any store, place or premises from which or in which any item of drug paraphernalia is kept for sale, offered for sale, displayed, sold or delivered for any commercial consideration by a holder of a business license issued by the city, and in the course of the licensee's business, shall be grounds for the revocation of such license. 
(Ord. No. 07-112, § 2, 10-11-2007)  
Sec. 62-577. - Possession of drug paraphernalia. 
Except as authorized by law, it shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly possess an item of drug paraphernalia with the intent to use it in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introduce cannabis or a controlled substance into the human body, or in preparing cannabis or a controlled substance for that use. In determining intent under this section, the proximity of the cannabis or controlled substances to drug paraphernalia or the presence of cannabis or a controlled substance on the drug paraphernalia, may be considered. 
(Ord. No. 07-112, § 2, 10-11-2007)  
Sec. 62-578. - Exemptions. 
This article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Items marketed for use in the preparation, compounding, packaging, labeling, or other use of cannabis or a controlled substance as an incident to lawful research, teaching, or chemical analysis and not for sale. 
(2)  Items marketed for, or historically and customarily used in connection with, the planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, or inhaling of tobacco or any other lawful substance. 
(3)  Items defined in this section which are marketed for decorative purposes, when such items have been rendered completely inoperable or incapable of being used for any illicit purpose prohibited by this article. 
(4)  Tobacco pipes and cigarette rolling papers. 
(5)  In determining whether or not a particular item is exempt under this article, the trier of fact should consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors, the following: 
(a)  The general, usual, customary, and historical use to which the item involved has been put; 
(b)  Evidence concerning the ordinary or customary use of the item and the effect of any peculiarity in the design or engineering of the device upon its functioning; 
(c)  Any written instructions accompanying the delivery of the item concerning the purposes or uses to which the item can or may be put; 
(d)  Any oral instructions provided by the seller of the item at the time and place of sale or commercial delivery; 
(e)  Any national or local advertising concerning the design, purpose or use of the item involved, and the entire context in which such advertising occurs; 
(f)  The manner, place and circumstances in which the item was displayed for sale, as well as any item or items displayed for sale or otherwise exhibited upon the premises where the sale was made; 
(g)  Whether the owner or anyone in control of the object is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products; 
(h)  The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community. 
(Ord. No. 07-112, § 2, 10-11-2007)  
Sec. 62-579. - Intent. 
It is the intent of this section that the provisions of this article shall be no less than the restrictions or limitations upon the availability of drug paraphernalia in accordance with the Illinois Drug Paraphernalia Control Act, 720 ILCS 600/1, et seq. 
(Ord. No. 07-112, § 2, 10-11-2007)  
Sec. 62-580. - Penalties. 
Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this article shall be fined not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. Each day any violation of any provision of this article shall occur or continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 07-112, § 2, 10-11-2007)  
Sec. 62-581. - Seizure and forfeiture. 
All items of drug paraphernalia determined to be in violation of this article shall be seized and forfeited as contraband to the city. No disposition may be made of property until the validity of the seizure has been determined pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-112, § 2, 10-11-2007)  
Sec. 62-582. - Severability. 
If any provision of this article or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this article which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application and to this end the provisions of this article are severable. 
(Ord. No. 07-112, § 2, 10-11-2007)  
Secs. 62-583—62-624. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - ON-SITE MOBILE STORAGE CONTAINER REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 62-625. - Definitions. 
On-site mobile storage container means a moveable, fully enclosed container which is used for the temporary storage of household or business items not related to construction for a limited period of time not to exceed an aggregate of thirty (30) consecutive days. 
(Ord. No. 08-1, § 2, 1-10-2008)  
Sec. 62-626. - On-site mobile storage container regulations. 
On-site mobile storage containers shall be permitted in the city only under the following terms, conditions, restrictions, and regulations, as follows: 
(a)  On-site mobile storage containers shall be utilized only for temporary storage while loading and unloading of household or business items. 
(b)  On properties whose primary structure is identified as a single-family detached structure, townhouse or two-family dwelling structure, on-site mobile storage containers may be placed only upon a residential driveway or other similar hard surface. 
(c)  On properties whose primary structure is identified as anything other than a single-family detached structure, on-site mobile storage containers may be placed upon a parking lot constructed of a hard surface, provided that the placement of the on-site mobile storage container does not impede the flow of traffic. 
d.  On-site mobile storage containers may not be placed in any unimproved yards, publicly owned rights-of-way, street, alley, sidewalks or other locations not specifically identified as acceptable within the provision of this section. 
e.  Only one (1) on-site mobile storage container shall be located on a property at a time. 
f.  On-site mobile storage containers on a residential property shall not exceed sixteen (16) feet in length. 
g.  An on-site mobile storage container shall not be placed on a property for more than fifteen (15) consecutive days. No person shall place an on-site mobile storage container upon their property for more than two (2) such fifteen-day periods per calendar year. 
h.  On-site mobile storage containers shall be used to temporarily store personal property of a nontoxic and nonflammable nature. 
i.  On-site mobile storage containers shall not be utilized for the purpose of conducting a business or selling merchandise. 
j.  On-site mobile storage containers not in size compliance with the regulations provided in this section must be approved by the department of inspectional services. 
(Ord. No. 08-1, § 2, 1-10-2008)  
Sec. 62-627. - Permit regulations. 
Before the placement of an on-site mobile storage container occurs as permitted in this article, a permit shall first be obtained from the department of inspectional services. Any applicant for a permit pursuant to this section shall complete an application on a form to be determined by the city. The fee for a permit shall be ten dollars ($10.00). 
(Ord. No. 08-1, § 2, 1-10-2008)  
Sec. 62-628. - Penalty. 
Unless otherwise provided in this article, any person, firm or corporation violating any section of this article shall be fined not more than two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) for each offense. Each day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 08-1, § 2, 1-10-2008)  
Secs. 62-629—62-644. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - OFFENSES INVOLVING VIOLENT FELONIES 
 
Sec. 62-645. - Violent crimes. 
The police department shall establish the guidelines and criteria for determining whether the circumstances surrounding a criminal offense render it a violent felony. The police department should take into account the felony class under 720 ILCS 5, any aggravating factors specific to the situation, the possible penalty, whether the defendant was given jail time or probation, and any other relevant bases. 
If a conviction is obtained in a violent felony case, the police department shall post the photo of the convicted felon on the city's police department website so it is accessible to the citizens of Calumet City. The police department shall assign guidelines and personnel to facilitate the effectiveness of this program. 
(Ord. No. 10-48, § 2, 9-22-2010)  
Sec. 62-646. - Sex offender and sexual predators' registration fee. 
(a)  Every sex offender or sexual predator, as those terms are defined in 730 ILCS 150/2 et seq., who either (1) resides in Calumet City; or (2) has a temporary domicile in Calumet City for more than three (3) days; or (3) is employed at an institution of higher education in Calumet City; or (4) attends an institution of higher learning in the City of Calumet City; or (5) is an out-of-state student or out-of-state employee as defined in 730 ILCS 150/2(F) and 730 ILCS 150/2(G), respectively, shall register with the Calumet City Chief of Police as required by law. The sex offender or sexual predator shall pay a one hundred dollar ($100.00) initial registration fee and one hundred dollar ($100.00) annual registration renewal fee to the Calumet City Chief of Police. The chief of police may waive the applicable registration fee if the chief of police determines that the person is indigent and unable to pay the registration fee. 
(b)  Fees collected pursuant to this section shall be distributed in the manner provided by 730 ILCS 150/3(c)(6)(A)—(C). The chief of police shall establish procedures to document the receipt and remittance of the one hundred dollar ($100.00) initial registration fee and one hundred dollar ($100.00) annual renewal fee. 
(Ord. No. 15-17, § 2, 5-14-2015)  
Secs. 62-647—62-650. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIII. - PUBLIC SECURITY POLICY  
DIVISION 1. - RETAIL MALLS 
 
Sec. 62-651. - Definitions. 
A regional retail mall is one which has two (2) or more main department stores and a minimum of twenty (20) smaller retail specialty shops. 
(Ord. No. 18-30, § 2, 6-14-2018)  
Sec. 62-652. - Time requirement. 
The owners, management and operators of all regional retail malls located within the corporate limits of Calumet City are required, within twenty-one (21) days of adoption of the ordinance codified in this article, to present a written security plan to the chief of police or his designee for approval. 
(Ord. No. 18-30, § 3, 6-14-2018)  
Sec. 62-653. - Security requirement. 
The security plan prepared by the owners, management and operators of all malls shall provide the following minimum requirements and crime prevention and security strategies: 
(a)  Designate at a minimum three (3) employees of the mall who will be responsible to the chief of police or his designee concerning matters related to security matters and operations. The names, phone numbers and email addresses of these individuals, will be provided by mall management to the chief of police within twenty-one (21) days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article. 
(b)  Provide properly uniformed security officers to patrol both the interior and exterior of the mall in well-marked vehicles. 
(c)  The minimum number of security personnel during all hours the mall is open for business and for a minimum of two (2) hours before opening and two (2) hours after the mall is closed shall be as follows: 
(1)  On all Mondays, Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays, a minimum of four (4) security officers per shift will be on duty. One (1) of the officers working on each shift will be a supervisor who has working knowledge of the mall. 
(2)  On all Fridays, Saturdays and Sundays, a minimum of six (6) security officers per shift will be on duty. One (1) of the officers working in each shift will be a supervisor who has working knowledge of the mall. 
(3)  On all days of the week, twenty-four (24) hours per day, Sunday through Saturdays, inclusive, a minimum of one (1) security officer in addition to those required in subparagraphs (c)(1) and (c)(2) will be employed to work in a marked security vehicle to patrol the exterior of the mall and parking area. 
(d)  Records will be kept by the mall management on site in its office at the mall establishing compliance with the minimum security officer manpower requirements set forth in subparagraphs (c)(1), (2) and (3) above. These records will be made available for inspection and review by the chief of police or his designee upon forty-eight (48) hours email notice to one (1) of the designated employees of mall management responsible to respond to the chief of police or his designee concerning matters related to mall security. 
(e)  The security staff shall either be contract or in-house and may be augmented by off-duty sworn police officers. 
(f)  Provide at the expense of the mall owners or mall management for a community policing kiosk or substation to be located in the mall in a public place and identified as being part of the City of Calumet City Police Department. 
(g)  Provide adequate exterior lighting in all parking and exterior areas associated with the mall. 
(h)  Provide limits on the hours of the day after which individuals under the age of eighteen (18) and unaccompanied by a parent or adult over the age of twenty-five (25) will be admitted to the mall. These limits must be enforced by mall security personnel stationed at the public entrances to the mall. 
(i)  A designated and properly authorized member of mall management will meet with the chief of police or his designee to develop and implement, within twenty-one (21) days of the effective date of this article, a mall youth supervision policy. This policy will include provisions establishing hours of the days after which individuals under the age of eighteen (18) years will not be allowed entrance into the mall unless accompanied by a parent or adult over the age of twenty-five (25). This policy will also include a plan for enforcement of its provisions by mall management and mall security. 
(Ord. No. 18-30, § 4, 6-14-2018)  
Sec. 62-654. - Waiver and revision. 
The owners, management or operators of the mall may petition the public safety committee of the city council to waive or revise any of the minimum requirements set forth in section 62-653 above. The petition shall be in writing and set forth the reasons why implementation of the provision is not practical or too costly. Submission of a petition to waive or revise any of the requirements set forth in this article will not permit the petitioner to delay submission and implementation of a security plan in compliance with the requirements of this article until a written waiver or permission for revision is authorized by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 18-30, § 5, 6-14-2018)  
Sec. 62-655. - Penalty. 
A person, firm, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, or any other entity failing to submit and implement a security plan including the minimum requirements and crime prevention and security strategies set forth in this article within twenty-one (21) days of its effective date shall be guilty of violating this article and will be subject to a mandatory fine of not less than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each violation thereof. Each day a violation is determined to exist shall constitute a separate and distinct offense and violation of this article and will be subject to a separate fine of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). 
(Ord. No. 18-30, § 6, 6-14-2018)  
Sec. 62-656. - Enforcement. 
Proceedings to enforce violations of this article may be initiated and conducted in accordance with and pursuant to the provisions of the city ordinance providing for administrative adjudication of code violations or by any other means provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 18-30, § 7, 6-14-2018)  
Chapter 66 - PLANNING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; community development, ch. 18; environment, ch. 26; floods, ch. 34; mobile home parks, ch. 58; signs, ch. 70; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78; utilities, ch. 94; subdivisions, app. A; zoning, app. B. 
State Law reference— Planning generally, 65 ILCS 5/11-12-4 et seq.; plats, 765 ILCS 205/0.01 et seq. 
 
Sec. 66-1. - Disclosure of beneficial interests. 
No petition for rezoning, annexation, disconnection or a building permit shall be issued to any trustee of any land trust except if attached thereto is an affidavit disclosing the names of all persons beneficially interested therein. 
(Code 1980, § 19-1; Ord. of 4-27-1972, § 1)  
Sec. 66-2. - Approval of plats. 
(a)  All new plats of subdivisions shall be submitted initially to the city zoning board of appeals for preliminary approval. The application for preliminary approval shall show location and width of proposed streets and public ways, shall indicate proposed location of sewers and storm drains, proposed dedication of public grounds, if any, lot sizes, proposed easements for public utilities, and proposed method of sewage and waste disposal, but need not contain specifications for proposed improvements. 
(b)  The board of appeals shall approve or disapprove the application for preliminary approval within ninety (90) days from the date of the application or the filing by the applicant of the last item of required supporting data, whichever date is later, unless such time is extended by mutual consent. If such plat is disapproved, then within said ninety (90) days the board of appeals shall furnish to applicant in writing a statement setting forth the reason for disapproval and specifying with particularity the aspects in which the proposed plat fails to conform to the ordinances including official map. If such plat is approved the city council shall accept or reject said plat within thirty (30) days after its next regular stated meeting following the action of the board of appeals, but such preliminary approval shall not qualify a plat for recording. 
(c)  An application for final approval of a plat shall be made not later than one (1) year after preliminary approval has been granted. This application shall be supported by such drawings, specifications and bond as may be necessary to demonstrate compliance with all requirements of statute and such regulations as the corporate authorities may provide by ordinance. 
(Code 1980, § 19-2; Ord. of 10-26-1961, § 3) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 65 ILCS 5/11-12-8.  
Chapter 70 - SIGNS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Section 3 of Ord. No. 07-21, adopted Apr. 17, 2007, deleted Ch. 70, which consisted of §§ 70-1—70-291, and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 70 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for amendatory history. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; advertising and signs on buildings, § 62-71; planning, ch. 66; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78; zoning, app. B. 
 
Sec. 70-1. - Definitions. 
Abandoned sign. 
1.  Any sign that does not display a well maintained message for a consecutive 120-day period; 
2.  Any sign the owner of which cannot be located at owner's last address as reflected on the records of the department; or 
3.  Any sign no longer fully supported, by the structure designed to support the sign, for a consecutive 120-day period. 
Ad bench. Any bench, chair, seat or structure upon which a person may sit and which directs attention to a business, commodity service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered for sale. 
Billboard. Any sign with an advertising surface measuring twelve (12) feet or more in length, width, height, or along any single dimension. 
Department. The Department of Inspectional Services of Calumet City or any other department that has responsibility for administering sign regulations as determined by the city council. 
Director. The director of the department of inspectional services or the authorized designee of the director. 
Major roads. Interstate 94 is hereby defined as a major road for purposes of this chapter. The city council may declare other thoroughfares to be major roads in the future. 
Owner. A person owning a sign. 
Person. Any individual or entity, including a firm, partnership, association, corporation, limited liability company, trustee, and their legal successors. 
Portable sign. Any sign posted on a cart, trailer, wheels, or other mobile device that is not affixed to the ground and has been parked in a stationary position. This definition shall not include signs on moving vehicles, even those that are parked, so long as such vehicles are moved every 24 hours. 
Sign. Any device, image, structure, or other thing utilized in whole or in part to convey or communicate a visual impression or message. Such definition includes, but is not limited to, billboards, placards, posters, flags, banners, pennants, pictures, lights, projected images, balloons, streamers, and painted images. 
(Ord. No. 07-21, § 3, 4-17-2007)  
Sec. 70-2. - Signs requiring permit. 
All signs not exempted by section 70-4 require a permit. 
(Ord. No. 07-21, § 3, 4-17-2007)  
Sec. 70-3. - Signs prohibited. 
The following signs are prohibited: 
(a)  Billboards, except in accordance with section 70-5; 
(b)  Signs on the public right-of-way, to include medians, sidewalks, curbs, and all other public land except in accordance with subsection 70-4(b); 
(c)  Any sign larger than fifteen (15) square feet on property that is currently vacant or in use for residential or agricultural purposes; 
(d)  Any sign, the erection of which would increase the total aggregate area of all sign faces on property that is currently vacant or in use for residential or agricultural purposes to more than twenty (20) square feet; 
(e)  Any sign larger than sixty (60) square feet on a property that is currently primarily used for commercial or industrial purposes, except in accordance with section 70-5; 
(f)  Any sign, the erection of which would increase the total aggregate area of all sign faces on a property that is currently primarily used for commercial or industrial purposes to more than one hundred (100) square feet; 
(g)  Signs attached to the roof of a building or structure; 
(h)  Portable signs; 
(i)  Any sign located on property that is currently vacant or in use for residential or agricultural purposes that is taller than ten (10) feet from the ground at its highest point; and 
(j)  Any sign located on a property that is currently primarily used for commercial or industrial purposes that is taller than thirty (30) feet from the ground at its highest point, except in accordance with section 70-5. 
(k)  Any sign located on any premises in the city without the consent of the owner(s) of such premises. 
(l)  Any flashing sign erected within fifty (50) feet of an adjoining residential district, if it would face such district and be visible therefrom. 
(m)  Any wall sign painted directly onto a building. 
(Ord. No. 07-21, § 3, 4-17-2007)  
Sec. 70-4. - Exempt signs. 
The following signs are exempt from all but the maintenance and public safety requirements of this chapter: 
(a)  One (1) sign smaller than eight (8) square feet in area may be posted on any commercial or industrial parcel of land; 
(b)  Signs posted by authorized government officials in the performance of their official duties on public land or right-of-way; 
(c)  Signs not visible from public thoroughfares or signs within a business, office, mall, or other enclosed area; 
(d)  Any nonilluminated sign of six (6) square feet or smaller that is posted by a city resident at the location of their residence; 
(e)  One (1) temporary sign or banner of a size not larger than fifty (50) square feet may be posted on property that is currently primarily used for commercial or industrial purposes for a period not exceeding fifteen (15) days during each calendar year. 
(f)  Flags: Governmental flags do not need a permit. The department, in its discretion, may require large or numerous governmental flags to be subject to the ordinance. A flagpole may not exceed 30 feet above ground level. Non-governmental flags are signs subject to the permitting provisions of the city Code. 
(g)  Nonilluminated nameplates not exceeding two (2) square feet in area attached to a building or that is not erected more than one (1) foot past the building line into the required front yard. 
(h)  Permanent, nonflashing signs on vending machines, gasoline pumps, ice containers, automated teller machines, or other similar machines, shall relate only to that which is dispensed by the machine. Such signs may be illuminated only on the front. 
(i)  Permanent, nonflashing traffic signs located on a parking lot serving a commercial or industrial use or drive-thru menu sign on any commercial parcel of land, which relates to the operation of the business on the parcel of land. Such signs may be illuminated. 
(j)  Signs on awnings: Restrictions imposed herein on the projection of signs located on awnings across property lines into the public right-of-way of the city shall not apply, except in residential districts, to signs located on awnings, provided that any sign located on an awning shall be affixed flat to the surface thereof, shall be nonilluminated and nonflashing, and shall indicate only the name and address of the establishment on the premises. Further, no such sign located on an awning shall extend vertically or horizontally beyond the limits of said awning. 
(Ord. No. 07-21, § 3, 4-17-2007)  
Sec. 70-5. - Billboards. 
The following regulations of billboard signs shall also apply: 
(a)  The city has considered the need for commercial and noncommercial speech through the medium of billboard signs along major roads, as defined herein, in the city. These interests must be weighed against the aesthetic and safety concerns that have been enumerated elsewhere in this chapter. After thorough consideration of these countervailing interests, the city has developed the following guidelines regarding billboard signs to be allowed along major roads, as defined herein, in the city: 
(1)  All billboards must comply with the State of Illinois' sign regulations, including the size, height, zoning, and spacing limitations; 
(2)  Eight (8) billboards shall be allowed in the city. All of them must be located on parcels adjacent to a major road, as defined herein. 
(Ord. No. 07-21, § 3, 4-17-2007)  
Sec. 70-6. - Ad benches. 
(a)  Prohibited. No person may place, install or knowingly maintain on the surface of the public right-of-way of the city or on any city property, including but not limited to city sidewalks, any ad bench. 
(b)  Declaration as public nuisance; removal. Any ad bench that is placed, installed or maintained on the public right-of-way of the city or on any city property in violation of this section is hereby declared a public nuisance and may be removed at any time by the city at the expense of the person responsible for the placement of the ad bench. 
(c)  Notice of removal. Prior to the removal of any ad bench by the city, a notice shall be sent to the person who placed the ad bench on the public right-of-way of the city or on any city property by certified mail notifying the person that the ad bench must be removed within thirty (30) days by such person or that the ad bench will be removed by the city. 
(d)  Previously Licensed Ad Benches. Any ad bench that was issued any type of permit or license by the city shall be permitted to remain until the expiration of said permit or license. No such permit or license shall thereafter be issued or renewed, and such ad bench shall be subject to all of the provisions of this section. 
(e)  Violations; penalties. Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine of not less that one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day, subsequent to the 30-day period allowed for corrective action, shall constitute a separate violation. The city is authorized to adjudicate the offense with a summons and complaint and to take any other action, legal, injunctive and equitable, to assure compliance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 07-21, § 3, 4-17-2007)  
Sec. 70-7. - Sign permit requirements. 
(a)  Enforcement. The department shall administer and enforce this chapter. 
(b)  Permit. A permit is not required for exempted signs. A permit must be obtained from the department for all other existing and new signs. Owners of existing signs that require a permit under this chapter shall apply for a permit within six (6) months of the effective date of this chapter. 
(c)  Application. Applications for sign permits shall be made upon a form provided by the department for this purpose. The application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name, address, phone, and if available, fax and e-mail, of the person applying for the permit. 
(2)  Name, address, phone, and if available, fax and e-mail, of the person owning the parcel upon which the sign is proposed to be placed along with evidence of written consent of said owner of the building, structure or lot to which or upon which the sign is to be erected. 
(3)  Location of the building, structure, and parcel on which the sign is or will be attached or erected. 
(4)  Position of the sign in relation to nearby buildings, structures, property lines, existing or proposed rights-of-way, ordinary high water marks of waterways, and the setback of applicable zoning ordinances. 
(5)  Two (2) copies of the plans and specifications. The method of construction and/or attachment to a building or in the ground shall be explained in the plans and specifications. 
(6)  Copy of stress sheets and calculations, if deemed necessary by the department, showing the structure as designed for dead load and wind pressure. 
(7)  Name, address, phone, and if available, fax and e-mail of the person who has or will be erecting the sign. 
(8)  Insurance policy as required by this chapter. 
(9)  Such other information as the department may require to show compliance with this chapter, and any other applicable laws. 
(10)  The seal or certificate of a registered structural or civil engineer, when required by the department. 
(11)  The zoning district in which the sign is to be placed. 
(12)  A statement that: "Any change in the information in this application, such as change of address, shall be submitted to the department within seven (7) days after the change." 
(d)  Insurance certificates. An applicant for a billboard sign permit shall provide a certificate of insurance to the department. The insurance shall provide public liability in the amount of at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for injuries to one (1) person and three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for injuries to more than one (1) person, and property damage insurance in the amount of at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). The billboard sign permit shall automatically be revoked if the insurance is permitted to lapse. The insurance policy shall require written notice to the department at least sixty (60) days before the insurance is cancelled or materially altered. 
(e)  Bond. Every applicant for a sign permit to erect, alter or maintain a sign over or on public property or in the public right-of-way shall file with the department for each such sign, or for each premises on which signs are erected, a continuing bond in the penal sum of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) executed by the applicant and approved surety company, conditioned to indemnify, save and keep harmless the city from all claims, damages, liabilities, losses, actions, suits or judgments which may be presented, sustained, brought or secured against the city on account of the erection, alteration or maintenance of said sign, or by reason of any accident caused by or resulting therefrom. 
(f)  Permit fees. Every applicant, before being granted a sign permit, shall pay the fee specified as follows: 
(1)  Three dollars ($3.00) per square foot of sign area, if such sign is not electrically lighted or electrically wired. 
(2)  Six dollars ($6.00) per square foot of sign area, if such sign is electrically lighted or wired. 
In no event shall the fee for any sign be less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00). 
(g)  False information. A person providing false information under this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and not eligible to apply for a permit for twelve (12) months from the date the department determines false information was presented. 
(h)  If the work authorized under a permit has not been completed within one (1) year after its date of issuance, the permit shall become null and void. 
(Ord. No. 07-21, § 3, 4-17-2007)  
Sec. 70-8. - Construction requirements. 
(a)  Material. Where feasible, signs should be constructed of weather-resistant wood, or other natural material. 
(b)  Codes. All signs shall conform to the latest edition of the applicable building and electrical codes. 
(c)  Fastenings. All signs must remain safe and secure during the period of use. All parts of the signs, including bolts and cables, shall remain painted, and free of corrosion. 
(d)  Windows, doors, fire escapes. A sign may not obstruct or prevent the free ingress or egress from any window, door or fire escape. 
(e)  Traffic hazard. No sign structure shall be erected at any street intersection in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision of motorists in a moving traffic lane of intersecting traffic. 
(f)  Lighting. External lighting shall be shielded from view and shall be focused upon the sign to avoid stray lighting. Flashing, rotating, and intermittent lighting are prohibited. 
(g)  Identification. All signs for which a permit is required shall identify the name and operating telephone number of the person responsible for the sign, in such lettering as to be visible from a distance of at least two (2) feet from the sign. 
(h)  Proximity to electrical conductors. Signs and all supporting structures shall be no closer to electrical utilities than is permitted by applicable codes. No sign, including cables and supports, shall, in any event, be within six (6) feet of any electrical conductor, electrical light pole, electric street lamp, traffic light, or other public utility pole. 
(i)  Sanitation. Property surrounding any sign shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. It shall be free from weeds, rubbish, and flammable material. 
(j)  Landscaping. The area beneath and around a sign shall be landscaped with plants, ground cover and materials so as to complement the site and integrate the sign with buildings, parking areas, surrounding vegetation and natural features of the landscape. 
(k)  Responsibility for compliance. The owner of the parcel on which a sign is placed and the person maintaining the sign are each fully responsible for the condition and the maintenance of the sign, and the area around the sign. 
(Ord. No. 07-21, § 3, 4-17-07)  
Sec. 70-9. - Appeals. 
Appeals to the determination of the department may be made in writing directly to the designated governing body of the city authorized to hear the appeal within sixty (60) days. Variances may be granted if all of the following criteria are fulfilled: 
(a)  That the circumstance are not of the applicant's making; 
(b)  That the applicant's request mitigates unusual site conditions; 
(c)  That the applicant's request would not create a detriment to the neighborhood or reduce property value; 
(d)  That the applicant's request is consistent with the spirit and intent of this chapter; 
(e)  That without a variance, the applicant would experience a hardship and cannot make any reasonable use of the property. 
(Ord. No. 07-21, § 3, 4-17-2007)  
Sec. 70-10. - First Amendment protection. 
Any sign allowed under this chapter may contain, in lieu of any other copy, any otherwise lawful noncommercial message that does not direct attention to a business operated for profit or to a commodity or service for sale and that complies with all other provisions of this chapter including the specific provisions for signage in the land use category on which the sign is placed. 
(Ord. No. 07-21, § 3, 4-17-2007)  
Sec. 70-11. - Administration. 
(a)  Administration. The department shall assign personnel to administer and enforce the terms and conditions of this chapter and all other provisions relating to signs. 
(b)  Enforcement. The department shall issue permits as required by this chapter. The department shall also ensure signs comply with this chapter and any other applicable law. The department shall also enforce the requirement that all signs properly comply with this chapter by procuring a permit. The department shall make such inspections as may be necessary and shall initiate appropriate action to enforce compliance with this chapter and other applicable laws. 
(c)  Department powers. The department shall have the power and authority to administer and enforce this chapter. Included among such powers are the following specific powers: 
(1)  Every sign for which a permit is required shall be subject to the inspection and approval of the department, including verification of the use of the parcel, and thus the standards that apply to signage. When deemed advisable, a sign may be inspected at the point of manufacture. 
(2)  Upon presentation of proper identification to the sign owner or owner's agent, the department may enter the sign area for purposes of inspecting the sign, sign structure, and any fasteners securing the sign to a building or support. In cases of emergency, where imminent hazards to persons or property are known to exist, and where the sign owner, or owner's agent, is not readily available, the department may enter the sign area for purposes of inspection or remediation. When on private property, the department shall observe rules and regulation concerning safety, internal security, and fire protection. If the department is denied admission to inspect any sign, inspection shall be made only under authority of a warrant issued by a court of proper jurisdiction. When applying for such warrant, the department shall submit an affidavit setting forth a belief that a violation of this chapter exists with respect to a particular sign, and the reasons for forming this belief. The affidavit shall designate the place and name of the person believed to own or possess the sign. If the court finds probable cause exists for the search of the sign, and supporting structures, then a warrant authorizing the search shall be issued. The warrant shall describe the property with sufficient certainty to identify the same. This warrant shall constitute authority for the department to enter the sign area and to inspect the property. 
(3)  Upon issuance of a stop order from the department, work on any sign that is being conducted in any manner contrary to this chapter shall be immediately stopped. This notice and order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the parcel, the sign owner, or to the person performing the work. The stop order shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. The police department shall have authority to enforce a stop order. 
(4)  The department has the authority to deny or revoke any permit authorized by this chapter if the sign violates this chapter or another law, provided that the department shall offer the sign owner an opportunity to be heard. The person whose permit is under consideration shall be given at least ten (10) days' written notice of the time, place, and reason for the hearing. The sign owner and/or party identified in the permit shall be permitted to present relevant facts and legal argument concerning the pending permit denial or permit revocation. Following this hearing, the department shall consider the merits of the case and shall present a written decision. 
(5)  If the department has determined that a violation has occurred, the owner shall have thirty (30) days to bring the sign into compliance or remove the sign. If, however, the department believes the health, safety, or welfare of the citizens is endangered by any violation of this chapter, the department may immediately revoke any sign permit. 
(6)  A sign installed after the effective date of this chapter, and not conforming to this chapter, shall be removed by the owner. The sign owner shall not be entitled to compensation for the sign removal and shall reimburse the department for any cost incurred in connection with the removal. 
(7)  Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be issued a citation with a forfeiture of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each violation. Each day, subsequent to the 30-day period allowed for corrective action, shall constitute a separate violation. The city is authorized to adjudicate the offense with a summons and complaint and to take any other action, legal, injunctive and equitable, to assure compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 07-21, § 3, 4-17-2007)  
Sec. 70-12. - Changing copy. 
The text or image posted on any sign may be changed without the city's permission. 
(Ord. No. 07-21, § 3, 4-17-2007)  
Sec. 70-13. - Nonconforming signs. 
Any sign that was approved or in existence at the time this chapter was passed, and was legal pursuant to the city's previous sign regulations, variances, or agreements, will be exempt from the provisions of this chapter. The structure, dimensions, location, and/or other physical characteristics of any such sign shall not be substantially altered without first complying with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 07-21, § 3, 4-17-2007)  
Sec. 70-14. - Maintenance. 
All signs must be maintained in a state of good repair. When the department or authorized city official believes that a sign is dangerous or has otherwise become a public nuisance or is an abandoned sign they shall contact the owner of the sign in writing at the address listed on the application and request that the problem be repaired or corrected. If the owner has not appealed the official's determination to the governing body or corrected the problem(s) within thirty (30) days of the date of the written notice, the city shall arrange for removal of any such sign and bill the owner for all costs of such removal. If, however, the department believes the health, safety, or welfare of the citizens is endangered by any violation of this chapter, the department may immediately revoke any sign permit. 
(Ord. No. 07-21, § 3, 4-17-2007)  
Sec. 70-15. - License. 
(a)  License. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of maintaining, erecting, placing, posting or painting any sign in or on any place so that the sign is visible from any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place to do business in the city without having first secured a license therefor as is required in this section; provided, that no license issued under this section shall be construed to permit the use for advertising purposes of any structure, natural or artificial, which is located in any public way, street, alley or other public place. 
(b)  Application; fee. Application for a license shall be made in writing to the city clerk and shall be accompanied by a list of all such places, including billboards or natural structures, on which it is intended to place a sign or advertisement. This list shall be added to from time to time by the licensee as a right to post or place an advertisement or sign at additional places. The annual fee for such license shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00). 
(c)  Bond or insurance. Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of maintaining, erecting, placing, posting or painting any sign in or on any place so that the sign is visible from any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place shall file, in the alternative, either a bond in the penal sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) with sureties deemed adequate by the department, conditioned that said person shall pay any lawful claims or judgments for damage sustained by the city due to the existence of such sign or due to the granting of a sign permit, or evidence that the person has in effect public liability insurance protecting the person against such claims or judgments, in the amount of at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) and ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for property damage, with an insurance company qualified to write such insurance under the laws of the state. Said bond or insurance shall be in force while the sign is erected or maintained. Said person shall present evidence at least once each year that said bond or insurance is still in effect. Said bond or evidence of insurance shall be held by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 07-21, § 3, 4-17-2007)  
Sec. 70-16. - Future developments. 
Where the owner or developer of a commercial, residential, or other development seeks permission to post signs on such development as part of the approval process, such signs may be approved by the city council, or any other person or body the council shall designate, as part of the normal process for approving design and building plans for new developments under the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 07-21, § 3, 4-17-2007)  
Chapter 74 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 26; health and sanitation, ch. 38; mobile home parks, ch. 58; utilities, ch. 94. 
State Law reference— Litter Control Act, 415 ILCS 105/1 et seq.; power of city to provide for disposal of refuse, garbage and ashes, 65 ILCS 5/11-19-1 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 74-1. - Evidentiary presumption. 
The fact that garbage, refuse or ashes remain on any occupant's premises in the city in violation of this article shall be prima facie evidence that the occupant of such premises is responsible for the violation. 
(Code 1980, § 13-19; Ord. of 4-30-1963, § 16)  
Sec. 74-2. - Enforcement. 
The commissioner of streets and alleys, or his authorized designee, shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1980, § 13-20; Ord. No. 89-37, § 1, 10-26-1989)  
Sec. 74-3. - Notice of violations; correction required. 
If any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be found to exist by the commissioner of streets and alleys, or his authorized designee, after an inspection conducted pursuant to this chapter, the commissioner of streets and alleys, or his authorized designee, shall serve written notice of such violation upon the owner or his agent or the occupant of the premises involved as the case may require. Such notice may be served at the time of inspection or by mail within ten (10) days after the date of such inspection. Such notice, if not served personally, shall be deemed properly served if a copy is sent to such occupant or to the owner, as the case may require it, by U.S. mail at his last known address. The notice shall indicate the provisions of this chapter being violated and may grant a period of time for compliance, which period shall not exceed fifteen (15) days. If such violations have not been eliminated within the time granted, the owner or occupant failing to comply shall be subject to the penalty provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1980, § 13-21; Ord. No. 89-37, § 1, 10-26-1989)  
Sec. 74-4. - Rules and regulations. 
The commissioner of streets and alleys, or his authorized designee, is hereby authorized and empowered to make such rules and regulations as he may deem necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter. Such rules and regulations may be promulgated from time to time and shall be effective upon approval by the mayor and city council. 
(Code 1980, § 13-22; Ord. No. 89-37, § 1, 10-26-1989)  
Sec. 74-5. - Compliance. 
Any person disposing of any garbage, refuse or ashes, except as provided under the Municipal Code of the city, shall be subject to the penalties as provided herein. Any garbage, refuse or ashes which are disposed of within the city in violation of this chapter, and which require the removal and disposal of same by the city, shall subject such person to the reasonable costs and expenses incurred by the city for removal and disposal. 
(Code 1980, § 13-23; Ord. No. 89-38, § 1, 10-26-1989)  
Sec. 74-6. - Sharps. 
(a)  Disposal. All medical waste consisting of sharp health care products, including but not limited to, needles, syringes and lancets shall be discarded by placing it in a puncture proof, opaque or colored hard plastic container or metal container, sealed with a tape reinforced lid and clearly marked in large letters "DO NOT RECYCLE," which shall then be clearly separated from recyclable items. 
(b)  Penalty for violation of section. A fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) shall be imposed upon the owner and/or resident of any residential or commercial address found to be in violation of this section. 
(Code 1980, §§ 13-75, 13-76; Ord. No. 99-35, § 1, 6-10-1999)  
Secs. 74-7—74-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 74-31. - Definitions 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Ashes means the residue from fires used for cooking and for heating buildings. 
Garbage means the wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food or the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
Recyclable materials means the material designated by the commissioner of streets and alleys or his designee, under promulgations and regulations established by him from time to time, a list of which designated materials shall be published and posted in the same manner as ordinances. 
Refuse means combustible trash, including, but not limited to, paper, cartons, boxes, barrels, wood, excelsior, tree branches, yard trimmings, grass clippings, garden refuse, wood furniture, bedding; noncombustible trash, including, but not limited to, metals, tin cans, metal furniture, dirt, small quantities of rock and pieces of concrete, glass, crockery, other mineral waste; street rubbish, including, but not limited to, street sweepings, dirt, leaves, catch basin dirt, contents of litter receptacles. Refuse shall not include earth and wastes from building operations, nor shall it include solid wastes resulting from industrial processes and manufacturing operations such as food processing wastes, boiler house cinders, lumber, scraps and shavings. 
(Code 1980, § 13-1; Ord. of 4-30-1963, § 1; Ord. No. 80-21, § 1, 8-28-1980; Ord. No. 94-35, § 1, 7-28-1994)  
Sec. 74-32. - Container. 
It shall be unlawful to place or permit to remain in any place any garbage or other material subject to decay other than leaves or grass, except in a tightly covered metal container. 
(Code 1980, § 13-2; Ord. of 4-30-1963, § 2)  
Sec. 74-33. - Disposal. 
It shall be unlawful to dispose of any garbage, refuse or ashes except in a disposal device, properly constructed and operated, or in a lawfully established garbage or refuse dump. Such material not so properly disposed of shall be placed in containers for collection by the city as prescribed in this article. 
(Code 1980, § 13-3; Ord. of 4-30-1963, § 6)  
Sec. 74-34. - Dumping on another's property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or place any garbage, refuse or ashes on any premises in the city without the consent of the owner of such premises. 
(Code 1980, § 13-4; Ord. of 4-30-1963, § 5)  
Sec. 74-35. - Street deposits. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or permit to fall from any vehicle any garbage, refuse or ashes on any public street or alley in the city; provided, that this section shall not be construed to prohibit placing garbage, refuse or ashes in a container complying with the provisions of this article preparatory to having such material collected and disposed of in the manner provided in this article. 
(Code 1980, § 13-5; Ord. of 4-30-1963, § 4) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78.  
Sec. 74-36. - Uncovered garbage. 
It shall be unlawful to place or permit to remain anywhere in the city any garbage or other material subject to decay other than leaves or grass, except in a tightly covered metal or plastic container. 
(Code 1980, § 13-6; Ord. of 4-30-1963, § 2; Ord. No. 94-36, § 1, 7-28-1994)  
Sec. 74-37. - Placement of certain windblown refuse in containers. 
It shall be unlawful to cause or permit to accumulate any dust, ashes or trash of such a material that it can be blown away by the wind, except in a covered container. 
(Code 1980, § 13-7; Ord. of 4-30-1963, § 3)  
Sec. 74-38. - Burning garbage. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to burn garbage within the city limits. 
(Code 1980, § 13-8; Ord. of 4-30-1963, § 13) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 30.  
Sec. 74-39. - Size of tree branches. 
All tree branches shall be cut into three (3) foot lengths and bundled with rope or twine and stacked in the alley, if available, or at curbside. Notice to the department of public works of placement of such branches shall be the responsibility of the resident. 
(Code 1980, § 13-9; Ord. No. 94-37, § 1, 7-28-1994)  
Sec. 74-40. - Nonresidential users; exemption from fee. 
Whenever any commercial establishment, apartment, restaurant, food dealer, factory, place of public entertainment, or other business place shall produce satisfactory evidence to the commissioner of streets and alleys that garbage, refuse and ashes are being removed from their premises, by privately operated scavenger service or by means other than city employees, then no fee shall be charged by the city to such person for collection. 
(Code 1980, § 13-18; Ord. of 4-30-1963, § 12)  
Sec. 74-41. - Termination of service for nonpayment of fee. 
When an occupant of any premises fails to pay the city's fee for removal of garbage, refuse or ashes when due, the commissioner of streets and alleys shall notify the occupant of this act and shall refuse further collection until the required fee is paid. 
(Code 1980, § 13-16; Ord. of 4-30-1963, § 16)  
Secs. 74-42—74-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CITY COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL  
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 74-61. - Commissioner of streets and alleys to have charge; number of pickups per week. 
The commissioner of streets and alleys shall have charge of the collection of garbage, refuse and ashes in the city. The collection shall be made from all premises at least once each week, provided that the material is properly stored for collection in a container, complying with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1980, § 13-10; Ord. of 4-30-1963, § 7; Ord. of 12-14-1967, § 1; Ord. No. 78-49, § 1, 10-26-1978)  
Sec. 74-62. - Separation of certain items. 
No refuse which is flammable shall be mixed or mingled with refuse that is nonflammable. Garbage shall be kept separate from all other types of refuse. Separate containers shall be provided for each class of garbage or refuse to be collected by the city. Provided, however, that no person shall commingle in said containers garbage and refuse with any yard waste such as grass, leaves, branches and garden waste. Separate containers must be provided for garbage/refuse and yard waste. 
(Code 1980, § 13-11; Ord. of 4-30-1963, § 10; Ord. No. 94-38, § 1, 7-28-1994)  
Sec. 74-63. - Containers; size and placement; penalty for violation of section. 
(a)  All garbage, refuse and ashes for collection by the city shall be placed in containers equipped with a cover and equipped with handles so that they may be lifted and carried by one (1) man. No such containers shall have a capacity of less than ten (10) gallons or more than thirty (30) gallons. No commercial establishment, restaurant or food dealer shall provide more than two (2) containers which have a capacity of less than ten (10) gallons nor more than thirty (30) gallons. 
(b)  All containers placed for collection pursuant to this chapter shall be placed in front of the premises, at curbside, where no alley is available. No containers shall be placed for collection prior to 3:30 p.m. on the day before the scheduled pickup, and such containers shall be removed from their collection points by 9:00 a.m. of the day following pickup. 
(c)  Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this section shall be punished by a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00). Each day any violation of any provision of this section continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1980, § 13-12; Ord. of 2-27-1964, § 1; Ord. No. 78-49, § 2, 10-26-1978; Ord. No. 88-11, § 1, 6-10-1988; Ord. No. 89-18, § 1, 6-8-1989; Ord. No. 94-39, § 1, 7-28-1994)  
Sec. 74-64. - Recyclable materials. 
(a)  Definition. Recyclables shall mean materials having an economic value in the secondary materials market. The following materials have such economic value: aluminum cans and articles, bi-metal cans, glass containers, corrugated paper (cardboard and paper boxes), magazines, computer printout paper, computer tab cards, office paper, steel cans, newspaper, paper products not chemically coated. 
(b)  Program established. There is hereby established a recycling program for the mandatory separating of recyclables from garbage and rubbish in the city, to be effective as of June 14, 1990. 
(c)  Separation of recyclables and placement for removal. Recyclables shall be prepared and separated from other refuse as required, and shall be collected by the city or under subcontract by its designated agent. Recyclables shall be placed either at the curbside to be collected at times designated by the city or shall be taken to a recycling facility. 
(d)  Time for placement of containers. All containers placed for collection pursuant to this section shall be placed in front of the premises. No containers shall be placed for collection prior to 3:30 p.m. on the day before the scheduled pickup, and such containers shall be removed from their collection points by 9:00 a.m. of the day following pickup. 
(e)  Collection by unauthorized person. 
(1)  From time of placement of recyclable at the curb or in recycling shelters for collection in accordance with the terms thereof, it shall be and become the property of the city or its authorized agent. It shall be a violation of this section for any person unauthorized by the city to collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked up any such items. Any and each such collection in violation hereof from one (1) or more locations shall constitute a separate and distinct offense punishable as hereinafter provided. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for a person to collect, remove or dispose of solid waste which contains recyclables combined with other forms of solid waste. 
(f)  Additional methods of disposal. Any person may donate or sell recyclables to any other person whether operating for profit or not for profit. 
(g)  Violation and penalty. Any person who violates or neglects to comply with any provision of this section or any regulation promulgated pursuant thereto, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00), except that the maximum fine for failure to comply with subparagraph (c) hereof shall not exceed ten dollars ($10.00) for the first offense or fifty dollars ($50.00) for any succeeding offense. No enforcement of subparagraph (c) of this section shall be made until six (6) months from the effective date hereof. 
(Code 1980, § 13-15.1; Ord. No. 80-21, §§ 2—5, 8-28-1980; Ord. No. 90-27, § 1, 6-14-1990; Ord. No. 90-40, § 1, 9-27-1990)  
Secs. 74-65—74-90. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Fees 
 
Sec. 74-91. - Schedule of fees; exemptions; rate increases. 
(a)  The fees for city garbage, refuse and ash collection shall be paid monthly in advance and shall be as follows: 
Class of User 	Monthly Fee 
Single-family Residence 	$19.72 
Apartment, per unit (not more than four units 	$19.72 per unit 
Apartment, more than four units 	Requires private scavenger 
Commercial establishment, restaurants, food dealers, factories, places of public entertainment and other places of businesses 	Requires private scavenger 
Any person, age 65 years of age as of May 1 of each year, shall pay 50 percent of the current single family residence monthly fee for any single family residence or apartment unit occupied by said person who shall be the owner or lessee of said single-family residence or the owner or lessee of said apartment and shall be the person to whom the bill for water services to said dwelling or apartment is charged, upon furnishing the water billing department such registration certificate, birth certificate or any other document reasonably required in order to show the age of the applicant 	50 percent of current single-family residence fee; for unit occupied by person age 65 years of age by May 1 
 
For all users, the maximum number of weekly pickups shall be one (1). 
(b)  Each single-family resident and apartment unit up to four (4) units will be issued one (1) garbage tote and one (1) recycling tote per unit. Residents requesting additional garbage totes are required to make the request from the garbage/refuse hauler and will be charged by the garbage/refuse hauler. 
(c)  Commencing February 1, 2019, and February 1 of every year thereafter, the refuse rate will automatically be increased and the increase will be based on the garbage/refuse hauler fee charged to the city by the garbage/refuse hauler contracted to provide solid waste collection and removal. 
(Code 1980, § 13-13; Ord. of 4-30-1963, § 7; Ord. of 12-14-1967, § 1; Ord. of 11-25-1970, § 1; Ord. No. 78-49, § 1, 10-26-1978; Ord. No. 80-18, § 1, 7-24-1980; Ord. No. 83-2, § 1, 1-27-1983; Ord. No. 87-22, § 1, 10-8-1987; Ord. No. 88-1, § 1, 2-11-1988; Ord. No. 90-12, § 1, 3-8-1990; Ord. No. 92-30, § 1, 7-23-1992; Ord. No. 94-5, § 1, 3-10-1994; Ord. No. 95-34, § 1, 7-27-1995; Ord. No. 18-23, § 2, 6-6-2018)  
Sec. 74-92. - Special fees when normal amounts of garbage are exceeded. 
Whenever the collection of garbage from any establishment or place shall exceed the normal amount for such a place so that the fee prescribed for such collection is not fair and reasonable as applied to that particular place, the commissioner of streets and alleys shall recommend to the city council the establishment of a special rate for such place. 
(Code 1980, § 13-14; Ord. of 4-30-1963, § 8)  
Sec. 74-93. - Billing and due date. 
Bills for the collection of garbage, refuse and ashes by the city shall be sent out at such times as may be directed by the city council. They shall be due and payable when the water bill is due and payable. Each bill shall be accompanied by the schedule of collection charges. 
(Code 1980, § 13-15; Ord. of 4-30-1963, § 11)  
Secs. 74-94—74-110. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - SCAVENGERS  
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 74-111. - Refuse defined. 
The term "refuse" as used in this article shall include, but not be limited to, garbage, such as all animal debris, fruit or vegetable matter and all other substances capable of decay, fermentation or putrefaction, leaves, grass, paper, wastepaper, rags, floor sweepings, tin cans, glassware, crockery, bottles, ashes, cinders, clinkers and other household waste with the exception of stone, dirt or waste material resulting from landscaping and the remodeling of old or construction of new buildings. 
(Code 1980, § 13-31; Ord. of 3-19-1970, § 2)  
Sec. 74-112. - Licensee's duties. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the person holding a license issued pursuant to the provisions of this article to comply fully with the provisions of this article and the terms and conditions of any agreement made by said licensee with the city respecting the collection, removal and disposal of garbage, refuse and ashes. 
(b)  Each such person and his agents or employees shall do his work with dispatch and in every particular in a manner as cleanly and free from offense and with as little danger or prejudice to life and health as possible and also shall perform the work in such a way that no nuisance will be created thereby. 
(Code 1980, § 13-40; Ord. of 3-19-1970, §§ 1, 10)  
Sec. 74-113. - Collection vehicles. 
(a)  Any person owning or controlling any vehicle used for the collection and removal of garbage, refuse and ashes in the city shall cause all such vehicles, and all implements used in connection with the loading and unloading hereof, when not in use, to be stored and kept in such place or places and in such manner as not to create a nuisance; and shall cause all such vehicles and implements to be thoroughly disinfected and put in an offensive condition when so stored and not in use. 
(b)  Vehicles used for the collection of garbage, refuse and ashes shall be of the all metal and totally enclosed type. 
(c)  Such vehicles and implements shall be thoroughly disinfected at least once each week, whether in use or not, unless the same shall not have been used since the last disinfection thereof. 
(d)  No person owning or controlling any vehicle used for the collection and removal of garbage, refuse and ashes in the city shall cause or permit any such vehicle to be so loaded, or to be in such defective condition, or to be so out of repair, or to be of such faulty construction, or to be so improperly driven or managed that any garbage, refuse or ashes contained in it shall drop or fall out on any public way or other place in the city. Such vehicle, and any box, can or other receptacle carried therein or thereon, shall be so constructed as to be strong and virtually airtight and watertight so as to prevent any such garbage, refuse or ashes from emitting any odor and so as to prevent any part of the contents or load thereof from falling, leaking or spilling. 
(Code 1980, § 13-41; Ord. of 3-19-1970, § 11)  
Sec. 74-114. - Cleanup of items falling from vehicles. 
Every person in possession or control of any vehicle used to collect and remove any garbage, refuse or ashes shall replace at once, on or in such vehicle, any of the contents thereof which fall, drop or spill, or may have fallen, dropped or spilled from such vehicle or any box or receptacle conveyed thereon, upon any public way or other place. 
(Code 1980, § 13-42; Ord. of 3-19-1970, § 11)  
Sec. 74-115. - Disposal of materials. 
The garbage, refuse or ashes collected and removed by any refuse disposal contractor licensed pursuant to this article shall under no circumstances be disposed of in any place in the city, or within one (1) mile of the corporate limits thereof, except by approval of the city council and subject to all applicable requirements of the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city, and the agencies and instrumentalities thereof. 
(Code 1980, § 13-43; Ord. of 3-19-1970, § 12)  
Sec. 74-116. - Refuse containers. 
All refuse containers provided by any refuse disposal contractor licensed pursuant to this article shall be equipped with a cover for health, safety and sanitary conditions. 
(Code 1980, § 13-44; Ord. No. 90-3, § 4, 1-25-1990)  
Secs. 74-117—74-140. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - License 
 
Sec. 74-141. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of scavenger, or the collection or disposal of animal, human or vegetable refuse, or offal, or refuse of any kind, without having first secured a license therefor. 
(Code 1980, § 13-32; Ord. of 3-19-1970, §§ 3, 5)  
Sec. 74-142. - Application. 
Every application for the license required by this article shall be made in writing to the city clerk on a form provided for that purpose. Such application shall contain the name of the person desiring the same and the place of business of the applicant. If the applicant is a partnership or firm, the application shall contain the names and addresses of each of its members; if a limited partnership, the names and residence addresses of each general partner thereof; and if a corporation, the names and addresses of the principal officers. 
(Code 1980, § 13-33; Ord. of 3-19-1970, § 4)  
Sec. 74-143. - Issuance. 
Every application for a license required by this article shall be transmitted by the city clerk to the city council; no license shall be granted to any applicant therefor, except upon approval of the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 13-34; Ord. of 3-19-1970, § 5)  
Sec. 74-144. - Fee. 
The annual fee for the issuance or renewal of a license required by this article shall be one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for up to two (2) trucks and the sum of three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each additional truck. 
(Code 1980, § 13-36; Ord. of 3-19-1970, §§ 7, 8; Ord. of 12-27-1973, § 4; Ord. No. 90-3, § 2, 1-25-1990; Ord. No. 05-87, § 2, 12-8-2005)  
Sec. 74-145. - Term. 
Every license issued pursuant to the provisions of this article shall expire at the end of each calendar year. 
(Code 1980, § 13-37; Ord. of 3-19-1970, § 7)  
Sec. 74-146. - Compliance with article provisions. 
Every refuse disposal contractor's license issued by the city council shall be subject to the express condition that the licensee shall comply with all of the provisions of this article and such additional requirements as the city may impose from time to time. 
(Code 1980, § 13-38; Ord. of 3-19-1970, § 5)  
Sec. 74-147. - Insurance coverage required. 
(a)  Certificate of insurance; coverage limits. Every applicant for a license required by this article shall submit satisfactory proof in the form of a certificate of insurance issued by an insurer authorized to transact business in the state showing that the applicant has procured comprehensive public liability insurance fully protecting the city against any loss, damage or liability that may result from the applicant's proposed operations in the city. Such insurance shall provide for limits of coverage of not less than three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for bodily injury to any one (1) person, not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for bodily injury to any group of persons resulting from any one (1) accident and not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for injuries to property resulting from any one (1) accident. A copy of said insurance certificate shall be kept on file in the city clerk's office. 
(b)  Workmen's compensation; occupational disease insurance. The applicant shall also furnish proper proof in the form of a certificate or certificates of insurance issued by an insurer authorized to transact business in the state, evidencing that said applicant has obtained workmen's compensation and occupational disease insurance fully protecting the city against any and all claims of employees, subcontractors, and other persons, by reason of bodily injury, or death, that may result from the applicant's proposed operations in the city. 
(c)  Expiration dates to be furnished city; notice to city prior to modification or cancellation. The applicant shall also furnish evidence of the expiration dates of the insurance coverages required hereunder, and shall duly certify that such coverages shall not be canceled or modified except upon ten (10) days' prior written notice given to the city. Upon the cancellation, expiration or modification of any coverages required hereunder without prior consent of the city, any license issued pursuant to this article to said applicant shall become void. 
(Code 1980, § 13-39; Ord. of 3-19-1970, § 9; Ord. No. 90-3, § 3, 1-25-1990)  
Secs. 74-148—74-170. - Reserved.  
Subdivision III. - Collection of Rates and Charges 
 
Sec. 74-171. - Owner's failure to pay scavenger. 
Any owner of private rental property who is responsible for payment of scavenger services and refuses to pay for such services resulting in the scavenger's refusal to pick up refuse at that location shall have three (3) days after receiving notice from the city to submit payment to the scavenger. Thereafter, the city may provide for the removal and disposal of refuse and collect from the owner the reasonable cost thereof, which is hereby established at fifteen dollars ($15.00) per can per pickup, two (2) cans required per unit, plus a fifteen (15) percent administrative charge. 
(Code 1980, § 13-45; Ord. No. 98-62, § 1, 10-8-1998)  
Sec. 74-172. - Notice. 
It shall be the duty of the streets and alleys commissioner or his authorized designee to serve or cause to be served a notice upon the owner and the city comptroller of any such premises where scavenger service has been halted because of nonpayment of fees. 
(Code 1980, § 13-46; Ord. No. 98-62, § 1, 10-8-1998; Ord. No. 18-38, § 7, 8-23-2018)  
Sec. 74-173. - Lien. 
If the payment required by section 74-171 is not received by the scavenger within the time specified, the city, after removing and disposing of the uncollected refuse, shall file a notice of lien upon the real estate affected with the county recorder of deeds, superior to all subsequent liens, except tax liens. 
(Code 1980, § 13-47; Ord. No. 98-62, § 1, 10-8-1998)  
Sec. 74-174. - Notice of lien. 
The notice of lien required by this chapter shall consist of a sworn statement setting out a description of the real estate sufficient for identification thereof, the amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for the service and the date or dates when such cost and expense was incurred by the city. 
(Code 1980, § 13-48; Ord. No. 98-62, § 1, 10-8-1998)  
Sec. 74-175. - Validity of lien. 
The lien provided for by this chapter shall not be valid as to any purchaser whose rights in and to such real estate have arisen subsequent to the removal of refuse and prior to the filing of such notice, and the lien shall not be valid as to any mortgagee, judgment creditor or other lienor whose rights in and to such real estate arise prior to the filing of such notice. 
(Code 1980, § 13-49; Ord. No. 98-62, § 1, 10-8-1998)  
Sec. 74-176. - Release of lien. 
Upon payment of the costs and expenses by the owner of, or persons interested in such property after notice of lien has been filed, the lien provided for by this chapter shall be released by the city and the release may be filed of record as in the case of filing notice of lien. 
(Code 1980, § 13-50; Ord. No. 98-62, § 1, 10-8-1998)  
Secs. 74-177—74-200. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - SANITARY LANDFILL 
 
Sec. 74-201. - Enforcement. 
The health commissioner of the city is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the standards and regulations as established by this article, and shall make such inspections as may be necessary to see to such enforcement. 
(Code 1980, § 13-63; Ord. of 12-28-1967, § 9)  
Sec. 74-202. - License. 
(a)  Required. No person shall dump or deposit or cause to be dumped or deposited anywhere within the city, any garbage, ashes, refuse, trash, rubbish, miscellaneous waste, manure or other substance that may contain disease germs, or decompose, or become filthy, noxious or unhealthful, except at a sanitary landfill site for which a license has been properly issued by the mayor and city council. 
(b)  Application. Application for such license to operate a sanitary landfill on private property shall be made to the mayor and city council and shall be accompanied by: 
(1)  Written consent of the owner or his authorized agent and evidence of payment of the most recent real estate property tax; 
(2)  An indemnifying bond with good and sufficient sureties in the penal sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) conditioned that the said applicant will comply with the regulations of this article; 
(3)  A site plan and survey, which shall include a description of the property, the method of operation, the type of available cover, fencing, fire-fighting equipment, access roads, and rodent control measures. 
(c)  Fees. License fees shall be as provided in section 54-881. 
(d)  Issuance. The mayor and city council shall issue a license for a sanitary landfill operation upon application, provided there is compliance with all provisions of this article and all other ordinances of the city applicable thereto. Such license shall be issued subject to the licensee's compliance with the provisions of this article and the plan of operation as submitted by the licensee and approved by the mayor and city council. Prior to the issuance of said license, the mayor and city council may request the investigation and approval by the board of health and building department of the city. 
(Code 1980, §§ 13-55, 13-56, 13-57, 13-1958; Ord. of 12-28-1967, § 1—4)  
Sec. 74-203. - Compliance with state department of public health. 
In addition to the requirements set forth in this article, sanitary landfill operations and sites shall comply with all rules and regulations now or hereafter promulgated by the department of public health of the state. 
(Code 1980, § 13-62; Ord. of 12-28-1967, § 8)  
Sec. 74-204. - Site requirements. 
Sites for sanitary landfills shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The subsoil structure shall be such that there is reasonable assurance that leachate from the landfill will not contaminate the ground, waters or streams in the area, or that suitable procedures to prevent such contamination will be followed. 
(2)  The surface contour of the area shall be such that surface runoff will not flow into or through the operational or completed fill area. Grading, diking, terracing, diversion ditches, or tiling may be approved when practical. 
(3)  Areas having high groundwater tables may be restricted to landfill operations which will maintain a safe vertical distance between deposited refuse and the maximum water table elevation. Any operation which proposes to deposit refuse within or near the maximum water table elevation shall include corrective or preventive measures which will prevent contamination of the groundwater stratum. Monitoring facilities may be required. 
(Code 1980, § 13-59; Ord. of 12-28-1967, § 5)  
Sec. 74-205. - Site improvements. 
Sites of sanitary landfills shall be improved in the following manner: 
(1)  Enclosure. The site shall be enclosed, with an entrance gate that can be locked and posted. 
(2)  Roadways. All-weather operational roads shall be provided for vehicular movement within the site. Separate operational areas may be operated within the site to allow for wet or dry weather operation and access. 
(3)  Facilities. A shelter, convenient for use by operating personnel, shall be furnished. The shelter shall be screened and provided with heating facilities and adequate lighting. Provisions shall also be made for safe drinking water and sanitary hand-washing and toilet facilities. 
(Code 1980, § 13-60; Ord. of 12-28-1967, § 6)  
Sec. 74-206. - Method of operation and controls. 
(a)  Unloading. Unloading of refuse on the site shall be confined to the smallest possible area and shall be used when necessary to prevent blowing litter from the unloading site. The fill and surrounding area shall be policed as necessary to collect all scattered material. 
(b)  Equipment. Sufficient equipment in operational condition shall be available at the site at all times to permit operation of the landfill according to the approved plan. 
(c)  Spreading and compacting of refuse. As refuse is admitted to the site, it shall be spread and compacted in layers not to exceed eight (8) feet in compacted depth depending upon the type of material and the compaction equipment. The completed cell shall consist of the refuse admitted and compacted during one (1) working day, regardless of overall height and area covered. 
(d)  Cover. Cover material shall be of such quality as to prevent fly and rodent attraction and breeding, blowing litter, release of odors, fire hazards, and unsightly appearance. Cover shall be applied as follows: 
(1)  Daily cover. A compacted layer of four (4) to six (6) inches of material shall be used to cover all exposed refuse at the end of each working day. 
(2)  Final cover. A compacted layer of eighteen (18) to twenty-four (24) inches of material in addition to the daily cover shall be placed over the entire surface of all compacted portions of the fill. Final cover shall be graded to prevent ponding. The surface of the final cover shall be maintained at the plan elevation at all times, by the placement of additional cover materials where necessary. 
(e)  Vector control. Insect and rodent control measures shall be employed as directed by the commissioner of health. 
(f)  Salvage operations. Salvage operations are not recommended in conjunction with a sanitary landfill. In the event that salvage operations are carried out, the following conditions shall apply: 
(1)  All salvage operations shall be conducted in a sanitary manner. 
(2)  Salvage operations shall be confined to an area remote from the operating face of the fill. 
(3)  Salvage operations shall not interfere with, or otherwise delay the fill operation. 
(4)  All salvaged materials shall be removed from the landfill site daily, or properly stored such that they will not create a nuisance, rodent harborage, or unsightly appearance. 
(g)  Sanitary landfill variation. Large quantities of inorganic and noncombustible waste such as boiler-house cinders, ashes, broken paving, or materials resulting from construction or demolition operations may be disposed of at a sanitary landfill by open dumping, or may be used as cover material. Such material shall be leveled and spread at sufficient intervals to prevent unsightly appearance or rodent harborage, and shall be finally covered as required for a completed sanitary landfill in subsection (f) of this section unless approved plan provides for other cover. 
(h)  Prohibited activities. The following activities shall be prohibited in conjunction with, or upon the site of the sanitary landfill: 
(1)  All scavenging operations. Scavenging shall mean the manual sorting of refuse, either in the trucks, at the face of the fill, or in unconfined truck discharge areas. 
(2)  All feeding of farm domestic animals. 
(3)  Burning, except in an approved incinerator. 
(Code 1980, § 13-61; Ord. of 12-28-1967, § 7)  
Secs. 74-207—74-230. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - RECYCLING 
 
Sec. 74-231. - Findings. 
After due investigation and consideration, the city council finds that it is in the best interest of the health and welfare of the residents of the city that the city reduce its reliance on landfills and avoid the use of incineration as a means of permanent disposal of refuse, in order to restrict the burial of potentially harmful substances in soil and the release of such substances and their byproducts into groundwater, surrounding soil and the atmosphere. 
(Code 1980, § 13-71; Ord. No. 89-35, § 1, 10-26-1989)  
Sec. 74-232. - Recycling coordinator. 
The mayor shall appoint a recycling coordinator, within forty-five (45) days of adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived, who shall serve as a member of the mayor's administrative staff and report directly to the mayor. The mayor shall provide for adequate budget to fulfill to requirements of this section. The recycling coordinator shall have the following responsibilities: 
(1)  To develop an educational and promotional program on the methods and benefits of recycling by residents and business operators; 
(2)  To develop methods of adherence to the goals stated in this article for recycling activities, and to coordinate and supervise implementation of those methods; 
(3)  To coordinate and monitor the activities of curbside collection of recyclable materials and buyback facilities dealing in such materials throughout the city; 
(4)  To identify potential markets for recyclable materials; and 
(5)  To submit, on September 1 of each year, to the mayor and the city council, an annual report on recycling activities in the city, with special emphasis on activities performed or sponsored by the city. 
(Code 1980, § 13-72; Ord. No. 89-35, § 2, 10-26-1989)  
Sec. 74-233. - Regular recycling service. 
(a)  Established. On or before January 1, 1993, the city shall provide regular recycling service to one hundred (100) percent of the households in low-density dwellings. This service shall provide sufficient recycling capacity to meet the disposal needs of the included residents with respect to the designated materials and shall be designed so as to assure reasonable ease of access to the regular recycling services for all included residents. "Regular recycling service" shall mean the collection of at least three (3) materials by one (1) or more of the following methods: 
(1)  Weekly alley or curbside collection of recyclable materials by the city or by a private for-profit or nonprofit collection service; 
(2)  A buyback center within one (1) mile of any building not receiving curbside or alley collection; 
(3)  Drop-off boxes arranged in a network, no more than two (2) city blocks distant from each other, for deposit of recyclable materials. 
(b)  Implementation. The regular recycling service shall be implemented in stages, as follows: 
(1)  By January 1, 1991, no less than fifty (50) percent of the households in low-density dwellings shall have regular recycling service. 
(2)  By January 1, 1993, all households in low-density dwellings shall have regular recycling service. 
(c)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the term "low density dwellings" means single-family residences and apartment buildings containing six or less residential units. The term "recyclable materials" means any of the following: newsprint, aluminum cans, steel cans, glass bottles and jars, and plastic containers. 
(Code 1980, § 13-73; Ord. No. 89-35, § 3, 10-26-1989)  
Sec. 74-234. - Restrictions on transporting and delivering municipal refuse. 
Municipal refuse collected by the city or private haulers under contract with the city shall not be transported or delivered to a municipal refuse incinerator, refuse-derived fuel incinerator or mixed refuse processing facility that produces refuse-derived fuel. 
(Code 1980, § 13-74; Ord. No. 89-35, § 4, 10-26-1989)  
Chapter 78 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Commissioner of streets and alleys, § 2-461 et seq.; board of local improvements, § 2-841 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; house moving, § 14-961 et seq.; community development, ch. 18; environment, ch. 26; floods, ch. 34; library, ch. 50; streets show, § 54-83; solicitation, § 54-1011 et seq.; solicitors, § 54-2121 et seq.; mobile home parks, ch. 58; streets in mobile home parks, § 58-171 et seq.; carrying or discharging air rifles on public streets, § 62-214; planning, ch. 66; signs, ch. 70; street deposits of solid waste, § 74-35; telecommunications, ch. 86; traffic and vehicles, ch. 90; right-of-way; yield streets and stop streets, § 90-211 et seq.; utilities, ch. 94; vehicles for hire, ch. 98; subdivisions, app. A; zoning, app. B. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 78-1. - Veteran's Way. 
That portion of Schrum Road from Wentworth Avenue to 159th Street, River Oaks Drive shall hereinafter be referred to as "Veteran's Way." 
(Code 1980, § 17-117; Ord. No. 99-29, § 1, 5-27-1999)  
Secs. 78-2—78-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DRIVEWAYS 
 
Sec. 78-31. - Permit. 
(a)  Required. No person shall construct a driveway for vehicles or animals across any sidewalk in the city without a permit therefor. 
(b)  Application. An application for a permit required by this article shall be made to the city clerk and shall be accompanied by the required fee. 
(c)  Issuance restrictions. No permit for construction of a driveway for commercial use, or for the habitual use of other than the owner or occupant of the premises served shall be issued except upon the order of the city council. All permits shall be subject to approval of the commissioner of streets and alleys. 
(d)  Fee. The fee for the permit required by this article shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(Code 1980, §§ 25-18, 25-19, 25-20, 25-21)  
Sec. 78-32. - Specifications. 
Driveways shall be constructed in such a manner that they are as flat as possible. A low area should be pitched toward the inside rather than the outside. The pitch should be four (4) inches for every twenty-five (25) feet, approximately, which pitch is to be maintained from either the middle or from the rear of the building or structure; provided, however, in the event any objection is raised in connection with a proposed driveway, that the building commissioner shall report said objection to city council for its determination. 
(Code 1980, § 25-22; Ord. of 4-25-1974, § 1)  
Sec. 78-33. - Grade surfaces. 
No driveway shall be so constructed or graded as to leave a step, sharp depression or other obstruction on the sidewalk. The grade shall be as nearly as possible the same as that of the adjoining sidewalk. It shall be unlawful to have the surface finish of any driveway where the same crosses the sidewalk constructed of such materials as to render it slippery or hazardous to pedestrians, or to have the grade of such portion vary from the grade of the sidewalk, or be other than level. 
(Code 1980, § 25-23)  
Sec. 78-34. - Repair. 
It shall be the duty of the person maintaining the driveway to keep the driveway in good repair where it crosses the sidewalk, and free from obstruction and openings. 
(Code 1980, § 25-24)  
Secs. 78-35—78-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - EXCAVATIONS AND OVERSIZE VEHICLES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 78-71. - Provisions declared supplemental. 
The provisions of this article shall be in addition and supplemental to all other provisions of this Code and ordinances. 
(Code 1980, § 25-36)  
Sec. 78-72. - Regulations authorized. 
In granting a permit required by this article, the commissioner of streets and alleys may impose reasonable regulations, including but not limited to: 
(1)  The manner of making the excavation, boring or tunneling. 
(2)  The location of the excavation, boring or tunneling. 
(3)  Protection of underground utility installations. 
(4)  The duration of the excavation, boring or tunneling. 
(5)  Required safety precautions, such as barricades, lighting, warning devices, etc. 
(6)  The extent and size of the excavation, boring or tunneling. 
(7)  Steps to be taken to protect nearby property owners. 
(Code 1980, § 25-42)  
Sec. 78-73. - Utilities. 
The applicant for the permit required by this article shall also show that the applicant has contacted all operators of gas, electric, telephone, water, sewer or any other public utility service in the area, as well as the city itself to receive from them the information as to the existence and location of any underground facilities, so that the proper precautions can be taken to avoid accidents through damage to the underground structures. 
(Code 1980, § 25-41; Ord. of 11-26-1963, § 3)  
Secs. 78-74—78-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 78-91. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to commence work on any excavation, or on any construction work involving driving or hauling machinery, trucks or equipment over any parkway or sidewalk area or involving excavating or leveling of any parkway or sidewalk area without a permit issued by the commissioner of streets and alleys. 
(Code 1980, § 25-37; Ord. of 11-26-1963, § 2)  
Sec. 78-92. - Application—Filing; contents. 
The applicant for a permit required by this article shall file an application with the commissioner of streets and alleys. This application shall clearly set out the purpose of the excavation, location of excavation, size of the opening, type of pavement (if any) to be removed, and approximate length of time excavation will remain open. 
(Code 1980, § 25-38; Ord. of 11-26-1963, § 2)  
Sec. 78-93. - Same—Duplicate. 
A duplicate copy of the approved application for making the permit required by this article shall be made a part of the permanent city records. 
(Code 1980, § 25-39; Ord. of 11-26-1963, § 4)  
Sec. 78-94. - Deposit and inspection fees. 
(a)  Every person desiring the permit required by the provisions of this article shall make a deposit with the city in an amount to be determined as follows: 
(1)  For each opening in Sealkote pavement ..... $100.00 
(2)  For each opening in asphalt pavement ..... 150.00 
(3)  For each opening in concrete ..... 200.00 
(4)  For each opening in concrete sidewalk ..... 50.00 
(b)  A five dollar ($5.00) inspection fee shall be charged against each deposit. No refund shall be issued of any deposit made hereunder unless the commissioner of streets and alleys recommends said refund to the city council and the city council approves of his recommendation to refund said deposit. 
(Code 1980, § 25-40; Ord. of 10-26-1972, § 1)  
Sec. 78-95. - Bond. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to commence work on any excavation, or on any construction work involving driving or hauling machinery, trucks or equipment over any parkway or sidewalk area or involving excavating or leveling of any parkway or sidewalk area, unless the person doing such work shall first have filed with the city a bond, with corporate surety, conditioned to indemnify the city for any damages done to any city property, including any curb, pavement, cable, pipe, shut-off box or other equipment, in the course of such work. 
(b)  Where the work contemplated includes the making of any excavation for any structure or foundation, the bond shall also be conditioned that the building or structure contemplated shall be completed within one (1) year from the date of commencement of work or the excavation refilled and the surface restored to its original condition. 
(Code 1980, § 25-43; Ord. of 5-8-1958, § 21)  
Sec. 78-96. - Assets or insurance required. 
When required by the commissioner of streets and alleys the applicant for a permit under this article shall submit satisfactory evidence that he has sufficient assets or insurance to indemnify the city for any costs, losses or liabilities that it may incur by reason of such excavation, and to satisfy any judgments or liabilities arising out of the excavation. 
(Code 1980, § 25-44)  
Sec. 78-97. - Permit revocation. 
In addition to any other penalty imposed by law, any person violating any provision of this article shall have his excavation permit revoked. 
(Code 1980, § 25-46)  
Secs. 78-98—78-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - STREET VACATIONS 
 
Sec. 78-131. - Standards. 
Prior to the adoption of any ordinance vacating a street or alley within the city, it shall be necessary that the consulting engineer to certify to the city council on the plat of vacation, that in his professional opinion there is no further public use to the city of said street or alley and that it is warranted to vacate said street or alley. 
(Code 1980, § 25-58; Ord. of 11-21-73, § 1)  
Sec. 78-132. - Fee. 
(a)  Any person requesting vacation of a street or alley shall pay the following fees to the city: 
Zoning classification 
of property vacated 	Charge (per 
square foot) 
 
Industrial (light and heavy) ..... $0.80 
Commercial ..... 0.70 
Multiple dwelling ..... 0.60 
Single dwelling ..... 0.50 
(b)  The zoning classification of the property immediately adjacent to the street or alley to be vacated shall be the determining factor as to the zoning classification of the property to be vacated and in setting the fee. 
(Code 1980, § 25-59; Ord. of 9-14-1972, §§ 1, 2)  
Chapter 82 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; finance, § 2-881 et seq.; licenses and permits and miscellaneous business regulations, ch. 54. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 82-1—82-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TAX PROCEDURES AND TAXPAYERS' RIGHTS 
 
Sec. 82-31. - Title. 
This article shall be known as, and may be cited as, the "Locally Imposed and Administered Tax Rights and Responsibility Ordinance." 
(Code 1980, § 26-201; Ord. No. 00-81, § 1, 12-14-2000)  
Sec. 82-32. - Scope. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to the city's procedures in connection with all of the city's locally imposed and administered taxes. 
(Code 1980, § 26-202; Ord. No. 00-81, § 2, 12-14-2000)  
Sec. 82-33. - Definitions. 
Certain words or terms herein shall have the meaning ascribed to them as follows: 
Act means the "Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act." 
City means the City of Calumet City, Illinois. 
Corporate authorities means the city's mayor and city council. 
Local tax administrator shall refer to the city clerk who is charged with the administration and collection of the locally imposed and administered taxes, including staff, employees or agents to the extent they are authorized by the local tax administrator to act in the local tax administrator's stead. The local tax administrator shall have the authority to implement the terms of this article to give full effect to this article. The exercise of such authority by the local tax administrator shall not be inconsistent with this article and the act. 
Locally imposed and administered tax or tax means each tax imposed by the city that is collected or administered by the city and not an agency or department of the state. It does not include any taxes imposed upon real property under the property tax code or fees collected by the city other than infrastructure maintenance fees. 
Notice means each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice or communication in connection with each of the city's locally imposed and administered taxes. 
Tax ordinance means each ordinance adopted by the city that imposes any locally imposed and administered tax. 
Taxpayer means any person required to pay any locally imposed and administered tax and generally includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of such tax is placed and with respect to consumer taxes includes the business or entity required to collect and pay the locally imposed and administered tax to the city. 
(Code 1980, § 26-203; Ord. No. 00-81, § 3, 12-14-2000)  
Sec. 82-34. - Notices. 
Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given, the notice is to be in writing mailed not less than seven (7) calendar days prior to the day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other scheduled act of the local tax administrator. The notice shall be sent by the local tax administrator as follows: 
(1)  First class or express mail, or overnight mail, addressed to the persons concerned at the persons' last known address, or 
(2)  Personal service or delivery. 
(Code 1980, § 26-204; Ord. No. 00-81, § 4, 12-14-2000)  
Sec. 82-35. - Late payment. 
Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to the city pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it is: 
(1)  Physically received by the city on or before the due date; or 
(2)  Received in an envelope or other container displaying a valid, readable U.S. postmark dated on or before the due date, properly addressed to the city, with adequate postage prepaid. 
(Code 1980, § 26-205; Ord. No. 00-81, § 5, 12-14-2000)  
Sec. 82-36. - Payment. 
Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in the following order: 
(1)  First to the tax due for the applicable period; 
(2)  Second to the interest due for the applicable period; and 
(3)  Third to the penalty for the applicable period. 
(Code 1980, § 26-206; Ord. No. 00-81, § 6, 12-14-2000)  
Sec. 82-37. - Certain credits and refunds. 
(a)  The city shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid without written protest at the time of payment in the event that a locally imposed and administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer shall not be deemed to have paid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts upon which to protest the taxes at the time of payment or if the taxpayer paid the taxes under duress. 
(b)  The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund shall be four (4) years after the end of the calendar year in which payment in error was made. The city shall not grant a credit or refund of locally imposed and administered taxes, interest, or penalties to a person who has not paid the amounts directly to the city. 
(c)  The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as follows: 
(1)  The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator in writing a claim for credit or refund together with a statement specifying: 
a.  The name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to the claim; 
b.  The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax subject to the claim; 
c.  The date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the canceled check or receipt for the payment; 
d.  The taxpayer's recalculation, accompanied by an amended or revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and 
e.  A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the claim to be applied to the amount owed, and, as applicable, related interest and penalties; provided, however, that there shall be no refund and only a credit given in the event the taxpayer owes any monies to the city. 
(2)  Within ten (10) calendar days of the receipt by the local tax administrator of any claim for a refund or credit, the local tax administrator shall either: 
a.  Grant the claim; or 
b.  Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement as to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial. 
(3)  In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or credit shall bear interest at the rate of four (4) percent per annum, based on a year of three hundred sixty-five (365) days and the number of days elapsed, from the date of the overpayment to the date of mailing of a refund check or the grant of a credit. 
(Code 1980, § 26-207; Ord. No. 00-81, § 7, 12-14-2000)  
Sec. 82-38. - Audit procedure. 
Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any local administered tax shall comply with the notice requirements of this article. 
(1)  Each notice of audit shall contain the following information: 
a.  The tax; 
b.  The time period of the audit; and 
c.  A brief description of the books and records to be made available for the auditor. 
(2)  Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and if the date and time selected by the local tax administrator is not agreeable to the taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer within thirty (30) calendar days after the originally designated audit and during normal business hours. 
(3)  The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit conducted. The audit shall be conducted not less than seven (7) calendar days nor more than thirty (30) calendar days from the date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer and the local tax administrator agreed to some other convenient time. In the event taxpayer is unable to comply with the audit on the date in question, the taxpayer may request another date within the thirty (30) calendar days, approved in writing, that is convenient to the taxpayer and the local tax administrator. 
(4)  Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the taxpayer's business or activities, including original source documents and books of entry denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have given rise to any tax liability, exemption or deduction. All book shall be kept in the English language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by the city. 
(5)  It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make available its books and records for inspection by the city. If the taxpayer fails to provide the documents necessary for audit within the time provided, the local tax administrator may issue a tax determination and assessment based on the best estimate of the taxpayer's tax liability. 
(6)  If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice of the amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within thirty (30) calendar days of the city's determination of the amount of overpayment. 
(7)  In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect local governmental entity, the local tax administrator shall notify the local governmental entity imposing such tax. 
(Code 1980, § 26-208; Ord. No. 00-81, § 8, 12-14-2000)  
Sec. 82-39. - Appeal. 
(a)  The local tax administrator shall send written notice to a taxpayer upon the local tax administrator's issuance of a protestable notice of tax due, a bill, a claim denial, or a notice of claim reduction regarding any tax. The notice shall include the following information: 
(1)  The reason for the assessment; 
(2)  The amount of the tax liability proposed; 
(3)  The procedure for appealing the assessment; and 
(4)  The obligations of the city during the audit, appeal, refund and collection process. 
(b)  A taxpayer who receives written notice from the local tax administrator of a determination of tax due or assessment may file with the local tax administrator a written protest and petition for hearing, setting forth the basis of the taxpayer's request for a hearing. The written protest and petition for hearing must be filed with the local tax administrator within forty-five (45) days of receipt of the written notice of the tax determination and assessment. 
(c)  If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed, the local tax administrator shall fix the time and place for hearing and shall give written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled for a date within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the written protest and petition for hearing, unless the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties. 
(d)  If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed within the forty-five (45) day period, the tax determination, audit or assessment shall become a final bill due and owing without further notice. 
(e)  Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full payment of the contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of the due date of the tax, the local tax administrator may reopen or extend the time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing. In no event shall the time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing be reopened or extended for more than ninety (90) days after the expiration of the forty-five (45) day period. 
(Code 1980, § 26-209; Ord. No. 00-81, § 9, 12-14-2000)  
Sec. 82-40. - Hearing. 
(a)  Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely written protest and petition for hearing under section 82-39, the local tax administrator shall conduct a hearing regarding any appeal. 
(b)  No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack of preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance granted shall not exceed fourteen (14) calendar days. 
(c)  At the hearing the local tax administrator shall preside and shall hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax determination, audit or assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings shall not apply. 
(d)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax administrator shall make a written determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing. The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with a copy of the written decision. 
(Code 1980, § 26-210; Ord. No. 00-81, § 10, 12-14-2000)  
Sec. 82-41. - Interest and penalties. 
In the event a determination has been made that a tax is due and owing, through audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be paid within the time frame otherwise indicated. 
(1)  Interest. The city hereby provides for the amount of interest to be assessed on a late payment, underpayment or nonpayment of the tax, to be ten (10) percent per annum, based on a year of three hundred sixty-five (365) days and the number of days elapsed. 
(2)  Late filing and payment penalties. If a tax return is not filed within the time and manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing penalty, of five (5) percent of the amount of tax required to be shown as due on a return shall be imposed; and a late payment penalty of five (5) percent of the tax due shall be imposed. If no return is filed within the time or manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance and prior to the city issuing a notice of tax delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure to file penalty shall be assessed equal to twenty-five (25) percent of the total tax due for the applicable reporting period for which the return was required to be filed. A late filing or payment penalty shall not apply if a failure to file penalty is imposed by the controlling ordinance. 
(Code 1980, § 26-211; Ord. No. 00-81, § 11, 12-14-2000)  
Sec. 82-42. - Abatement. 
The local tax administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate any late filing penalty or failure to file penalty if the local tax administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay or failure to make a filing. 
(Code 1980, § 26-212; Ord. No. 00-81, § 12, 12-14-2000)  
Sec. 82-43. - Installment contracts. 
The city may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for the payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The local tax administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the local tax administrator that the payment is thirty (30) calendar days delinquent, the taxpayer shall have fourteen (14) calendar days to cure any delinquency. If the taxpayer fails to cure the delinquency within the fourteen (14) day period or fails to demonstrate good faith in restructuring the installment contract with the local administrator, the installment contract shall be canceled without further notice to the taxpayer. 
(Code 1980, § 26-213; Ord. No. 00-81, § 13, 12-14-2000)  
Sec. 82-44. - Statute of limitations. 
The city, through the local tax administrator, shall review all tax returns in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any amounts due and owing. The taxpayer shall have forty-five (45) calendar days after receiving notice of the reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund or provide any tax still due and owing. 
(1)  No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than four (4) years after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later. 
(2)  If any tax return is not filed or if during any 4-year period for which a notice of tax determination of assessment may be issued by the city, the tax paid was less than seventy-five (75) percent of the tax due, the statute of limitations shall be six (6) years after the end of the calendar year in which return for the applicable period was due or end of the calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was filed. 
(3)  No statute of limitations shall apply if a fraudulent tax return was filed by the taxpayer. 
(Code 1980, § 26-214; Ord. No. 00-81, § 14, 12-14-2000)  
Sec. 82-45. - Voluntary disclosure. 
For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has not received a written notice of an audit, investigation, or assessment from the local tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application with the local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A taxpayer filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of tax due, along with interest of one (1) percent per month, for all periods prior to the filing of the application but not more than four (4) years before the date of filing the application. A taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure application may not be liable for any additional tax, interest, or penalty for any period before the date the application was filed. However, if the taxpayer incorrectly determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the taxpayer is liable for the underpaid tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid tax, unless the underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the taxpayer, in which case the application shall be deemed invalid and void. The payment of tax and interest must be made by no later than ninety (90) calendar days after the filing of the voluntary disclosure application or the date agreed to by the local tax administrator. However, any additional amounts owed as a result of an underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under this Section must be paid within ninety (90) calendar days after a final determination and the exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed to by the local tax administrator, whichever is longer. 
(Code 1980, § 26-215; Ord. No. 00-81, § 15, 12-14-2000)  
Sec. 82-46. - Publication of tax ordinances. 
Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or standard publishing requirements. The posting of a tax ordinance on the Internet shall satisfy the publication requirements. Copies of all tax ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request at the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1980, § 26-216; Ord. No. 00-81, § 16, 12-14-2000)  
Sec. 82-47. - Internal review process. 
The local tax administrator shall establish an internal review procedure regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes. Upon a determination by the local tax administrator that the lien is valid, the lien shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is determined to be improper, the local tax administrator shall: 
(1)  Timely remove the lien at the city's expense; 
(2)  Correct the taxpayer's credit records; and 
(3)  Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien. 
(Code 1980, § 26-217; Ord. No. 00-81, § 17, 12-14-2000)  
Sec. 82-48. - Application. 
This article shall be liberally construed and administered to supplement all the city's tax ordinances. To the extent that any tax ordinance is in conflict with or inconsistent with this article, this article shall be controlling. 
(Code 1980, § 26-218; Ord. No. 00-81, § 18, 12-14-2000)  
Secs. 82-49—82-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - AMUSEMENT ADMISSIONS TAX 
 
Sec. 82-81. - Imposed; exemptions. 
A tax is hereby imposed upon the admission of every person to a place of amusement in the city in the amount of twenty-five cents ($.25), which shall be in addition to all fees or other charges required to be paid as a condition of admission, provided, however, that no such tax shall be imposed as a condition of admission on the following: 
(1)  A child, where the amount of the fee or other charge to a child is less than that for an adult. For the purpose of this article, a child shall be any person under twelve (12) years of age. 
(2)  A senior citizen, where the amount of the fee or other charge to a senior citizen is less than that for other adult persons. For the purpose of this article, a senior citizen shall be any person over the age of sixty (60) years. 
(3)  A person admitted to a place of amusement operated for the principal benefit of a religious, educational or charitable institution, or a society or organization conducted or maintained for the purpose of civic improvement, or a fraternal organization, legion post or a social or political group, or an organization or association created and maintained for the purpose of benefiting the members' dependents or heirs of members of the police or fire department or the city or of any political subdivision providing that as to all of the foregoing the proceeds received by reason of admission charges, after the payment of reasonable expenses, inure exclusively to the benefit of one (1) or more of the foregoing organizations or societies, and no part of funds realized is to inure to the benefit of any private shareholder or person, and further provided that the amusement which is so conducted is sponsored occasionally, but no more often than twice yearly for periods no longer than fifteen (15) days. 
(Code 1980, § 26-94; Ord. No. 00-12, § 1, 2-10-2000)  
Sec. 82-82. - Reduction of tax to equal amount imposed by state in the event of similar taxes. 
In the event the state shall impose an amusement tax of like or similar nature to the tax imposed by this article, the tax hereby imposed shall be reduced in an amount equal to the amount of the aforesaid state tax effective on the last day of the month in which such state admission tax shall become effective, if such state tax becomes effective during a calendar month, or if said state tax becomes effective on the first day of a month, the aforesaid reduction shall take effect on the last day of the preceding month. 
(Code 1980, § 26-95; Ord. No. 00-12, § 1, 2-10-2000)  
Sec. 82-83. - Collection from each person required. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to produce, present or conduct any amusement for gain or profit without collecting this admission tax from each person as a condition of admission to the place of amusement. 
(Code 1980, § 26-96; Ord. No. 00-12, § 1, 2-10-2000)  
Sec. 82-84. - When paid; statement of number of admissions to accompany payment. 
This admission tax shall be paid to the city clerk not later than the twentieth (20th) day of each calendar month for the number of applicable admissions during the preceding calendar month. A verified statement of the number of admissions subject to the tax shall accompany the payment. The acceptance by the city of any amount tendered in payment of this tax shall be without prejudice to any claim, demand or right on account of any deficiency or of any overpayment. 
(Code 1980, § 26-97; Ord. No. 00-12, § 1, 2-10-2000)  
Sec. 82-85. - Records. 
Complete accurate records of the number of admissions which are subject to the tax shall be kept at the place of amusement in the city or such other place in the Chicago Metropolitan Area as may be designated in writing by the person liable for the payment of the tax. The city clerk or his/her designee shall have access to such records at all reasonable times for the purpose of determining the number of admissions which are subject to the tax. The city clerk or his/her designee examining such records shall not disclose the contents thereof to any person except as may be required by law and this article. 
(Code 1980, § 26-98; Ord. No. 00-12, § 1, 2-10-2000)  
Sec. 82-86. - When tax effective. 
The tax imposed by this article shall become effective and be collected commencing March 1, 2000. 
(Code 1980, § 26-99; Ord. No. 00-12, § 1, 2-10-2000)  
Secs. 82-87—82-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE COMPANIES 
 
Sec. 82-121. - Imposed. 
Any foreign fire insurance company which is engaged in the city in effecting or soliciting fire insurance shall pay to the city treasurer upon July 15 of each and every year, a sum equal to two (2) percent of the gross receipts or premiums received by such corporation, company or association or their agency or agents for business effected or transacted for fire insurance within the city for the year ending July 1 preceding said dates. 
(Code 1980, § 26-1; Ord. of 11-12-25, § 1) 
State Law reference— Power of city to impose tax on foreign fire insurance companies, 65 ILCS 5/11-10-1.  
Sec. 82-122. - Reports. 
Every person acting as agent or otherwise, for or upon behalf of a foreign fire insurance company which is engaged in the city in effecting or soliciting fire insurance shall on or before July 15 of each and every year render to the city clerk a full, true and just account, verified by oath, of all the premiums which during the year ending on July 1 of each and every year, shall have been received by him, or any other person for him in behalf of such company and shall fully and specifically set out in said report the amount received as premiums for fire insurance. 
(Code 1980, § 26-2; Ord. of 11-12-25, § 2) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 65 ILCS 5/11-10-1.  
Sec. 82-123. - Payment. 
The agent of a foreign fire insurance company which is engaged in the city in effectuating or soliciting fire insurance shall also, at the time of the making of the report required by this article, pay to the city the amount of the tax imposed by this article. 
(Code 1980, § 26-3; Ord. of 11-12-25, § 3) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 65 ILCS 5/11-10-1.  
Sec. 82-124. - Defaults; effect. 
If the accounting required by this article is not rendered on or before July 15 of each year, or if the sum remains unpaid after that day, it shall be unlawful for any such foreign fire insurance company to transact any business of fire insurance in the city until the sum due has been fully paid; provided, however, that this section shall in no way affect the validity of any risk that may be taken in violation of this article, between such company and the person so insured. 
(Code 1980, § 26-4; Ord. of 11-12-25, § 4) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 65 ILCS 5/11-10-1.  
Sec. 82-125. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided in 65 ILCS 5/11-10-3. 
(Code 1980, § 26-5) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 65 ILCS 5/11-10-3.  
Secs. 82-126—82-160. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - HOTEL ACCOMMODATIONS TAX 
 
Sec. 82-161. - Title. 
Pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/8-3-14, as amended, the tax herein imposed shall be known and cited as the "Hotel Accommodations Tax." 
(Code 1980, § 26-51; Ord. No. 02-21, § 1, 6-4-2002)  
Sec. 82-162. - Definitions and construction. 
For the purpose of this article, whenever any of the following words, terms or definitions are used herein, they shall have the following meaning ascribed to them in this section: 
City means the City of Calumet City. 
City collector means the city collector of the City of Calumet City. 
Hotel accommodations means a room or rooms in any building or structure located in the city and kept, used or maintained as or advertised or held out to the public to be an inn, motel, hotel, apartment hotel, lodging house, dormitory or place, where sleeping, rooming, conference or exhibition accommodations are furnished for lease or rent, whether with or without meals, in which ten (10) or more such accommodations are used or maintained for guests, lodgers or rooms. The term "hotel accommodations" does not include an accommodation which a person occupies, or has the right to occupy, as his domicile and permanent residence. 
Person means any natural person, receiver, administrator, executor, conservator, assignee, trust in perpetuity, trust, estate, firm, partnership, joint venture, club, company, business trust, domestic or foreign corporation, association, syndicate, society, or any group of individuals acting as a unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, for profit, nonprofit or otherwise. Whenever the term "person" is used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term as applied to corporations shall include the officers thereof, and as applied to any other entity, the owners or part-owners thereof. 
(Code 1980, § 26-52; Ord. No. 02-21, § 1, 6-4-2002)  
Sec. 82-163. - Tax imposed. 
There is hereby imposed and to be collected a tax, as herein provided, upon the rental or leasing of any hotel accommodations at the rate of four (4) percent of the gross rental or leasing charge. 
(Code 1980, § 26-53; Ord. No. 02-21, § 1, 6-4-2002)  
Sec. 82-164. - Tax borne by lessee. 
The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of said tax shall be borne by the hotel owner, manager or operator of such hotel accommodations. The tax herein levied shall be in addition to any and all other taxes. The hotel owner, manager, or operator may reimburse themselves for their tax liability for such tax by charging the lessee or tenant of such hotel accommodations by separately stating such tax as an additional charge on the lessee's or tenant's statement of charges. It shall be the duty of every owner, manager or operator of hotel accommodations to secure said tax from the lessee or tenant of said hotel accommodations and pay over to the city collector said tax under rules and regulations prescribed by the city collector and as otherwise provided by this article. 
(Code 1980, § 26-54; Ord. No. 02-21, § 1, 6-4-2002)  
Sec. 82-165. - Collection. 
The tax herein levied shall be secured by the hotel owner, manager or operator from the lessee or tenant when collecting the price, charge or rent to which it applies. Every lessee or tenant shall be given a bill, invoice, receipt or other statement or memorandum of the price, charge or rent payable upon which the hotel accommodations tax shall be stated, charged and shown separately. The hotel accommodations tax shall be paid to the city collector or the authorized representative of this office on a quarterly basis. Each quarter is to consist of a three (3) month period ending on April 15, July 15, October 15, and January 15 of each year. The tax shall be due at the time of filing tax returns in accordance with section 82-166. 
(Code 1980, § 26-55; Ord. No. 02-21, § 1, 6-4-2002)  
Sec. 82-166. - Payment and penalty for nonpayment. 
(a)  Every owner, manager or operator of hotel accommodations shall file a sworn tax return on a quarterly basis with the city collector showing tax receipts received with respect to hotel accommodation space rented or leased during the preceding quarterly period, upon forms prescribed by the city collector. At the time of filing said tax return, the owner, manager or operator of hotel accommodations shall pay to the city collector all taxes due for the period to which the tax return applies. 
(b)  If for any reason any tax is not paid when due, a penalty at the rate of two (2) percent per month on the amount of tax which remains unpaid shall be added and collected. Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax as herein provided, upon the request of the city collector, the corporation counsel shall bring or cause to be brought an action to enforce the payment of said tax on behalf of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction with the cost of such enforcement to be borne by the owner of the hotel accommodations. 
(Code 1980, § 26-56; Ord. No. 02-21, § 1, 6-4-2002)  
Sec. 82-167. - Records. 
Every owner, manager or operator of hotel accommodations shall keep books and records showing the prices, rents or charges made or charged, and occupancies taxable under this article. The city collector, or his designate, shall at all reasonable times have full access to said books and records. 
(Code 1980, § 26-57; Ord. No. 02-21, § 1, 6-4-2002)  
Sec. 82-168. - Suspension or revocation of licenses. 
If the mayor, after hearing held by or for him, shall find that any person has willfully avoided payment of the tax imposed by this article, he may suspend or revoke all city licenses held by said tax evader. The owner, manager or operator of the hotel accommodations shall have an opportunity to be heard and such hearing shall not be held less than five (5) days after notice of the time and place of the hearing, addressed to the owner, manager or operator at his last known place of business. The suspension or revocation of any license shall not release or discharge the owner, manager or operator of hotel accommodations from civil liability for the payment of the tax nor for prosecution of such offense. 
(Code 1980, § 26-58; Ord. No. 02-21, § 1, 6-4-2002)  
Sec. 82-169. - Proceeds. 
All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under this article, including penalties, shall be distributed as follows: 
(1)  Ninety-five (95) percent of one (1) percent of the gross rental or lease charges shall be paid to the Chicago Southland Convention and Visitors Bureau for the sole purpose of promoting tourism and conventions. 
(2)  The excess over ninety-five (95) percent of one (1) percent of the gross rental or lease charges shall be retained by the city to defray the costs of administering and processing the imposition and collection of the tax. 
(3)  In the event the city increases the tax collected pursuant to section 82-163 hereof, the bureau shall only be entitled to ninety-five (95) percent of one (1) percent of the gross rental or lease charges. 
(Code 1980, § 26-59; Ord. No. 02-21, § 1, 6-4-2002; Ord. No. 03-07, § 2, 3-13-2003)  
Secs. 82-170—82-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX 
 
Sec. 82-201. - Imposed. 
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property at retail in this city at the rate of one (1) percent of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business. 
(Code 1980, § 26-17; Ord. of 9-11-1969, § 1) 
State Law reference— Power of city to impose municipal retailers' occupation tax, 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.  
Sec. 82-202. - Reports and payment. 
(a)  Every person required to account for the tax imposed by this article shall file on or before the last day of each calendar month, the report to the state department of revenue required by law. 
(b)  At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the state department of revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the receipts from sales of tangible personal property during the preceding month. 
(Code 1980, § 26-18; Ord. of 9-11-1969, § 3) 
State Law reference— Retailers' Occupation Tax Act, 35 ILCS 120/1 et seq.; filing and payment of tax, 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1, 35 ILCS 120/442.  
Secs. 82-203—82-230. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX 
 
Sec. 82-231. - Imposed. 
A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the city in the business of making sales of service at the rate of one (1) percent of the cost price of all tangible personal property transferred by said servicemen either in the form of tangible personal property or in the form of real estate as an incident to a sale of a service. 
(Code 1980, § 26-30; Ord. of 9-11-1969, § 1) 
State Law reference— Power of city to impose municipal service occupation tax, 65 ILCS 5/8-11-5.  
Sec. 82-232. - Reports and payment. 
(a)  Every supplier or serviceman required to account for the tax required by this article shall file, on or before the last day of each calendar month, the report to the state department of revenue required by law. 
(b)  At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the state department of revenue the amount of tax imposed by this article. 
(Code 1980, § 26-31; Ord. of 9-11-1969, §§ 2, 3) 
State Law reference— Service Occupation Tax Act, 35 ILCS 115/1 et seq.; required reports and payments, 65 ILCS 5/8-11-5, 35 ILCS 115/9 et seq.  
Secs. 82-233—82-260. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - MUNICIPAL USE TAX 
 
Sec. 82-261. - Tax imposed; amount. 
A tax is hereby imposed in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal Use Tax Act upon the privilege of using in the municipality any item of tangible personal property which is purchased outside the state at retail from a retailer, and which is titled or registered with an agency of State government. The tax shall be at a rate of one (1) percent of the selling price of such tangible property with selling price to have meaning as defined in the Use Tax Act. 
(Code 1980, § 26-43; Ord. of 11-14-1974, § 1) 
State Law reference— Municipal Use Tax Act, 65 ILCS 5/8-11-6; Use Tax Act, 35 ILCS 105/1 et seq.  
Sec. 82-262. - Payment to state. 
The tax imposed by this article shall be collected by the state department of revenue and shall be paid before the title or certificate of registration for the personal property is issued. 
(Code 1980, § 26-44; Ord. of 11-14-1974, § 1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 65 ILCS 5/8-11-6.  
Secs. 82-263—82-290. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - HOME RULE MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' OCCUPATIONAL TAX AND HOME RULE MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX 
 
Sec. 82-291. - Imposed. 
(a)  A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property, other than an item of tangible personal property titled or registered with an agency of this state's government, at retail in this municipality at the rate of one (1) percent of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while this article is in effect; and a tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this municipality in the business of making sales of service, at the rate of one (1) percent of the selling price of all tangible personal property transferred by such serviceman as an incident to a sale of service. Such "Home Rule Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax" and the "Home Rule Municipal Service Occupation Tax" shall not be applicable to the sales of food for human consumption which is to be consumed off the premises where it is sold (other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks and food which has been prepared for immediate consumption) and prescription and nonprescription medicines, drugs, medical appliances and insulin, urine testing materials, syringes and needles used by diabetics. The imposition of these home rule taxes are in accordance with the provisions of the "Illinois Municipal Code," 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1 and 5/8-11-5, respectively as amended. 
(b)  The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the department of revenue of the state. The department of revenue shall have full power to administer and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1980, § 26-61; Ord. No. 90-14, § 1, 4-12-1990; Ord. No. 02-08, 3-28-2002, § 1, 3-28-2002) 
State Law reference— Home Rule Municipal Retailer's Occupation Tax, 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1; Home Rule Municipal Service Occupation Tax, 65 ILCS 5/8-11-5.  
Secs. 82-292—82-320. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - REAL ESTATE TRANSFER TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority, 65 ILCS 5/8-11-6a(4). 
 
Sec. 82-321. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, whenever any of the following words, terms or definitions are used herein, they shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
Beneficial interest in real property includes, but is not limited to (1) the beneficial interest in an Illinois land trust; (2) the lessee interest in a ground lease (including any interest of the lessee in the related improvements) that provides for a term of thirty (30) or more years when all options to renew or extend are included, whether or not any portion of the term has expired; or (3) the indirect interest in real property as reflected by a controlling interest in a real estate entity. 
Controlling interest means: 
(1)  Fifty (50) percent or more of the combined voting power or fair market value of all ownership interests or beneficial interests in a real estate entity, whether the interests are owned by one (1) or by several persons: or 
(2)  The right of one (1) or of several persons to receive at the time of any distribution fifty (50) percent or more of the income or profits of a real estate entity. 
Person means any individual, receiver, administrator, executor, conservator, assignee, trust, estate, partnership, joint venture, club, joint stock company, business trust, political subdivision of the state, corporation, association, limited liability company, syndicate, society, or any group of persons acting as a unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit or otherwise. 
Real estate entity means any person (other than a state land trust) including, but not limited to, any partnership, corporation, trust, or single or multi-tiered entity, that exists or acts substantially for the purpose of holding directly or indirectly title to or beneficial interest in real property located in the city, whether for personal use, the production of rental income, or investment. It shall be presumed, unless proved otherwise, that an entity is a real estate entity if it owns directly or indirectly real property located in the city having a fair market value greater than seventy-five (75) percent of the total fair market value of all of the entity's assets, determined without deduction for any mortgage, lien or encumbrance. 
Recordation means the recording of deeds with the office of the recorder of deeds or the registration of deeds with the Registrar of Titles of Cook County, Illinois. 
Transfer price means the consideration furnished for the transfer of title to, or beneficial interest in, real property, valued in money, whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits and property, determined without any deduction for mortgages, liens or encumbrances, and specifically including the amount of any indebtedness or obligation cancelled or discharged in connection with the transfer. In the case where the controlling interest in a real estate entity is transferred, and the real estate entity holds assets in addition to title to or beneficial interest in real property located in the city, "transfer price" means only that portion of the consideration attributable to the transfer of such real property or such beneficial interest. 
(Code 1980, § 26-70; Ord. No. 80-17, § 1, 7-24-1980; Ord. No. 98-21, § 1, 4-30-1998)  
Sec. 82-322. - Imposed. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, a tax is imposed upon the privilege of transferring title to, or beneficial interest in, real property located within the corporate limits of the city. The tax shall be imposed at the following rates: 
(1)  Eight dollars ($8.00) per one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) of the transfer price, or fraction thereof, of the real property or the beneficial interest in real property up to, and including, two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) 
(2)  Ten dollars ($10.00) per one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) of the transfer price, or fraction thereof, of the real property or the beneficial interest in real property between two million dollars and one cent ($2,000,000.01) and five million dollars ($5,000,000.00). 
(3)  Twelve dollars ($12.00) per one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) of the transfer price, or fraction thereof, of the real property or the beneficial interest in real property between five million dollars and one cent ($5,000,000.01) and ten million dollars ($10,000,000.00). 
(4)  Fourteen dollars ($14.00) per one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) of the transfer price, or fraction thereof, of the real property or the beneficial interest in real property between ten million dollars and one cent ($10,000,000.01) and twenty million dollars ($20,000,000.00). 
(5)  Sixteen dollars ($16.00) per one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) of the transfer price, or fraction thereof, of the real property or the beneficial interest in real property over twenty million dollars ($20,000,000.00). 
(b)  (1)  The tax imposed by this chapter is due upon the earlier of the delivery or recording of the deed, assignment or other instrument of transfer. 
(2)  In the case of an assignment of a beneficial interest in a trust, delivery shall be deemed to occur when the trustee receives possession of a valid assignment of the beneficial interest. In the case of other transfers, delivery shall be deemed to occur when the transferee, or the transferee's representative or agent, receives or becomes entitled to receive possession of the instrument of transfer. 
(c)  The tax imposed by this article shall be due whether the transfer of a controlling interest in a real estate entity is effected by one (1) transaction or by a series of related transactions. For purposes of this subsection, it shall be presumed, unless provided otherwise, that transactions are related if they occur within the same twenty-four (24) month period. 
(d)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to impose a tax upon any transaction or privilege which, under the circumstances of the United States or the State of Illinois, may not be made the subject of taxation by the city. 
(Code 1980, § 26-71; Ord. No. 80-17, § 1, 7-24-1980; Ord. No. 93-35, § 1, 10-28-1993; Ord. No. 95-32, § 1, 7-27-1995; Ord. No. 98-21, § 2, 4-30-1998)  
Sec. 82-323. - Exceptions. 
(a)  The tax imposed by this article shall not apply to the following transactions: 
(1)  Transactions involving property acquired by or from any governmental body or by any corporation, society, association, foundation or institution organized and operated exclusively for charitable, religious or educational purposes; provided that only the governmental body or corporation, society, association, foundation or institution organized and operated exclusively for charitable, religious or education purposes shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this article; 
(2)  Transactions which secure debt or other obligations; 
(3)  Transactions in which deeds, without additional consideration, confirm, correct, modify or supplement deeds previously recorded; 
(4)  Transactions in which the actual consideration is less than one hundred dollars ($100.00); 
(5)  Transactions in which the deeds are tax deeds; 
(6)  Transactions which are releases of property which is security for a debt or other obligation; 
(7)  Transactions of partitions; 
(8)  Transactions made pursuant to mergers, consolidations or transfers or sales of substantially all of the assets of a corporation pursuant to plans of reorganization; 
(9)  Transactions between subsidiary corporations and their parents for no consideration other than the cancellation or surrender of the subsidiary corporation's stock; 
(10)  Transactions wherein there is an actual exchange of real property except that the money difference or money's worth paid from one to the other shall not be exempt from the tax; 
(11)  Transactions representing transfers subject to the imposition of a documentary stamp imposed by the government of the United States. 
(12)  Transactions by full-time employees of the City of Calumet City who sell their residence within the city limits and purchase residential property within the city limits for the purpose of relocating their legal residence. 
(13)  Transactions in which the deed or other instrument of transfer is issued to the mortgagee or secured creditor pursuant to a mortgage or security interest foreclosure proceeding or sale or pursuant to a transfer in lieu of foreclosure. 
(b)  Every deed or other instrument which is tax exempt pursuant to this section shall be presented to the city clerk so as to be appropriately marked by said city clerk as an exempt deed or instrument eligible for recordation without the payment of tax. At such time as a deed or instrument is presented to the city clerk a certificate setting forth the facts which justify exemption shall be presented. 
(c)  No other fees shall apply to any transactions in this section, except that a service fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be assessed on all transactions in which deeds, without additional consideration, confirm, correct, modify, or supplement deeds previously recorded. 
(Code 1980, § 26-75; Ord. No. 80-17, § 1, 7-24-1980; Ord. No. 82-3, § 1, 2-11-1982; Ord. No. 95-21, § 1, 5-25-1995; Ord. No. 95-32, § 3, 7-27-1995; Ord. No. 98-21, § 3, 4-30-1998; Ord. No. 05-09, § 1, 2-10-2005; Ord. No. 05-51, § 1, 7-28-2005)  
Sec. 82-324. - Liability for tax. 
The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of the tax imposed by this section shall be borne as follows: 
(1)  One-half (½) the tax shall be borne by the grantor of any deed subject to this article or by the grantor, assignor or transferor of any instrument conveying the beneficial interest in real estate within the corporate limits of the city. 
(2)  One-half (½) the tax shall be borne by the grantee of any deed subject to this article or by the grantee, assignee or transferee of any instrument conveying the beneficial interest in real estate within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 26-72; Ord. No. 80-17, § 1, 7-24-1980; Ord. No. 95-32, § 1, 7-27-1995)  
Sec. 82-325. - Purchase of stamps. 
The tax levied by this article shall be paid by the purchase of tax stamps from the city clerk or a designated agent. The payment of such tax shall be denoted by the adhesive stamp or stamps affixed to the fact of the deed or instrument transferring the beneficial interest. 
(Code 1980, § 26-73; Ord. No. 80-17, § 1, 7-24-1980)  
Sec. 82-326. - Filing of declaration. 
At such time as the tax levied by this article is paid there shall be filed with the city clerk a fully executed and completed copy of the "real estate transfer declaration" required by section 3 of the real estate transfer tax of the state, or a declaration of the full consideration paid for the transfer of beneficial interest which declaration shall be on a form provided by the city clerk. Such declaration shall be deemed as a confidential record. 
(Code 1980, § 26-74; Ord. No. 80-17, § 1, 7-24-1980)  
Sec. 82-327. - Real estate transfer tax stamps required. 
(a)  The tax herein levied and imposed shall be collected by the city clerk through the sale of real estate transfer tax stamps, which shall be caused to be prepared by said clerk in such quantities as said clerk may from time to time prescribe. Such stamps shall be available for sale at, and during the regular business hours of the city offices and the offices of such agent as the city may designate. For the purpose of reviewing a request for the stamps, the city shall process a request within forty-eight (48) hours of working time. Upon payment of the tax herein levied and imposed, the stamps so purchased shall be affixed to the deed or other instrument of conveyance. Any person so using or affixing a stamp shall cancel it and so deface it as to render it unfit for reuse by marking it with his initials and the day, month and year when the affixing occurs. Such markings shall be made by writing or stamping in indelible ink or by perforating with a machine or punch; however, the stamp shall not be so defaced as to prevent ready determination of its genuineness. 
(b)  The city clerk shall issue no stamps for the transfer of any dwelling, structure, commercial or industrial building unless the grantor/seller (i) presents a "certificate of compliance" or other certificate indicating compliance with appropriate city ordinances and/or codes signed by an authorized signatory of the department of inspectional services or (ii) presents an "uninspected property" notice to the city clerk pursuant to subsection 14-1(f) of the City Code. The city clerk shall provide the purchaser notice whether the property is inspected or uninspected. 
Additionally, prior to the issuance of transfer tax stamps, and subject to the procedures as set forth in subsection 14-1(i) of the City Code, the grantor/seller shall present to the city clerk proof of a current paid water bill. The term "current" shall be defined as the most recent bill issued to the grantor/seller and certified as same by an authorized official of the water department of the city. The water department shall not issue certification of a paid water bill relative to any transfer of title unless the new owner's name and address is supplied to an official of the water department simultaneously upon request for certification of a paid water bill. Grantors/sellers who are exempt from the requirement of purchase of transfer stamps shall be required to comply with the requirements of this section, and shall have the subsection 14-1(i) procedural rights. 
(Code 1980, § 26-76; Ord. No. 80-17, § 1, 7-24-1980; Ord. No. 96-29, § 1, 5-9-1996; Ord. No. 05-09, § 2, 2-10-2005; Ord. No. 06-68, § 2, 8-24-2006; Ord. No. 08-06, § 2, 1-31-2008)  
Sec. 82-328. - Recordation of deeds. 
No deed conveying real property within the corporate limits of the city shall be entitled to recordation by the recorder of deeds or the registrar of titles of the county, unless such deed shall bear either a city real estate transfer tax stamp or an exemption mark from the city clerk. 
(Code 1980, § 26-77; Ord. No. 80-17, § 1, 7-24-1980; Ord. No. 82-3, § 2, 2-11-1982; Ord. No. 95-21, § 2, 5-25-1995)  
Sec. 82-329. - Duty of trustee. 
No trustee of real estate shall accept an assignment of beneficial interest in real estate located in the city unless such instrument shall bear either a city real estate transfer tax stamp or an exemption mark from the city clerk. 
(Code 1980, § 26-78; Ord. No. 80-17, § 1, 7-24-1980)  
Sec. 82-330. - Proceeds of tax. 
All proceeds resulting from the collection of the tax imposed by this article, including interest and penalties, shall be paid into the treasury of the city and shall be credited to and deposited in the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 26-79; Ord. No. 80-17, § 1, 7-24-1980)  
Sec. 82-331. - Interest and penalties. 
In the event of failure by any person to pay to the city clerk the tax required hereunder when the same shall be due, interest shall accumulate and be due upon said tax at the rate of one (1) percent per month commencing as of the first day following the day when the deed was recorded or the assignment of beneficial interest was accepted by the trustee. In addition, a penalty of fifty (50) percent of the tax and interest shall be assessed and collected against any person who shall fail to pay the tax imposed by this article. 
(Code 1980, § 26-80; Ord. No. 80-17, § 1, 7-24-1980)  
Sec. 82-332. - Civil liability for tax. 
In the event of failure by any person to pay to the city clerk tax required hereunder when the same shall be due, said person shall be liable to the city for such tax, together with interest and penalties. The city may bring an action to collect such tax, interest and penalties in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1980, § 26-81; Ord. No. 80-17, § 1, 7-24-1980)  
Sec. 82-333. - Fine for violation. 
In addition to the remaining provisions of this article, any person found guilty in a court of competent jurisdiction of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with any provision of this article, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. 
(Code 1980, § 26-82; Ord. No. 80-17, § 1, 7-24-1980)  
Sec. 82-334. - Certificate of zoning compliance. 
(a)  Categories of zoning compliance. A certificate of zoning compliance shall be available to owners of all residential property in accordance with the terms of this section. 
(b)  Application. The owner or owner's agent may apply for a certificate of zoning compliance (certificate) for any property subject to this section (1) by submitting to the department of inspectional services (department) an application in a form prescribed by the department and payment of any administrative fee of $50.00. The consent of the owner or occupant of the property for which a certificate is requested shall not be required unless the department determines that an on-site inspection of the property is required. In the event that the owner or any occupant does not consent to an inspection, the department shall not issue a certificate. 
(c)  Rental dwelling inspection. The department shall conduct a use analysis of each rental dwelling concurrent with each rental dwelling inspection completed pursuant to chapter 14, article X, division 2 of this Code in the same manner as if the owner or owner's agent submitted an application. 
(d)  Nonrental dwelling inspections. The use analysis of all residential properties not licensed as a rental dwelling shall also be initiated upon the filing of a notice of transfer as described in section 14-1(b) of this Code. 
(e)  Use analysis. Upon receipt of an application for a certificate, the department shall conduct a use analysis of the property. For purposes of issuance of a certificate, the use analysis shall be limited to a determination of the applicable and lawful number of dwelling units on the property. Nothing herein shall be deemed or interpreted as precluding the department from performing otherwise authorized and lawful zoning inspections, or from initiating otherwise authorized and lawful zoning enforcement procedures, for any property at any time. 
(f)  Action. Within ten (10) business days after receipt of an application for a certificate, the department shall either: (1) issue the certificate if the department determines that there are no more dwelling units on the property than that which are permitted by the applicable provisions of the city's zoning ordinance; or (2) issue the certificate as a legal nonconforming use if the department determines that the property is a legal nonconforming use as defined in section 3.2 of the city's zoning ordinance, and further indicate the maximum number of allowable dwelling units based on the property's legal nonconforming status; or (3) deny the application for a certificate by issuance of a written statement setting forth the reason for such denial. The refusal of the owner or occupant of the property to allow the department to inspect the property shall be a sufficient basis to deny an application for a certificate. If no request for reconsideration is made pursuant to subsection 82-334(h), the decision of the department shall become a final decision within ten (10) business days after its issuance. 
(g)  Reconsideration. Any person whose application for a certificate is denied may request the department to reconsider its determination. If such a request for reconsideration is made, the department shall review any additional information presented by the applicant and shall conduct an on-site inspection of the property, regardless of whether any such on-site inspection previously was made; provided, however, that no on-site inspection shall be conducted without the prior written consent by the owner and occupant of the property. Within ten (10) business days after the request for reconsideration is made, the department shall render a final decision which shall consist of either: (1) issuance of a certificate; or (2) issuance of a written statement setting forth the reasons for denial of the application. 
(h)  Appeal. Any final decision of the department under this section may be appealed to the zoning board of appeals pursuant to section 12.5 of the city's zoning ordinance. 
(i)  Effective period. A certificate issued under this section shall be valid for one (1) year following the date of its issuance. 
(Ord. No. 09-47, § 2, 9-10-2009)  
Sec. 82-335. - Severability. 
If any clause, sentence, section, provision or part of this article or the application thereof to any person or circumstance shall be adjudged to be unconstitutional, the remainder of this article or its application to persons or circumstances other than those to which it is held invalid shall not be affected thereby. 
(Code 1980, § 26-83; Ord. No. 95-32, § 4, 7-27-1995; Ord. No. 09-47, § 1, 9-10-2009) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-47, § 1, adopted Sept. 10, 2009, renumbered the former § 82-334 to § 82-335.  
Secs. 82-336—82-370. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - SALES TAX 
 
Sec. 82-371. - Short title; tax additional to all others. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the Calumet City Sales Tax. The tax herein imposed is in addition to all other taxes imposed by the city or any other municipal corporation or political subdivision thereof. 
(Code 1980, § 26-111; Ord. No. 81-35, § 1, 11-24-1981)  
Sec. 82-372. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, when any of the following words or terms are used herein they shall have the meaning or construction ascribed to them in this section: 
Bulk vending machine means a nonelectrically operated vending machine, containing unsorted confections, nuts or other merchandise which, when a coin of a denomination not larger than one cent ($0.01) is inserted, are dispensed in equal portions, at random and without selection by the customer. 
City means the City of Calumet City, Illinois. 
Department means the department of the city clerk of the city. 
Director means the city collector. 
Person means any natural individual, firm, society, foundation, institution, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, public or private corporation, or a receiver, executor, trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court. 
Low sulfur dioxide emission coal fueled device means any device sold or used or intended for the purpose of burning, combusting or converting locally available coal in a manner which eliminates or significantly reduces the need for additional sulfur dioxide abatement that would otherwise be required under state or federal air emission standards. 
Pollution control facilities means any system, method, construction, devise or appliance appurtenant thereto sold or used or intended for the primary purpose of eliminating, preventing, reducing air or water pollution, as the term "air pollution" or "water pollution" is defined in the "Environmental Protection Act," enacted by the 76th Illinois General Assembly, as amended, or for the primary purpose of treating, pretreating, modifying or disposing of any potential solid, liquid or gaseous pollutant which if released without such treatment, pretreatment, modification or disposal might be harmful, detrimental or offensive to human, plant or animal life, or to property. 
Purchase at retail means the acquisition of the ownership of or title to tangible personal property through a sale at retail. 
Purchaser means any person who, through a sale at retail, acquires the ownership of or title to tangible personal property for a valuable consideration. 
Receipts from sales of tangible personal property at retail with respect to any period of time means the aggregate selling price, as hereinbefore defined, received by a seller during such period of time. In the case of charge and time sales, receipts include consideration only as and when payments are received by the seller. 
Retailer means every person engaged in the business of making sales at retail as defined in this section. 
Retailer maintaining a place of business in the city, or any like term, shall mean and include any retailer: 
(1)  Having a maintaining within the city, directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution house, sales house, warehouse or other place of business, or any agent or other representative operating within the city under the authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of business or agent or other representative is located here permanently or temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in the city; or 
(2)  Engaging in soliciting orders within the city from users by means of catalogues or other advertising, whether such orders are received or accepted within or without the city. 
Sale at retail means any transfer of the ownership of or title to tangible personal property to a purchaser, for the purpose of use or consumption, and not for the purpose of resale in any form as tangible personal property to the extent not first subjected to a use for which it was purchased, for a valuable consideration; provided that the property purchased is deemed to be purchased for the purpose of resale despite first being used, to the extent to which it is resold as an ingredient of an intentionally produced product or byproduct of manufacturing. For this purpose, slag produced as an incident to manufacturing pig iron or steel and sold is considered to be an intentionally produced byproduct of manufacturing. Transactions whereby the possession of the property is transferred but the seller retains the title as security for payment of the selling price shall be deemed to be sales. "Sale at retail" shall be construed to include any transfer of the ownership of or title to tangible personal property to a purchaser, for use or consumption by any other person to whom such purchaser may transfer the tangible personal property without a valuable consideration, and to include any transfer, whether made for or without a valuable consideration, for resale in any form as tangible personal property unless made in compliance with section 82-377 of this article. Sales of tangible personal property, which property, to the extent not first subjected to a use for which it was purchased, as an ingredient or constituent, goes into and forms a part of tangible personal property subsequently the subject of a "sale at retail," are not sales at retail as defined in this section. "Sale at retail" shall also be construed to include any city florist's sales transaction in which a purchase order is received in the city by a florist and the sale is for use or consumption, but the city florist has a florist outside of the city deliver the property to the purchaser or the purchaser's donee outside the city. 
Selling price means the consideration for a sale at retail valued in money whether received in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, property, other than as hereinafter provided, and services, but not including the value of or credit given for traded-in tangible personal property where the item that is traded-in is of like kind and character as that which is being sold, and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of materials used, labor or service cost or any other expense whatsoever, but shall not include: 
(1)  The proceeds of any mandatory service charge which is separately stated on customers' bills for purchase and consumption of food and beverages, if all of the proceeds of the service charge are in fact turned over to the employees who would normally have received tips had the service charge policy not been introduced; or 
(2)  Charges that are added to the price by the seller on account of the seller's duty to collect, from the purchaser, the tax imposed upon the purchaser under this article or on account of a tax liability imposed upon the seller or the purchaser under any other ordinance of the city or of any other unit of local government or under any law of the state upon or in connection with such sale, purchase or use. 
The phrase "like kind and character" shall be liberally construed (including but not limited to any form of motor vehicle for any form of motor vehicle, or any kind of farm or agricultural implement for any other kind of farm or agricultural implement), while not including a kind of item which, if sold at retail by that retailer, would be exempt from tax hereunder as an isolated or occasional sale. 
Tax collector means a "retailer" maintaining a place of business in the city or a retailer authorized by the department to collect the tax herein imposed pursuant to section 82-375 hereof. 
Use means the exercise by any person of any right to or power over tangible personal property incident to the ownership of that property, except that it does not include the sale of such property in any form as tangible personal property in the regular course of business to the extent that such property is not first subjected to a use for which it was purchased, and does not include the use of such property by its owner for sales demonstration purposes; provided that the property purchased is deemed to be purchased for the purpose of resale, despite first being used, to the extent to which it is resold as an ingredient of an intentionally produced product or byproduct of manufacturing. The term "use" does not mean the interim use of tangible personal property by a retailer before he sells such tangible personal property and does not mean the physical incorporation of tangible personal property, to the extent not first subjected to a use for which it was purchased, as an ingredient or constituent, into other tangible personal property which: 
(1)  Is sold in the regular course of business; or 
(2)  The person incorporating such ingredient or constituent therein has undertaken at the time of such purchase to cause to be transported: 
a.  In interstate commerce to destinations outside the state; or 
b.  To destinations outside the city and within the state. 
(Code 1980, § 26-112; Ord. No. 81-35, § 1, 11-24-1981)  
Sec. 82-373. - Imposition of tax; collection; refunds. 
(a)  Except as provided in section 82-374, every purchaser of tangible personal property through a sale at retail in the city after December 5, 1981, shall be liable for a tax on the purchase at the rate of one-half (½) of one (1) percent of the selling price of such property. 
(b)  The tax imposed hereunder and the obligation to pay the same is upon the purchaser. The tax imposed hereunder shall be collected from the purchaser by the tax collector, as defined in section 82-372 hereof, and remitted to the department as provided herein. The tax collector shall be liable to the city for the amount of tax he is required to collect. Retailers shall collect the tax from purchasers by adding the tax to the selling price of tangible personal property, when sold for use, in the manner prescribed by the department. Whenever possible, the tax imposed by this article shall, when collected, be stated as a distinct item separate and apart from the selling price of the tangible personal property. The department may adopt and promulgate reasonable rules and regulations for the adding of such tax by retailers to selling prices by prescribing bracket systems for the purpose of enabling such retailers to add and collect, as far as practicable, the amount of such tax. The tax hereby imposed and not paid to a retailer pursuant to this section shall be paid to the department directly by any person purchasing or using such property within the city, pursuant to section 82-378 hereof. If any seller collects an amount (however designated) which purports to constitute taxes measured by receipts which are not subject to such tax, or if any seller, in collecting an amount (however designated) which purports to constitute taxes measured by receipts which are subject to tax under this article, collects more from the purchaser than the actual tax liability on the transaction, the purchaser shall have a legal right to claim a refund of such amount from such seller. However, if such amount is not refunded to the purchaser for any reason, the seller is liable to pay such amount to the department. This subsection does not apply to an amount collected by the seller on receipts which are subject to tax under this article as long as such collection is made in compliance with the tax collection brackets prescribed by the department in its rules and regulations. 
(Code 1980, § 26-113; Ord. No. 81-35, § 1, 11-24-1981)  
Sec. 82-374. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Purchases or uses of tangible personal property under the following circumstances shall not be subject to the tax imposed by the article: 
(1)  Purchase or use of such tangible personal property as newsprint and ink which was sold at retail for the primary purpose of conveying news (with or without other information). 
(2)  Purchase or use of such tangible personal property as: 
a.  Pollution control facilities; or 
b.  Low sulfur dioxide emission coal fueled devices. 
(3)  Purchases or uses by any governmental body, or any corporation, society, association, foundation, or institution organized and operated exclusively for charitable, religious or educational purposes, or any not-for-profit corporation, society, association, foundation, institution or organization which has no compensated officers or employees which is organized and operated primary for the recreation of persons fifty-five (55) years of age or older. 
(4)  Purchases or uses of tangible personal property by interstate carriers for hire as rolling stock moving in interstate commerce or purchases or uses by lessors under leases of one (1) year or longer executed or in effect at the time of purchase to interstate carriers for-hire for use of rolling stock moving in interstate commerce as long as so used by such interstate carriers for-hire. 
(5)  The temporary storage, in the city, of tangible personal property which is acquired outside this city and which, subsequent to being brought into this city and stored here temporarily, is use solely outside this city or physically attached to or incorporated into other tangible personal property that is used solely outside this city, or is altered by converting, fabricating, manufacturing, printing, processing or shaping, and, as altered is used solely outside this city. 
(6)  The temporary storage in this city of building materials and fixtures which are acquired either in the city or outside this city by an Illinois registered combination retailer and construction contractor, and which such purchaser thereafter uses outside this city by incorporating such property into real estate located outside this city. 
(7)  Where a business that is not operated in this city, but which does operate elsewhere is moved to the city or opens up an office, plant or other business facility in the city, such business shall not be taxed on its use, in the city, of used tangible personal property which such business bought outside the city and used outside the city in the operation of such business for at least three (3) months before moving such used property to the city for use here. 
(8)  The use, in this city, of jet fuel delivered to an airport directly by pipeline from outside Illinois. 
(9)  However, with respect to food for human consumption which is to be consumed off the premises where it is sold (other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks and food which has been prepared for immediate consumption), and prescription and nonprescription medicines, drugs, medical appliances and insulin, urine testing materials, syringes, and needles used by diabetics, for human use, such tax shall be imposed at the rate of zero percent. For the purposes of this section, the term "soft drinks" shall mean any complete finished, ready-to-use, nonalcoholic drinks, whether carbonated or not, including but not limited to soda water, cola, fruit juice, vegetable juice, carbonated water and all other preparations commonly known as soft drinks of whatever kind or description, which are contained in any closed or sealed bottle, can, carton or container, regardless or size. The term "soft drinks" shall not include coffee, tea, noncarbonated water, infant formula, milk or milk products, as defined in the Grade A. Pasteurized Milk Products Act as now or hereafter amended, or drinks containing fifty (50) percent or more natural fruit or vegetable juice. 
(b)  "Acquired outside the city," whenever used in this section, in addition to its usual and popular meaning, includes delivery of tangible personal property that is purchased in the city to the point of delivery outside the city. 
(Code 1980, § 26-114; Ord. No. 81-35, § 1, 11-24-1981; Ord. No. 84-32, § 1, 8-30-1984)  
Sec. 82-375. - Certificate of registration required; who is a "retailer" for purposes of this article; application and bond, etc. 
(a)  Certificate defined. Every retailer maintaining a place of business in the city shall obtain a certificate of registration as a tax collector from the department no later than thirty (30) days after commencing such business or thirty (30) days after the effective date of this article, whichever occurs later. 
(b)  What constitutes a "retailer." 
(1)  The isolated or occasional sale of tangible personal property at retail by a person who does not hold himself out as being engaged (or who does not habitually engage) in selling such tangible personal property at retail, or a sale through a bulk vending machine, does not constitute such person a retailer within the meaning of this article; provided that any person who is engaged in a business which is not subject to the tax collection obligation imposed by this article because of involving the sale of or a contract to sell real estate or a construction contract to improve real estate, but who, in the course of conducting such business, transfers tangible personal property to users of consumers in the finished form in which it was purchased, and which does not become real estate, under any provision of a construction contract or real estate sale or real estate sales agreement entered into which some other person arising out of or because of such business which is not subject to such collection obligation, is a retailer to the extent of the value of the tangible personal property so transferred. If, in such a transaction, a separate charge is made for the tangible personal property so transferred, the value of such property, for the purpose of this article, shall be the amount so separately charged, but not less than the cost of such property to the transferrer if no separate charge is made, the value of such property, for the purposes of this article, is the cost to the transferrer of such tangible personal property. 
(2)  A person who holds himself out as being engaged (or who habitually engages) in selling tangible personal property at retail is a retailer hereunder with respect to such sales notwithstanding the fact that such person is a serviceman engaging in sales of services. 
(3)  Persons who engage in the business of transferring tangible personal property upon the redemption of trading stamps are retailers hereunder and shall collect and pay the tax imposed by the article on the basis of the retail value of the property transferred upon redemption of such stamps. 
(4)  A person whose activities are organized and conducted primarily as a not-for-profit service enterprise, and who engages in selling tangible personal property at retail (whether to the public or merely to members and their guests) is a retailer with respect to such transactions, excepting only a person organized and operated exclusively for charitable, religious or educational purposes either: 
a.  To the extent of sales by such person to its members, students, patients or inmates of tangible personal property to be used primarily for the purposes of such person; or 
b.  To the extent of sales by such person of tangible personal property which is not sold or offered for sale by persons organized for profit. 
The selling of school books and school supplies by schools at retail to students is not "primarily for the purposes of" the school which does such selling. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to nor subject to taxation; occasional dinners, socials or similar activities of a person organized and operated exclusively for charitable, religious or educational purposes, whether or not such activities are open to the public. 
(5)  A person who is the recipient of a grant or contract under Title VII of the Older Americans Act of 1965 (P.L. 92-258) and serves meals to participants in the Federal Nutrition Program for the Elderly in return for contributions established in amount by the individual participant pursuant to a schedule of suggested fees as provided for in the federal act is not a retailer hereunder with respect to such transactions. 
(6)  A person who is engaged in the business of leasing or renting motor vehicles to others and who, in connection with such business, sells any used motor vehicle to a purchaser for his use and not for the purpose of resale, is a retailer engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property at retail under this article to the extent of the value of the vehicle sold. For the purpose of this section, "motor vehicle" has the meaning prescribed in Section 1-157 of The Illinois Vehicle Code, as now or hereafter amended. (Nothing provided herein shall affect liability incurred under this article because of the sale at retail of such motor vehicle to a lessor.) 
(c)  Application for certificate. Application for a certificate of registration shall be made to the department upon forms furnished by it. Each such application shall be signed and verified by the applicant or a properly accredited agent, which in the case of a corporation shall include the president, any vice president, the secretary or treasurer or some other properly accredited agent and shall state: 
(1)  The name of the applicant; 
(2)  His residence address and the address of his principal place of business; 
(3)  The address of the principal place of business from which he engages in the business of selling tangible personal property at retail in the city and the addresses of all other places of business, if any (enumerating such addresses, if any, in a separate list attached to and made a part of the application), from which he engages in the business of selling tangible personal property at retail in the city; 
(4)  The applicant's most recent gross receipts from the retail sale of tangible personal property whether or not incidental to the sale of service as reported to the state department of revenue; 
(5)  The applicant's estimated receipts from sales of tangible personal property at retail in the city for the current calendar year; and 
(6)  Such other information as the department may reasonably require. 
If the applicant will sell tangible personal property at retail through vending machines, his application to register shall indicate the number of vending machines to be so operated; and thereafter, he shall notify the department by January thirty-first of the number of vending machines which such person was using in his business of selling tangible personal property at retail on the preceding December 31. 
(d)  Bond. Every applicant for a certificate of registration hereunder shall, within thirty (30) days after he commences to engage in the business of selling tangible personal property at retail, furnish a bond from a surety company authorized to do business in the state, or a bond signed by two (2) personal sureties who have filed with the department sworn statements disclosing net assets equal to at least three (3) times the amount of the bond to be required of such applicant, or a bond secured by an assignment of a bank account or certificate of deposit, stocks or bonds, conditioned upon the applicant paying to the city all moneys becoming due under this article. The department shall fix the amount of such security in each case, taking into consideration the amount of money expected to become due from the applicant under this article. The amount of security required by the department shall be such as, in its opinion, will protect the city against failure to pay the amount which may become due from the applicant under this chapter, but the amount of the security required by the department shall not exceed three (3) times the amount of the applicant's average monthly tax collection and remission liability, or fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), whichever amount is lower. No certificate of registration under this article shall be issued by the department until the applicant provides the department with satisfactory security as herein provided for. The department may waive the furnishing of a bond until January 1, 1982. 
(e)  Issuance of certificate. Upon receipt of the application for a certificate of registration in proper form, and upon approval by the department of the security furnished by the applicant, the department shall issue to such applicant a certificate of registration. 
(f)  Subcertificates. 
(1)  If the person so registered states that he operates other places of business as a retailer in the city, the department shall furnish him with a subcertificate of registration for each such place of business. All subcertificates of registration shall bear the same registration number as that appearing upon the certificate of registration to which such subcertificates relate. 
(2)  Where the same person engages in two (2) or more businesses as a retailer in the city, which businesses are substantially different in character or engaged in under different trade names or engaged in under other substantially dissimilar circumstances (so that it is more practicable, from an accounting, auditing or bookkeeping standpoint, for such business to be separately registered), the department may require or permit such person (subject to the same requirements concerning the furnishing of security as those that are provided for hereinbefore in this section as to each application for a certificate of registration) to apply for and obtain a separate certificate of registration for each such business or for any of such businesses, under a single certificate of registration supplemented by related subcertificates of registration. 
(g)  Types of security. With respect to security other than bonds (upon which the department may sue in the event of a forfeiture), if the tax collector fails to pay, when due, any amount whose payment such security guarantees, the department shall, after such liability is admitted by the tax collector or established by the department through the issuance of a final assessment that has become final under the law, convert the security which that tax collector has furnished into money for the city after first giving the tax collector at least ten (10) days' written notice, by registered or certified mail, to pay the liability or forfeit such security to the department. If the security consists of stocks or bonds or other securities which are listed on a public exchange, the department shall sell such securities through such public exchange. If the security consists of a bank certificate of deposit, the department shall convert the security into money by demanding and collecting the amount of such bank certificate of deposit from the bank which issued such certificate. If the security consists of a type of stocks or other securities which are not listed on a public exchange, the department shall sell such security to the highest and best bidder after giving at least ten (10) days' notice of the date, time and place of the intended sale by publication in a daily newspaper of general circulation in the city. If the department realizes more than the amount of such liability from the security, plus the expenses incurred by the department in converting the security into money, the department shall pay such excess to the tax collector who furnished such security and the balance shall be paid into the corporate fund of the city. 
(h)  Receipts. Except as to motor vehicles and other items of tangible personal property which must be titled or registered under state law, but which cannot be so titled or registered without a use tax receipt or exemption determination from the state department of revenue, every retailer maintaining a place of business in the city and making sales of tangible personal property for use in the city shall, when collecting the tax as provided in section 82-374 of this article from the purchaser, give to the purchaser (if demanded by the purchaser) a receipt therefor in the manner and form prescribed by the department. Such receipt shall be sufficient to relieve the purchaser from further liability for the tax to which such receipt may refer. Each such retailer shall list with the department the names and addresses of all his agents operating in the city and the location of any and all of his distribution or sales houses, offices of other places of business in the city. 
(Code 1980, § 26-115; Ord. No. 81-35, § 1, 11-24-1981)  
Sec. 82-376. - Procedures for filing returns. 
(a)  Except as provided in this section, every retailer required or authorized to collect the tax imposed by this article shall, on or before the last day of each calendar month, file a return for the preceding calendar month with the department, stating: 
(1)  The name of the retailer; 
(2)  His residence address and the address of his principal place of business and the address of the principal place of business (if that is a different address) from which he engages in the business of selling tangible personal property in the city; 
(3)  Total amount of receipts received by him during the preceding calendar month from sales of tangible personal property in the city by him during such preceding calendar month; 
(4)  Total amount received by him during the preceding calendar month on charge and time sales of tangible personal property in the city by him prior to the month for which the return is filed; 
(5)  Deductions allowed by law; 
(6)  Receipts which were received by him during the preceding calendar month and upon the basis of which the tax upon purchasers from him is imposed; 
(7)  The amount of tax due; 
(8)  The amount of penalty due, if any; and 
(9)  Such other reasonable information as the department may require. 
(b)  If the retailer's average monthly liability to the department does not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), the department may authorize his returns to be filed on a quarter annual basis, with the return for January, February and March of a given year being due by April 30 of such year; with the return for April, May and June of a given year being due by July 31 of such year; with the return for July, August and September of a given year being due by October 31 of such year, and with the return for October, November and December of a given year being due by January 31 of the following year. 
(c)  If the retailer's average monthly liability with the department does not exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), the department may authorize his returns to be filed on an annual basis, with the return for a given year being due by January 31 of the following year. 
(d)  Such quarter annual and annual returns, as to form and substance shall be subject to the same requirements as monthly returns. 
(e)  Notwithstanding any other provision in this article concerning the time within which a retailer may file his return, in the case of any retailer who ceases to engage in a kind of business which makes him responsible for filing returns under this article, such retailer shall file a final return under this article with the department not more than one (1) month after discontinuing such business. 
(f)  Where the same person has more than one (1) business registered with the department under separate registrations under this chapter, such person may not file each return that is due as a single return covering all such registered businesses, but shall file separate returns for each such registered business. 
(g)  Refunds to purchasers made by the retailer during the preceding return period shall be allowed as a deduction under subdivision 5, in case the retailer had theretofore included the receipts from such sale in a return filed by him and has remitted the tax imposed by this article with respect to such receipts. 
(h)  Where the retailer is a corporation, the return filed on behalf of such corporation shall be signed by the president, vice-president, secretary or treasurer by the properly accredited agent of such corporation or by the chief executive officer or highest ranking manager. 
(i)  Except as provided in this section, the retailer filing the return under this section shall, at the time of filing such return, pay to the department the amount of tax imposed by this article less a discount of two (2) percent or five dollars ($5.00) per calendar year, whichever is greater, which is allowed to reimburse the seller for the expenses incurred in collecting the tax, keeping records, preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data to the department on request. 
(j)  All such deposits shall be credited against the tax collector's liabilities under this article. 
(k)  If the tax collector's average monthly liability to the department under this article was twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) or more during the preceding four (4) complete calendar quarters, he shall file a return with the department each month by the end of the month next following the month during which such liability is incurred and shall make payments to the department on or before the seventh, fifteenth, twenty-second and last day of the month during which such liability is incurred in an amount equal to one-fourth (¼) of the tax collector's actual liability for the month or an amount set by the department not to exceed one-fourth (¼) of the average monthly liability of the tax collector to the department for the preceding four (4) complete calendar quarters (excluding the month of highest liability and the month of lowest liability in such four-quarter period). The amount of such quarter monthly payments shall be credited against the final tax liability on the tax collector's return for that month. Once applicable, the requirement of the making of quarter monthly payments to the department shall continue until such tax collector's average monthly liability to the department during the preceding four (4) complete calendar quarters (excluding the month of highest liability and the month of lowest liability) is less than nine thousand dollars ($9,000.00), or until such tax collector's average monthly liability to the department as computed for each calendar quarter of the four (4) preceding complete calendar quarter period is less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). (If any such quarter monthly payment is not paid at the time or in the amount required by this section, then the two (2) percent tax collector's discount shall be reduced by two (2) percent of the difference between the minimum amount due as a payment and the amount of such quarter monthly payment actually and timely paid, except insofar as the tax collector has previously made payments for that month to the department in excess of the minimum payments previously due as provided in this section. The department shall make reasonable rules and regulations to govern the quarter monthly payment amount and quarter monthly payment dates for tax collectors who file on other than a calendar monthly basis). 
(l)  Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, for the first twelve (12) month period this tax is in effect the department may estimate what the amount of liability from any tax collector would have been for prior periods if the tax hereunder had been in effect for such periods and direct the frequency of remittance of the tax and filing of returns in accordance with the provisions of this section on the basis of such estimates. 
(m)  If any such payment or deposit provided for in this section exceeds the tax collector's present and probable future liabilities under this article, the department shall issue to the taxpayer no later than sixty (60) days after the date of payment a credit memorandum, which may be submitted by the tax collector to the department in payment of liability subsequently to be remitted by the tax collector to the department or be assigned by the tax collector to a similar tax collector under this article, in accordance with reasonable rules and regulations to be prescribed by the department. 
(n)  Any deposit previously made by a tax collector who is required to make quarter monthly payments under this article shall be applied against the tax collector's liability to the department under this article for the month preceding the first month in which the tax collector is required to make such quarter monthly payments. If the deposit exceeds that liability, the department may issue the tax collector a credit memorandum for the excess. 
(o)  The money received by the department under the provisions of this article shall be deposited in the corporate fund of the city. 
(p)  The department may require the tax collector to prepare and file with the department on a form prescribed by the department within fifteen (15) days after filing the state income tax return for his fiscal year an annual information return for such fiscal year. Such annual return to the department shall include a statement of receipts as shown by the retailer's last state income tax return. If the total receipts of the business as reported in the state income tax return do not agree with the receipts reported to the department for the same period, the retailer shall attach to his annual return a schedule showing a reconciliation of the two (2) amounts and the reasons for the difference. The retailer's annual return to the department shall also disclose any additional reasonable information which the department deems would be helpful in determining the accuracy of the quarter-monthly, monthly, quarterly or annual returns filed by such seller as provided for in this section. The provisions of this section concerning the filing of an annual information return do not apply to a retailer who is not required to file an income tax return with the United States government. 
(q)  If the annual information return required by this section is not filed when and as required, the tax collector shall be liable for a penalty equal to one-sixth ( 1/6 ) of one (1) percent of the amount due from such tax collector under this article during the period to be covered by the annual return for each month or fraction of a month until such return is filed as required, the penalty to be assessed and collected in the same manner as any other penalty provided for in this article. 
(r)  The president, vice-president, secretary or treasurer, chief executive officer, proprietor, owner or highest ranking manager shall sign any return required to be filed under this section to certify the accuracy of the information contained therein. Any person who willfully signs any such return containing false or inaccurate information shall be guilty of a violation of this article and punished accordingly. The return forms prescribed by the department shall include a warning that the person signing such return may be liable for a penalty as provided by this article. 
(s)  Any person engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property at retail as a concessionaire or other type of seller at art shows, flea markets and similar exhibitions or events may be required to make a daily report of the amount of such sales to the department and to make a daily payment of the full amount of tax due. The department shall impose this requirement when it finds that there is a significant risk of loss of revenue to the city at such an exhibition or event. Such a finding shall be based on evidence that a substantial number of concessionaires or other sellers who are not residents of the city will be engaging in the business of selling tangible personal property at retail at the exhibition or event, or other evidence of a significant risk of loss of revenue to the city. The department shall notify concessionaires and other sellers affected by the imposition of this requirement. In the absence of notification by the department, the concessionaires and other sellers shall file their returns as otherwise required in this section. 
(t)  With respect to motor vehicles and aircraft, every retailer selling this kind of tangible personal property shall file, with the department, upon a form to be prescribed and supplied by the department, a separate return for each such item of tangible personal property which the retailer sells, except that where, in the same transaction, a retailer of motor vehicles transfers more than one (1) motor vehicle to another motor vehicle retailer for the purpose of resale, such seller for resale may report the transfer of all the motor vehicles involved in that transaction to the department on the same uniform invoice-transaction reporting return form. Such transaction reporting return in the case of motor vehicles shall be the same document as the uniform invoice referred to in Section 5-402 of The Illinois Vehicle Code and must show the name and address of the seller; the name and address of the purchaser; the amount of the selling price, including the amount allowed by the retailer for traded-in property; if any; the amount allowed by the retailer for the traded-in tangible personal property, if any, to the extent to which section 82-372 of this article allows an exemption for the value of traded-in property; the balance payable after deducting such trade-in allowance from the total selling price; the amount of tax due from the retailer with respect to such transaction; the amount of tax collected from the purchaser by the retailer on such transaction (or satisfactory evidence that such tax is not due in that particular instance, if that is claimed to be the fact); the place and date of the sale; a sufficient identification of the property sold; such other information as is required in Section 5-402 of The Illinois Vehicle Code, and such other information as the department may reasonably require. Such transaction reporting return in the case of aircraft must show the name and address of the retailer; the name and address of the purchaser; the amount of the selling price including the amount allowed by the retailer for traded-in property, if any; the amount allowed by the retailer for the traded-in tangible personal property, if any, to the extent to which section 82-372 of this article allowed an exemption for the traded-in property; the balance payable after deducting such trade-in allowance from the total selling price; the amount of tax due from the retailer with respect to such transaction; the amount of tax collected from the purchaser by the retailer on such transaction (or satisfactory evidence that such tax is not due in that particular instance, if that is claimed to be the fact); the place and date of the sale, a sufficient identification of the property sold, and such other information as the department may reasonably require. Such transaction reporting return shall be filed not later than thirty (30) days after the date of delivery of the item that is being sold, but may be filed by the retailer at any time sooner than that if he chooses to do so. The transaction reporting return and tax remittance or proof of exemption from the tax that is imposed by this article may be transmitted to the department by way of the state agency with which, or state officer with whom, the tangible personal property must be titled or registered (if titling or registration is required). With each such transaction reporting return, the retailer shall remit the proper amount of tax due (or shall submit satisfactory evidence that the sale is not taxable if that is the case), to the department or its agents, whereupon the department shall issue, in the purchaser's name, a tax receipt (or a certificate of exemption if the department is satisfied that the particular sale is tax exempt). If the purchaser or user who would otherwise pay tax to the retailer wants the transaction reporting return filed and the payment of tax or proof of exemption made to the department before the retailer is willing to take these actions and such purchaser or user has not paid the tax to the retailer, such purchaser or user may certify to the fact of such delay by the retailer, and may (upon the department being satisfied of the truth of such certification) transmit the information required by the transaction reporting return and the remittance for tax or proof of exemption directly to the department and obtain his tax receipt or exemption determination, in which event the transaction reporting return and tax remittance (if a tax payment was required) shall be credited by the department to the proper retailer's account with the department, but without the two (2) percent discount provided for in this section being allowed. When the purchaser or user pays the tax directly to the department, he shall pay the tax in the same amount and in the same form in which it would be remitted if the tax had been remitted to the department by the retailer. 
(u)  Any retailer filing a return under this section shall also include (for the purpose of paying tax thereon) the total tax, if any, imposed upon him hereunder for the purpose or use of tangible personal property purchased by him at retail from a retailer, but as to which the tax imposed by this article was not collected from the retailer filing such return, and such retailer shall remit the amount of such tax to the department when filing such return. 
(Code 1980, § 26-116; Ord. No. 81-35, § 1, 11-24-1981)  
Sec. 82-377. - Resale numbers assigned to nontaxable purchasers. 
(a)  If the purchaser is not registered with the department as a tax collector, but claims to be a reseller of the tangible personal property in such a way that the purchaser's purchase or use if not taxable under this article or under some other tax law which the department may administer, such purchaser (except in the case of an out-of-city purchaser who will always resell and deliver the property to his customers outside the city) shall apply to the department for a resale number. Such applicant shall state facts which will show the department why such applicant is not liable for tax under this article or under some other tax law which the department may administer and shall furnish such additional information as the department may reasonably require. 
(b)  Upon approval of the application, the department shall assign a resale number to the applicant and shall certify such number to him. The department may cancel any such number which is obtained through misrepresentation, or which is used to make a purchase or use tax-free when the purchase in fact is not a purchase for resale, or which no longer applies because of the purchaser's having discontinued the making of resales of the property. Except as provided hereinabove in this section, no purchase or use shall be made tax-free on the ground of the retailer's sale being a sale for resale unless the purchaser has an active registration number or resale number from the department and furnishes that number to the retailer in connection with certifying to the retailer that any purchase or use by such purchaser is nontaxable because of the retailer's sale being a sale for resale. 
(Code 1980, § 26-117; Ord. No. 81-35, § 1, 11-24-1981)  
Sec. 82-378. - Payment of tax by purchaser to department. 
(a)  Except as to motor vehicles and aircraft, when tangible personal property is purchased from a retailer in the city or for use in the city by a purchaser who did not pay the tax imposed by this article to the retailer, and who does not file returns with the department as a retailer under section 82-376 of this article, such purchaser (by the last day of the month following the calendar month in which such purchaser makes any payment upon the selling price of such property) shall, except as provided in this section, file a return with the department and pay the tax upon that portion of the selling price so paid by the purchaser during the preceding calendar month. When tangible personal property is purchased by a lessor, under a lease for one (1) year or longer, executed or in effect at the time of purchase to an interstate carrier for hire, who did not pay the tax imposed by this article to the retailer, such lessor (by the last day of the month following the calendar month in which such property reverts to the use of such lessor) shall file a return with the department and pay the tax upon the fair market value of such property on the date of such reversion. Such return shall be filed on a form prescribed by the department and shall contain such information as the department may reasonably require. Such return and payment from the purchaser shall be submitted to the department sooner than the last day of the month after the month in which the purchase is made to the extent that they may be necessary in order to secure the title to a motor vehicle or the certificate of registration for an aircraft. 
(b)  When a purchaser pays a tax imposed by this article directly to the department, the department (upon request therefor from such purchaser) shall issue an appropriate receipt to such purchaser showing that he had paid such tax to the department. Such receipt shall be sufficient to relieve the purchaser from further liability for the tax to which such receipt may refer. A purchaser or user who is liable to pay tax directly to the department only occasionally and not on a frequently recurring basis, and who is not required to file returns with the department as a retailer under section 82-376 of this article, need not register with the department. However, if such a purchaser or user has a frequently recurring direct tax liability to pay to the department, such purchaser or user shall be required to register with the department on forms prescribed by the department and to obtain and display a certificate of registration from the department. In that event, all of the provisions of section 82-376 of this article concerning the filing of regular monthly, quarterly or annual tax returns and all of the provisions of this article concerning the requirements for registrants to post bond or other security with the department, as the provisions now exist or may hereafter be amended, shall apply to such purchasers or users. 
(Code 1980, § 26-118; Ord. No. 81-35, § 1, 11-24-1981)  
Sec. 82-379. - Failure to file return or pay tax; determination of tax due. 
(a)  In case any person engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property at retail fails to file a return when and as herein required, but thereafter, prior to the department's issuance of a notice of tax liability under this section, files a return and pays the tax, he shall also pay a penalty of five (5) percent of the amount of the tax. 
(b)  In case any person engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property at retail files the return at the time required by this article but fails to pay the tax, or any part thereof, when due, a penalty of five (5) percent of the amount of the tax unpaid when due shall be added thereto. 
(c)  In case any person engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property at retail fails to file a return when and as herein required, but thereafter, prior to the department's issuance of a notice of tax liability under this section, files a return but fails to pay the entire tax, a penalty of five (5) percent of the full amount of tax shown by such return shall be added thereto. 
(d)  In case any person engaged in the business of selling tangible personable property at retail fails to file a return, the department shall determine the amount of tax due from him according to its best judgment and information, which amount so fixed by the department shall be prima facie correct and shall be prima facie evidence of the correctness of the amount of tax due, as shown in such determination. In making any such determination of tax due, it shall be permissible for the department to show a figure that represents the tax due for any given period of six (6) months instead of showing the amount of tax due for each month separately. Proof of such determination by the department may be made at any hearing before the department or in any legal proceeding by a reproduced copy of the department's record relating thereto in the name of the department under the certificate of the director. Such reproduced copy shall, without further proof, be admitted into evidence before the department or in any legal proceeding and shall be prima facie proof of the correctness of the amount of tax due, as shown therein. The department shall issue the tax collector a notice of tax liability for the amount of tax claimed by the department to be due, together with a penalty of twenty (20) percent thereof. 
(e)  However, where the failure to file any tax return required under this article on the date prescribed therefor (including any extensions thereof), is due to reasonable cause the penalties impose by this article shall not apply. 
(f)  In case of failure to pay the tax, or any portion thereof, or any penalty provided for in this article, or interest, when due, the department may bring suit against the tax collector or the purchaser or user to recover the amount of such tax or portion thereof, or penalty or interest; or, if the tax collector or purchaser or user has died or become incompetent, may file a claim therefor against his estate; provided that no such suit with respect to any tax, or portion thereof, or penalty, or interest shall be instituted more than two (2) years after the latter of the date any proceedings in court for review, thereof have terminated or the time for the filing of such proceedings has expired without such proceedings being instituted, except with the consent of the person from whom such tax or penalty or interest is due; nor, except with such consent, shall such suit be instituted more than two (2) years after the date any return is filed with the department in cases where the return constitutes the basis for the suit or unpaid tax, or portion thereof, or penalty provided for in this article, or interest; provided that the time limitation period on the department's right to bring any such suit shall not run during any period of time in which the order of any court has the effect of enjoining or restraining the department from bringing such suit. 
(g)  The collection of tax or penalty or interest by any means provided for herein shall not be a bar to collection by any other means or to any prosecution under this article. 
(h)  In addition to any penalty provided for in this article amount of tax which is not paid when due shall bear interest at the rate of two (2) percent per month or fraction thereof from the date when such tax becomes past due until such tax is paid or a judgment therefor is obtained by the department; provided however, that if the time for making or completing an audit of a tax collector's books and records is extended with the tax collector's consent, at the request of and for the convenience of the department, beyond the date on which the statute of limitations upon the issuance of a notice of tax liability by the department otherwise would run, no interest shall accrue during the period of such extension. 
(Code 1980, § 26-119; Ord. No. 81-35, § 1, 11-24-1981)  
Sec. 82-380. - Books and records; account of receipts; presumption of taxability. 
(a)  Every person engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property at retail in the city shall keep records and books of all such sales, together with invoices, sales records, copies of bills of sale, inventories prepared as of December 31 of each year or otherwise annually as has been the custom in the specific trade and other pertinent papers and documents. Every person who is engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property at retail in the city and who, in connection with such business, also engages in other activities (including, but not limited to, engaging in a sales of goods occupation) shall keep such additional records and books of all such activities as will accurately reflect the character and scope of such activities and the amount of receipts realized therefrom. 
(b)  All books and records and other papers and documents which are required by the article to be kept shall be kept in the English language and shall, at all times during business hours of the day, be subject to inspection by the department or its duly authorized agents and employees. 
(c)  To support deductions made on the tax return form, or authorized under this article, on account of receipts from isolated or occasional sales, on account of receipts from sales to governmental bodies or other exempted types of purchasers, on account of receipts from sales in interstate commerce, and on account of receipts from any other kind of transaction that is not taxable under this article, entries in any books, records or other pertinent papers or documents of the tax collector in relation thereto shall be in detail sufficient to show the name and address of the tax collector's customer in each such transaction, the character of every such transaction, the date of every such transaction, the amount of receipts realized from every such transaction, the amount of receipts realized from every such transaction and such other information as may be necessary to establish the nontaxable character of such transaction under this article. This subsection does not apply to the food and drug exemption. 
(d)  It shall be presumed that all purchases or uses of tangible personal property purchased at retail are subject to tax under this article until the contrary is established, and the burden of proving that a transaction is not taxable hereunder shall be upon the person who would be required to pay the tax or remit the tax to the department if such transaction is taxable. In the course of any audit or investigation or hearing by the department with reference to a given tax collector or purchaser, if the department finds that such person lacks documentary evidence needed to support the claim that no tax is due hereunder, the department is authorized to notify such person in writing to produce such evidence, and such person shall have sixty (60) days subject to the right in the department to extend this period either on request for good cause shown or on its own motion from the date when such notice is sent by certified or registered mail (or delivered if the notice is served personally) in which to obtain and produce such evidence for the department's inspection, failing which the matter shall be closed and the transaction shall be conclusively presumed to be taxable hereunder. 
(e)  Books and records and other papers reflecting receipts received during any period with respect to which the department is authorized to issue notices of tax liability as provided by section 82-379 and this section of this article shall be preserved until the expiration of such period unless the department, in writing shall authorize their destruction or disposal prior to such expiration. 
(Code 1980, § 26-120; Ord. No. 81-35, § 1, 11-24-1981)  
Sec. 82-381. - Service of process of notice for tax liability. 
(a)  Any resident of the city who incurs liability under this article and who subsequently removed from the city or conceals his whereabouts, and any person who incurs tax liability under this article as a purchaser in the city and who removes from the city or conceals his whereabouts, shall be deemed thereby to appoint the city clerk his agent for the service of process or notice in any judicial or administrative proceeding under this article. Such process or notice shall be served by the department on the city clerk by leaving, at the office of the city clerk at least fifteen (15) days before the return day of such process or notice, a true and certified copy thereof, and by sending to the taxpayer by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, a like and true certified copy, with an endorsement thereon of the service upon said city clerk, addressed to such taxpayer or tax collector at his last known address. 
(b)  Service of process of notice in the manner provided for in this section, under the circumstances specified in this section, shall be of the same force and validity as if served upon the taxpayer personally within the city. Proof of such service upon the taxpayer through the city clerk as his agent and by mailing to the last known address of the taxpayer may be made in such judicial or administrative proceeding by the affidavit of the director, or by his duly authorized representative who made such service, with a copy of the process or notice that was so served attached to such affidavit. 
(Code 1980, § 26-121; Ord. No. 81-35, § 1, 11-24-1981)  
Sec. 82-382. - Duties of department; powers and authority of director. 
It shall be the duty of the department to collect and receive the tax imposed by this article. The department shall keep an accurate and separate account of all such tax payments received by it showing the name and address of the person remitting the tax and the date of each payment. The director is hereby empowered to adopt and promulgate, and to enforce, rules and regulations relating to any matter or thing pertaining to the administration and enforcement of the provisions of the article, including provisions for reexamination, correction and amendment of all returns. The director, or any agent or employee designated in writing by him, is hereby authorized to examine the books, papers and records of any tax collector during regular business hours, in order to certify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return was made, to ascertain the tax imposed by this article. 
(Code 1980, § 26-122; Ord. No. 81-35, § 1, 11-24-1981)  
Sec. 82-383. - Claims for credits or refunds. 
(a)  Whenever it appears to a person paying or remitting the tax that an amount of tax, interest or penalty has been paid in error to the department by him, whether such amount be paid through a mistake of fact or error of law, not later than three (3) years from the date upon which such payment was made, such person may file a claim for credit or refund with the department on forms provided by said department for that purpose. 
(b)  Any credit or refund that is allowed under this section shall bear interest at the rate of one-half (½) of one (1) percent per month or any fraction thereof, from the date when the erroneous payment for which credit or refund is being allowed was made to the department, until a credit memorandum is issued or a refund is paid. 
(c)  A claim for credit or refund shall be considered to have been filed with the department on the date upon which it is received by the department, and receipt of any claim for credit filed under this section shall be acknowledged by the director of any designated person on his behalf, said receipt to describe the claim in sufficient detail as to identify it, and to state the date upon which the claim was received by the department. 
(d)  As soon as practicable after a claim for credit or refund is filed, the director, or his designate, shall examine the same and determine the amount of credit or refund due, if any, and shall issue a notice of tentative determination of claim and notify the claimant of such determination. If the claimant disagrees with the determination, he shall file a protest and challenge thereto within twenty (20) days allowed, the director or his designate, shall fix the time and place for a hearing thereon, giving notice to the claimant thereof, not less than seven (7) days prior thereto. At any hearing held as herein provided, the tentative determination of claim shall be prima facie correct and the burden shall be upon the claimant to prove that it is incorrect. Upon the conclusion of the hearing, a decision shall be made by the director and notice thereof given to the claimant. In the event no protest or challenge to the tentative determination of claim is filed within the twenty (20) day period hereinabove set forth, said notice shall thereafter become and operate as a final determination. 
(e)  The director may in his discretion issue a letter of credit to a claimant who may be able to use said credit in the foreseeable future, or a refund certificate in lieu of a credit memorandum on application by a person who cannot use said credit, or sell or assign the same. Refund certificates shall be numbered serially as they are issued and shall be paid in the order of their issuance from funds that are appropriated to the department for that purpose. 
(Code 1980, § 26-123; Ord. No. 81-35, § 1, 11-24-1981)  
Sec. 82-384. - Procedures for article violations. 
(a)  Determination and assessment by director; demand for payment. If it shall appear to the director that any person has violated any provision of this article or any rule or regulation promulgated hereunder, or if the amount of any tax payment is incorrect in that it does not include all taxes payable for such calendar quarter or period, or if the director shall find that the collection of any taxes which have accrued but are not year due will be jeopardized by delay, and declares said taxes to be immediately due and payable, or if it shall appear to the director that he has made any final assessment which did not include taxes payable for the periods involved, or if it appears to the director that any person has, by reason of any act or omission or by operation of law, become liable for the payment of any taxes, interest or penalties not originally incurred by him, the director may in any of the above events determine and assess the amount of such taxes of deficiency, as the case may be, together with the interest and penalties due and unpaid, and immediately serve notice upon such person of such determination and assessment and make a demand for payment of the tax together with interest and penalties thereon. If the person incurring any such liability has died, such assessment may at the discretion of the director be made against his personal representative. Such determination and assessment by the director shall be final at the expiration of twenty (20) days from the date of the service of such written notice thereof and demand for payment, unless such person shall have filed with the director a written protest and a petition for a hearing, specifying its objections thereto. Upon the receipt of such petition within the twenty (20) days allowed, the director shall fix the time and place for a hearing and shall notify the petitioner thereof. The director may amend his determination and assessment at any time before it becomes final. In the event of such amendment the person affected shall be given notice thereof and an opportunity to be heard in connection therewith. At any hearing held as herein provided, the determination and assessment that has been made by the director shall be prima facie correct and the burden shall be upon the protesting person to prove that it is incorrect. Upon the conclusion of such hearing a decision shall be made by the director either canceling, increasing, modifying or affirming such determination or assessment and notice thereof given to the petitioner. Such notice shall contain a statement by the director of the cost of the certification of the record computed at the rate of five cents ($0.05) per one hundred (100) words, which cost shall be charge to the petitioner if the determination or assessment is affirmed. The record shall consist of the notices and demands caused to be served by the director, the written protest and petition for hearing, the testimony introduced at such hearing, the exhibits produced at such hearing, or certified copies thereof, the decisions of the director and such other documents in the nature of pleadings filed in the proceeding. 
(b)  Action to enforce payment by city prosecutor. Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax as herein provided, the city prosecutor shall, upon the request of the department, bring or cause to be brought an action to enforce the payment of said tax on behalf of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(c)  Authority of mayor to suspend or revoke city licenses; hearing. If the mayor, after hearing held by or for him, shall find that any person has willfully evaded payment or collection and remittance of the tax imposed by this article, he may suspend or revoke all city licenses held by such tax evader. Said person shall have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing to be held not less than seven (7) days after notice is given to him of the time and place of the hearing to be held, addressed to him at his last known place of business. Pending notice, hearing and finding, any license issued by the city possessed by said person may be temporarily suspended. Any suspension or revocation of any license shall not release or discharge said person from his civil liability for the payment or collection and remittance of the tax, nor from prosecution for such offense. 
(Code 1980, § 26-124; Ord. No. 81-35, § 1, 11-24-1981)  
Sec. 82-385. - Investigations and hearings. 
For the purpose of administering and enforcing the provisions of this article, the department, or any officer or employee of the department designated, in writing, by the director thereof, may hold investigations and hearings concerning any matters covered by this article and may examine any books, papers, records or memoranda bearing upon the sales or purchases of services of any such person, and may require the attendance of such person or any officer or employee of such person, or of any person having knowledge of such business, and may take testimony and require proof for its information. In the conduct of any investigation or hearing, neither the department nor any officer or employee thereof shall be bound by the technical rules of evidence, and no informality in any proceeding, or in the manner of taking testimony, shall invalidate any order, decision, rule or regulation made or approved or confirmed by the department. The director, or any officer or employee of the department authorized by the director thereof, shall have power to administer oaths to such persons. The books, papers, records and memoranda of the department, or parts thereof, may be proved in any hearing, investigation, or legal proceeding by a reproduced copy thereof under the certificate of the director. Such reproduced copy shall, without further proof, be admitted into evidence before the department or in any legal proceeding. 
(Code 1980, § 26-125; Ord. No. 81-35, § 1, 11-24-1981)  
Sec. 82-386. - Immunity from prosecution; incriminating evidence; perjury. 
No person shall be excused from testifying or from producing any books, papers, records or memoranda in any investigation or upon any hearing, when ordered to do so by the department or any officer or employee thereof, upon the ground that the testimony or evidence, documentary or otherwise, may tend to incriminate him or subject him to a criminal penalty, but no person shall be prosecuted or subjected to any criminal penalty for, or on account of, any transaction made or thing concerning which he may testify or produce evidence, documentary or otherwise, before the department or an officer or employee thereof; provided, that such immunity shall extend only to a natural person who, in obedience to a subpoena, gives testimony under oath or produces evidence, documentary or otherwise, under oath. No person so testifying shall be exempt from prosecution and punishment for perjury committed in so testifying. 
(Code 1980, § 26-126; Ord. No. 81-35, § 1, 11-24-1981)  
Sec. 82-387. - Issuance of subpoenas; witness fees; compelling attendance of witnesses and production of books; papers, etc. 
(a)  The department or any officer or employee of the department designated, in writing, by the director, shall at its or his own instance, or on the written request of any other party to the proceeding issue subpoenas duces tecum requiring the production of books, papers, records or memoranda. All subpoenas and subpoenas duces tecum issued under the terms of this article may be served by any person of full age. The fees of witnesses for attendance and travel shall be the same as the fees of witnesses before the circuit court of this state; such fees to be paid when the witness is excused from further attendance. When the witness is subpoenaed at the instance of the department or any officer or employee thereof, such fees shall be paid in the same manner as other expenses of the department, and when the witness is subpoenaed at the instance of any other party to any such proceeding the department may require that the cost of service of the subpoena or subpoena duces tecum and the fee of the witness be borne by the party at whose instance the witness is summoned. In such case, the department, in its discretion, may require a deposit to cover the cost of such service and witness fees. A subpoena or subpoena duces tecum issued as aforesaid shall be served in the same manner as a subpoena issued out of a court. 
(b)  Any circuit of this state, or any judge thereof, upon the application of the department or any officer or employee thereof, or upon the application of any other party to the proceeding, may, in its or his discretion, compel the attendance of witnesses, the production of books, papers, records or memoranda and the giving of testimony before the department or any officer or employee thereof conducting an investigation or holding a hearing authorized by this article, by an attachment for contempt, or otherwise, in the same manner as production of evidence may be compelled before said court. 
(c)  The department or any officer or employee thereof, or any other party in an investigation or hearing before the department, may cause the depositions of witnesses to be taken in the manner prescribed by law for like depositions in civil actions in courts of this state, and to that end compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers, records or memoranda. 
(Code 1980, § 26-127; Ord. No. 81-35, § 1, 11-24-1981)  
Sec. 82-388. - Confidentiality; exceptions for official purposes. 
(a)  All information received by the department from returns filed under this article, or from any investigation conducted under this article, shall be confidential, except for official purposes, and any person who divulges any such information in any manner, except in accordance with a proper judicial order or as otherwise provided by law, shall be punished by a jail sentence not to exceed six months or a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), or both. 
(b)  Nothing in this article prevents the director from publishing or making available to the public the names and addresses of persons filing returns under this article, or reasonable statistics concerning the operation of the tax by grouping the contents of returns so the information in any individual return is not disclosed. 
(c)  Nothing in this article prevents the director from divulging to the United States Government or the government of any state, or any officer or agency thereof, for exclusively official purposes, information received by the department in administering this article, provided that such other governmental agency agrees to divulge requested tax information to the department. 
(d)  The department's furnishing of information derived from a tax collector's return or from an investigation conducted under this article to the surety on a tax collector's bond that has been furnished to the department under this article, in order to support the department's demand for payment from such surety under the bond, is an official purpose within the meaning of this section. 
(e)  The furnishing upon request of information obtained by the department from returns filed under this article or investigations conducted under this article to the liquor control commissioner for official use is deemed to be an official purpose within the meaning of this section. 
(f)  The furnishing upon request of the city's auditor or his authorized agents, for official use, of returns filed and information related thereto under this article is deemed to be an official purpose within the meaning of this section. 
(Code 1980, § 26-128; Ord. No. 81-35, § 1, 11-24-1981)  
Sec. 82-389. - Notice, location of hearings. 
(a)  Whenever notice is required by this article, such notice may be given by United States registered or certified mail, addressed to the person concerned at his last known address, and proof of such mailing shall be sufficient for the purposes of this article. Notice of any hearing provided for by this article shall be so given not less than seven (7) days prior to the day fixed for the hearing. Following the initial contact of a person represented by an attorney, the department shall not contact the person concerned but shall only contact the attorney representing the person concerned. 
(b)  All hearings provided for in this article shall be at the department's office. 
(Code 1980, § 26-129; Ord. No. 81-35, § 1, 11-24-1981)  
Sec. 82-390. - Liability of persons responsible for filing returns and making payments. 
Any officer or employee of any corporation subject to the provisions of this article who has the control, supervision or responsibility of filing returns and collecting and making payment of the amount of tax herein imposed and who willfully fails to file such return or to collect and make such payment to the department shall be personally liable for such amounts, including interest and penalties thereon, in the event that after proper proceedings for the collection of such amounts, as provided in this article, such corporation is unable to pay such amounts to the department; and the personal liability of such officer or employee as provided herein shall survive the dissolution of the corporation. 
(Code 1980, § 26-130; Ord. No. 81-35, § 1, 11-24-1981)  
Sec. 82-391. - Penalties for article violations. 
Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting, or refusing to comply with, or resisting or opposing the enforcement of any of the provisions of this article, except when otherwise specifically provided, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for the first offense and not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) nor more than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) or five (5) times the amount of tax imposed, if any, whichever is higher, for the second and each subsequent offense in any one hundred eighty (180) day period, provided, however, that all actions seeking the imposition of fines only shall be filed as quasi-criminal actions subject to the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure (735 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.). Repeated offenses in excess of three (3) within any one hundred eighty (180) day period may also be punishable as a misdemeanor by incarceration in the county jail for a term not to exceed six (6) months under the procedures set forth in Section 1-2-1.1 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/1-2-1.1) and under the provisions of the Illinois Code of Criminal Procedures (725 ILCS 5/100-1 et seq.) in a separate proceeding. A separate and distinct offense shall be regarded as committed each day upon which said person shall continue any such violation, or permit any such violation to exist after notification thereof. 
(Code 1980, § 26-131; Ord. No. 81-35, § 1, 11-24-1981)  
Sec. 82-392. - Severability. 
If any provision of this article or application thereof to any person or circumstance is held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications of this article which can be given effect without the invalid application or provision, and to this end each such invalid provision or invalid application of this article is severable, unless otherwise provided by this article. In particular, but without limitation, each provision creating an exception to or an exemption or exclusion from the imposition of the tax is severable. It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent of the city council that this article would have been adopted had any such unconstitutional or otherwise invalid provision or application not been included. 
(Code 1980, § 26-132; Ord. No. 81-35, § 1, 11-24-1981)  
Secs. 82-393—82-430. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - MUNICIPAL UTILITY TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 94. 
 
Sec. 82-431. - Definitions. 
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms as used in this article shall be construed according to the definitions given in this section: 
Gross receipts means the consideration received for the transmission of messages, or for distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling gas, electricity, or water for use or consumption and not for resale, as the case may be; and for all services rendered in connection therewith valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise including cash, credit, services and property of every kind and material and for all services rendered therewith; and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of transmitting said messages without any deduction on account of the cost of the service, product or commodity supplied, the cost of materials used, labor or service cost, or any other expenses whatsoever. The term "gross receipts" shall not include any charges added to customers' bills pursuant to the provisions of section 9-221 or 9-222 of the Illinois Public Utilities Act or any other separately stated charge added to customers' bills in respect of any tax or other governmental imposition. 
Person means any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, municipal corporation or political subdivision of this state, or a receiver, trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court. 
Transmitting messages, in addition to the usual and popular meaning of person or person communication, shall include the furnishing, for a consideration, of services or facilities (whether owned or leased), or both, to persons in connection with the transmission of messages where such persons do not, in turn, receive any consideration in connection therewith, but shall not include the furnishing of services or facilities to persons for the transmission of messages to the extent that any such services or facilities for the transmission of messages are furnished for a consideration, by such persons or other persons for the transmission of messages. 
(Code 1980, § 26-162; Ord. No. 91-31, § 1, 8-8-1991; Ord. No. 92-12, § 1, 2-27-1992)  
Sec. 82-432. - Tax imposed. 
(a)  A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the following occupations or privileges: 
(1)  Persons engaged in the business of transmitting messages by means of electricity, at the rate of five (5) percent of the gross receipts from such business originating within the corporate limits of the city. 
(2)  Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling gas for use or consumption within the corporate limits of Calumet City, and not for resale, at the rate of five (5) percent of the gross receipts therefrom. 
(3)  Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling electricity for use or consumption within the corporate limits of Calumet City, and not for resale, at the rate of five (5) percent of the gross receipts therefrom. 
(b)  The tax imposed under this article shall not apply with respect to gross receipts pertaining to bills for the distribution, supply, furnishing or sale of electricity where the use or consumption of the electricity is subject to the tax imposed under article XIII. 
(Code 1980, § 26-163; Ord. No. 91-31, § 1, 8-8-1991; Ord. No. 98-38, § 1, 6-25-1998; Ord. No. 98-47, § 1, 7-23-1998; Ord. No. 98-39, § 1, 6-25-1998)  
Sec. 82-433. - Exclusions. 
No tax is imposed by this article with respect to any transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which such business may not, under the Constitution and statutes of the United States, be made subject to taxation by this state or any political subdivision thereof; nor shall any persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas, water or electricity, or engaged in the business of transmitting messages be subject to taxation under the provisions of this article for such transactions as are or may become subject to taxation under the provisions of the Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax Act authorized by Section 8-11-1 of the Illinois Municipal Code, as approved May 29, 1961, as amended. 
(Code 1980, § 26-164; Ord. No. 91-31, § 1, 8-8-1991)  
Sec. 82-434. - Tax to be additional. 
The tax shall be in addition to the payment of money, or value of products or services furnished to this municipality by the taxpayer as compensation for the use of its streets, alleys, or other public places, or installation and maintenance therein, thereon, or thereunder of poles, wires, pipes, or other equipment used in the operation of the taxpayer's business. 
(Code 1980, § 26-165; Ord. No. 91-31, § 1, 8-8-1991)  
Sec. 82-435. - Tax based on gross receipts. 
The tax provided for herein shall be based on the gross receipts, as herein defined, actually paid to the taxpayer for services billed on or after the first day of October 1991. 
(Code 1980, § 26-166; Ord. No. 91-31, § 1, 8-8-1991)  
Sec. 82-436. - Returns; payment. 
(a)  On or before the last day of November 1991, each taxpayer shall make a return to the city treasurer for the month of October 1991, stating: 
(1)  His name; 
(2)  His principal place of business; 
(3)  His gross receipts during those months upon the basis of which the tax is imposed; 
(4)  Amount of tax; 
(5)  Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate authorities may require. 
(b)  On or before the last day of every month thereafter, each taxpayer shall make a like return to the city treasurer for the monthly period. 
(c)  The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at the time of making such return, pay to the city treasurer, the amount of tax herein imposed; provided that in connection with any return the taxpayer may, if he so elects, report and pay an amount based upon his total billings of business subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made (exclusive of any amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of later payments based upon any differences between such billings and the taxable gross receipts. 
(Code 1980, § 26-167; Ord. No. 91-31, § 1, 8-8-1991)  
Sec. 82-437. - Credit for overpayment. 
(a)  If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due under the provisions of this article, whether as the result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax due, or to become due, under this article from the taxpayer who made the erroneous payment; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than three (3) years prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be so credited. 
(b)  If a taxpayer under this article is unable to use a credit authorized by this section solely because the tax imposed by this article has been replaced by the tax imposed under article XII, then the taxpayer may apply such credit against any tax due under article XII. 
(Code 1980, § 26-168; Ord. No. 91-31, § 1, 8-8-1991; Ord. No. 98-38, § 1, 6-25-1998)  
Sec. 82-438. - Limitation. 
No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this article shall be commenced more than three (3) years after the due date of such amount. 
(Code 1980, § 26-169; Ord. No. 91-31, § 1, 8-8-1991)  
Sec. 82-439. - Penalty. 
Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent return, or who willfully violates any other provision of this article is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) and in addition shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due. 
(Code 1980, § 26-170; Ord. No. 91-31, § 1, 8-8-1991)  
Sec. 82-440. - City exempted. 
The City of Calumet City, a municipal corporation, is declared exempt from the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1980, § 26-171; Ord. No. 91-31, § 1, 8-8-1991)  
Sec. 82-441. - Municipal natural gas use tax. 
(a)  Short title. The tax imposed by this section shall be known as the "Municipal Natural Gas Use Tax" and is imposed in addition to all other taxes imposed by the City of Calumet City, the State of Illinois, or any other municipal corporation or political subdivision thereof. 
(b)  Definitions. For the purpose of this section the following definitions shall apply: 
(1)  Person means any individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, municipal corporation or political subdivision of this state, or a receiver, trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court. 
(2)  Public utility means a public utility as defined in section 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act. 
(3)  Public Utilities Act means the Public Utilities Act, as amended, (220 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.). 
(4)  Retail purchaser means any person who purchases natural gas in a sale at retail. 
(5)  Sale at retail means any sale of natural gas by a retailer to a person for use or consumption, and not for resale. For this purpose, the term "retailer" means any person engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling natural gas. 
(c)  Tax. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided by this section a tax is imposed on the privilege of using or consuming natural gas in the city that is purchased in a sale at retail at the rate of five cents ($0.05) per therm. 
(2)  The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of the tax is on the retail purchaser, and nothing in this section shall be construed to impose a tax on the occupation of distributing, supplying, furnishing, selling or transporting natural gas. 
(3)  The retail purchaser shall pay the tax, measured by therms of natural gas delivered to the retail purchaser's premises, to the public utility designated to collect the tax pursuant to subsection (d) of this section on or before the payment due date of the public utility's bill first reflecting the tax, or directly to the city treasurer on or before the fifteenth day of the second month following the month in which the natural gas is delivered to the retail purchaser if no public utility has been designated to collect the tax pursuant to subsection (d) or if the natural gas is delivered by a person other than a public utility so designated. 
(4)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to impose a tax upon any person, business or activity which, under the constitutions of the United States or State of Illinois, may not be made the subject of taxation by the city. 
(5)  A person who purchases natural gas for resale and therefore does not pay the tax imposed by this section with respect to the use or consumption of the natural gas, but who later uses or consumes part or all of the natural gas, shall pay the tax directly to the city treasurer on or before the fifteenth day of the second month following the month in which the natural gas is used or consumed. 
(6)  The tax shall apply to natural gas for which the delivery to the retail purchaser is billed by a public utility on or after December 1, 2005. 
(7)  If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due under the provisions of this section whether as a result of mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be (i) credited against any tax due, or to become due, under this section from the taxpayer who made the erroneous payment or (ii) subject to a refund if no such tax is due or to become due; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than three (3) years prior to the filing of a claim therefore shall be so credited or refunded. 
(8)  No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this section shall be commenced more than three (3) years after the due date of such amount. 
(9)  To prevent multiple taxation, the use of natural gas in the city by a retail purchaser shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this section if the gross receipts from the sale at retail of such natural gas to the retail purchaser are properly subject to a tax imposed upon the seller of such natural gas pursuant to the city's municipal utility tax, as amended from time to time, see section 82-432, authorized pursuant to section 82-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-2). 
(d)  Collection of tax by public utility. The mayor and city finance director are each authorized to enter into a contract for collection of the tax imposed by this section with any public utility providing natural gas service in the city. The contract shall include and substantially conform with the following provisions: 
(1)  The public utility will collect the tax from retail purchasers as an independent contractor; 
(2)  The public utility will remit collected taxed to the city treasurer no more often than once each month; 
(3)  The public utility will be entitled to withhold from tax collections a service fee equal to three (3) percent of the amounts collected and timely remitted to the city treasurer; 
(4)  The public utility shall not be responsible to the city for any tax not actually collected from a retail purchaser; and 
(5)  Such additional terms as the parties may agree upon. 
(e)  Books and records. Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records, including original source documents and books of entry, denoting the activities or transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise to any tax liability or exemption under this section. All such books and records shall, at all times during business hours, be subject to and available for inspection by the city. 
(f)  Application of tax to large users. Effective with respect to the use or consumption of natural gas billed on or after January 1, 2007, the city shall enter into an agreement with any retail purchaser that demonstrates to the city that it was billed for use or consumption of over one million (1,000,000) therms of natural gas in the city in the prior calendar year, under which agreement the retail purchaser shall pay the tax directly to the city treasurer at a rate of five cents ($0.05) per therm for the first one million (1,000,000) therms of natural gas used or consumed in the city that is billed during the calendar year (and no tax imposed on each therm of natural gas used or consumed in the city beginning with the first therm of usage above one million (1,000,000) therms billed in a calendar year). The agreement shall contain such additional terms and conditions (including, without limitation, payment of estimated taxes) as are negotiated between the city and the retail purchaser. The mayor, or such person as is designated by the mayor, is authorized to enter into such an agreement with a retail purchaser. Unless otherwise waived by the public utility, at least forty-five (45) days prior to the effective date of any such agreement, the city shall provide notice to the public utility that the retail purchaser is exempt from collection of the tax by the public utility under the contract between the city and the public utility for collection of the tax, if such a contract is then in effect. To avoid double taxation, any retail purchaser that enters into an agreement with the city under this paragraph shall receive a credit from the city for any tax required to be paid by the retail purchaser under the agreement that was paid by the retail purchaser to a public utility. No public utility shall be required to provide natural gas usage information to the city related to any retail purchaser that enters into an agreement with the city under this paragraph. 
(Ord. No. 05-75, § 1(3-2-10), 10-31-2005; Ord. No. 06-86, § 1, 10-26-2006; Ord. No. 06-107, § 1, 12-28-2006)  
Secs. 82-442—82-470. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIII. - MUNICIPAL TAX ON ELECTRIC SERVICE 
 
Sec. 82-471. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, unless the context otherwise requires: 
City means the City of Calumet City. 
Department means the Department of Finance of the City of Calumet City. 
Exempt purchaser means the City of Calumet City. 
Person means any natural, individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, limited liability company, municipal corporation, the state or any of its political subdivisions, any state university created by statute, or a receiver, trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court. 
Person maintaining a place of business in this state means any person having or maintaining within this state, directly or by a subsidiary or other affiliate, an office, generation facility, distribution facility, transmission facility, sales office or other place of business, or any employee, agent, or other representative operating within this state under the authority of the person or its subsidiary or other affiliate, irrespective of whether such place of business or agent or other representative is located in this state permanently or temporarily, or whether such person, subsidiary or other affiliate is licensed or qualified to do business in this state. 
Purchase at retail means any acquisition of electricity by a purchaser for purposes of use or consumption, and not for resale, but shall not include the use of electricity by a public utility, as defined in section 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-2), directly in the generation, production, transmission, delivery or sale of electricity. 
Purchaser means any person who uses or consumes, within the corporate limits of the city, electricity acquired in a purchase at retail, other than an exempt purchaser. 
Tax collector means the person delivering electricity to the purchaser. 
Treasurer means the treasurer of the City of Calumet City. 
(Code 1980, § 26-172; Ord. No. 98-38, § 2, 6-25-1998)  
Sec. 82-472. - Tax imposed. 
(a)  Pursuant to section 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-2) and any and all other applicable authority, a tax is imposed upon the privilege of using or consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at retail and used or consumed within the corporate limits of the City at the following rates, calculated on a monthly basis for each purchaser: 
(1)  For the first 2,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month, 0.560 cents per kilowatt hour; 
(2)  For the next 48,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month, 0.368 cents per kilowatt hour; 
(3)  For the next 50,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month, 0.331 cents per kilowatt hour; 
(4)  For the next 400,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month, 0.321 cents per kilowatt hour; 
(5)  For the next 500,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month, 0.311 cents per kilowatt hour; 
(6)  For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month, 0.293 cents per kilowatt hour; 
(7)  For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month, 0.290 cents per kilowatt hour; 
(8)  For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month, 0.285 cents per kilowatt hour; 
(9)  For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month, 0.280 cents per kilowatt hour; and 
(10)  For all electricity used or consumed in excess of 20,000,000 kilowatt hours in a month, 0.275 cents per kilowatt hour. 
(b)  The tax is in addition to all taxes fees and other revenue measures imposed by the city, the state or any other political subdivision of the state. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the tax shall not be imposed if and to the extent that imposition or collection of the tax would violate the Constitution or statutes of the United States or the constitution of the state. 
(d)  The tax shall be imposed with respect to the use or consumption of electricity by residential customers beginning with the first bill issued on or after August 1, 1998, and with respect to the use or consumption of electricity by nonresidential customers beginning with the first bill issued to such customers for delivery services in accordance with Section 16-104 of the Public Utilities Act (220 ILCS 5/16-104), or the first bill issued to such customers on or after January 1, 2001, whichever issuance occurs sooner. 
(Code 1980, § 26-173; Ord. No. 98-38, § 2, 6-25-1998; Ord. No. 98-45, § 1, 7-23-1998)  
Sec. 82-473. - Collection of tax. 
(a)  Subject to the provisions of section 82-475 regarding the delivery of electricity to resellers, the tax imposed under this article shall be collected from purchasers by the person maintaining a place of business in this State who delivers electricity to such purchasers. This tax shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the person who delivers the electricity to the purchaser and is recoverable at the same time and in the same manner as the original charge for delivering the electricity. 
(b)  Any tax required to be collected by this article, and any tax in fact collected, shall constitute a debt owed to the city by the person delivering the electricity, provided that the person delivering electricity shall be allowed credit for such tax related to deliveries of electricity, the charges for which are written off as uncollectible, and provided further, that if such charges are thereafter collected, the delivering supplier shall be obligated to remit such tax. 
(c)  Persons delivering electricity shall collect the tax from the purchaser by adding such tax to the gross charge for delivering the electricity. Persons delivering electricity shall also be authorized to add to such gross charge an amount equal to three (3) percent of the tax they collect to reimburse them for their expenses incurred in keeping records, billing customers, preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data to the city upon request. For purposes of this article, any partial payment of a billed amount not specifically identified by the purchaser shall be deemed to be for the delivery of electricity. 
(Code 1980, § 26-174; Ord. No. 98-38, § 2, 6-25-1998)  
Sec. 82-474. - Tax remittance and return. 
(a)  Every tax collector shall, on a monthly basis, file a return in a form prescribed by the treasurer. The return and accompanying remittance shall be due on or before the last day of the month following the month during which the tax is collected or is required to be collected under section 82-473. 
(b)  If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax from the purchaser or is excused from collecting the tax under section 82-475, then the purchaser shall file a return in a form prescribed by the treasurer and pay the tax directly to the department on or before the last day of the month following the month during which the electricity is used or consumed. 
(Code 1980, § 26-175; Ord. No. 98-38, § 2, 6-25-1998)  
Sec. 82-475. - Resales. 
(a)  Electricity that is delivered to a person in the city shall be considered to be for use and consumption by that person unless the person receiving the electricity has an active resale number issued by the department and furnishes that number to the person who delivers the electricity, and certifies to that person that the sale is either entirely or partially nontaxable as a sale for resale. 
(b)  If a person who receives electricity in the city claims to be an authorized reseller of electricity, that person shall apply to the department for a resale number. The applicant shall state facts showing why it is not liable for the tax imposed by this article on any purchases of electricity and shall furnish such additional information as the department may reasonably require. 
(c)  Upon approval of the application, the department shall assign a resale number to the applicant and shall certify the number to the applicant. 
(d)  The department may cancel the resale number of any person if the person fails to pay any tax payable under this article for electricity used or consumed by the person, or if the number was obtained through misrepresentation, or is no longer necessary because the person has discontinued making resales. 
(e)  (1)  If a reseller has acquired electricity partly for use or consumption and partly for resale, the reseller shall pay the tax imposed by this article directly to the Department pursuant to subsection B of section 82-474 on the amount of electricity that the reseller uses or consumes, and shall collect the tax pursuant to section 82-473 and remit the tax pursuant to subsection a of section 82-474 on the amount of electricity delivered by the reseller to a purchaser. 
(2)  Any person who delivers electricity to a reseller having an active resale number and complying with all other conditions of the section shall be excused from collecting and remitting the tax on any portion of the electricity delivered to the reseller, provided that the person reports to the department the total amount of electricity delivered to the reseller, and such other information that the treasurer may reasonably require. 
(Code 1980, § 26-176; Ord. No. 98-38, § 2, 6-25-1998)  
Sec. 82-476. - Books and records. 
Every tax collector, and every taxpayer required to pay the tax imposed by this article, shall keep accurate books and records of its business or activity, including contemporaneous books and records denoting the transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise, to any tax liability under this article. The books and records shall be subject to and available for inspection at all times during business hours of the day. 
(Code 1980, § 26-177; Ord. No. 98-38, § 2, 6-25-1998)  
Sec. 82-477. - Credits and refunds. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, in order to permit sound fiscal planning and budgeting by the city, no person shall be entitled to a refund of, or credit for, a tax imposed under this article unless the person files a claim for refund or credit within one (1) year after the date on which the tax was paid or remitted to the department. 
(Code 1980, § 26-178; Ord. No. 98-38, § 2, 6-25-1998)  
Sec. 82-478. - Penalty. 
Any tax collector who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent return, or who willfully violates any other provision of this Article is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) and, in addition, shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due. 
(Code 1980, § 26-179; Ord. No. 98-38, § 2, 6-25-1998)  
Secs. 82-479—82-510. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIV. - HAZARDOUS WASTE TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 26. 
 
Sec. 82-511. - Tax imposed. 
A tax is imposed upon every cubic yard of off-site generated hazardous waste disposed of at the C.I.D. Landfill Facility within the city. 
(Code 1980, § 26-133; Ord. No. 87-27, § 1, 12-21-1987)  
Sec. 82-512. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, when any of the following words or terms are used herein, they shall have the meaning or construction ascribed to them in this section: 
City means the City of Calumet City, Illinois. 
Department means the department of the city clerk of the city. 
Hazardous waste as determined from time to time by the state and federal environmental protection agencies and applicable state and federal laws. 
Person means any natural individual, firm, society, foundation, institution, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, public or private corporation, or a receiver, executor, trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court. 
Special waste as determined from time to time by the state and federal environmental protection agencies and applicable state and federal laws, excepting pollution control waste and hazardous waste. 
(Code 1980, § 26-134; Ord. No. 87-27, § 1, 12-21-1987; Ord. No. 99-69, § 1, 12-23-1999)  
Sec. 82-513. - Hazardous waste tax, amount. 
(a)  This tax, which is hereby levied and imposed upon the disposition of all offsite generated hazardous waste disposed of at the C.I.D. Landfill Facility within the city, shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00) per cubic yard. 
(b)  The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of said tax is to be borne by the person who disposes of said offsite generated hazardous waste. 
(c)  The tax hereby levied shall be in addition to any and all other taxes and charges. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the licensee of the C.I.D. Landfill Facility to secure said tax from the persons who dispose of the offsite generated hazardous waste. Each person required to collect the tax levied by this article shall secure said tax at the time of disposal of the offsite generated hazardous waste at the landfill facility. 
(Code 1980, § 26-135; Ord. No. 87-27, § 1, 12-21-1987; Ord. No. 89-9, § 1, 2-9-1989; Ord. No. 94-4, § 1, 2-10-1994)  
Sec. 82-514 - Special waste tax, amount. 
(a)  There is hereby levied and imposed upon the disposition of all offsite generated special waste disposed of at the C.I.D. Landfill Facility within the city a tax as follows: 
(1)  If more than one hundred fifty thousand (150,000) cubic yards of nonhazardous solid waste is permanently disposed of at the C.I.D. Landfill Facility between February 1st and January 31st of the following year, the owner, operator or licensee of the C.I.D. Landfill Facility shall pay a fee of sixty cents ($.60) per cubic yard or one dollar twenty-seven cents ($1.27) per ton if the owner, operator or licensee weighs the quantity of the solid waste permanently disposed of with a device for which certification has been obtained under the Illinois Weights and Measures Act (225 ILCS sec. 470/1 et seq.). 
(2)  If more than one hundred thousand (100,000) cubic yards, but not more than one hundred fifty thousand (150,000) cubic yards, of nonhazardous solid waste is permanently disposed of at the C.I.D. Landfill Facility between February 1 and January 31 of the following year, the owner, operator, or licensee of the C.I.D. Landfill Facility shall pay a fee of thirty-three thousand three hundred fifty dollars ($33,350.00). 
(3)  If more than fifty thousand (50,000) cubic yards, but not more than one hundred thousand (100,000) cubic yards, of nonhazardous solid waste is permanently disposed of at the C.I.D. Landfill Facility between February 1st and January 31st of the following year, the owner, operator, or licensee of the C.I.D. Landfill Facility shall pay a fee of fifteen thousand five hundred dollars ($15,500.00). 
(4)  If more than ten thousand (10,000) cubic yards, but not more than fifty thousand (50,000) cubic yards, of nonhazardous solid waste is permanently disposed of at the C.I.D. Landfill Facility between February 1 and January 31 of the following year, the owner, operator, or licensee of the C.I.D. Landfill Facility shall pay a fee of four thousand six hundred fifty dollars ($4,650.00). 
(5)  If not more than ten thousand (10,000) cubic yards of nonhazardous solid waste is permanently disposed of at the C.I.D. Landfill Facility between February 1 and January 31 of the following year, the owner, operator, or licensee of the C.I.D. Landfill Facility shall pay a fee of six hundred fifty dollars ($650.00). 
(b)  The owner, operator or licensee of the C.I.D. Landfill Facility shall pay the special waste tax as set forth above. 
(c)  The tax hereby levied shall be in addition to any and all other taxes and charges upon waste. 
(d)  The tax imposed by this section shall become effective commencing February 1, 2000, and payment of the tax shall be tendered to the city on or before March 1, 2001, and each March 1 thereafter. 
(Code 1980, § 26-135.1; Ord. No. 99-69, § 2, 12-23-1999; Ord. No. 00-19, §§ 1, 2, 3-23-2000)  
Sec. 82-515. - Books and records. 
The city collector, or any person certified by him/her as his/her deputy or representative, may enter the premises of said C.I.D. Landfill Facility for inspection and examination of books and records in order to effectuate the proper administration of this article and to assure the enforcement of the collection of the tax imposed. It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, hinder or interfere with the city collector or his/her duly authorized deputy or representative in the discharge of his/her duties in the performance of his article. It shall be the duty of said owner to keep accurate and complete books and records to which the city collector, or his/her deputy or representative (authorized by him/her) shall at all times have full access, which records shall include a daily sheet showing the user and the number of cubic yards per deposit. 
(Code 1980, § 26-136; Ord. No. 87-27, § 1, 12-21-1987)  
Sec. 82-516. - Transmittal of tax revenue. 
The licensee of the C.I.D. Landfill Facility shall file tax returns showing tax receipts received during each monthly period upon forms prescribed by the city collector. At the time of filing said tax return, the licensee shall pay to the city collector all taxes due for the period to which the tax return applies. 
(Code 1980, § 26-137; Ord. No. 87-27, § 1, 12-21-1987)  
Sec. 82-517. - Collection. 
Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax as herein provided, the city prosecutor shall, upon request of the city collector, bring or cause to be brought an action to enforce the payment of said tax on behalf of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1980, § 26-138; Ord. No. 87-27, § 1, 12-21-1987)  
Sec. 82-518. - Proceeds of tax and fines. 
All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under this article, including penalties, shall be paid to the treasury of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 26-139; Ord. No. 87-27, § 1, 12-21-1987)  
Sec. 82-519. - Fine for violation. 
In addition to the remaining provisions of this article, any person found guilty in a court of competent jurisdiction of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with any provision of this article, upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. 
(Code 1980, § 26-140; Ord. No. 87-27, § 1, 12-21-1987)  
Sec. 82-520. - When tax effective. 
The tax imposed by this article shall become effective and be collected commencing March 1, 1994. 
(Code 1980, § 26-141; Ord. No. 87-27, § 1, 12-21-1987; Ord. No. 89-9, § 2, 2-9-1989; Ord. No. 94-4, § 1, 2-10-1994)  
ARTICLE XV. - VEHICLE FUEL TAX 
 
Sec. 82-521. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, when any of the following words or terms are used herein, they shall have the meaning or construction ascribed to them in this section: 
City means the City of Calumet City, Illinois. 
Calumet City's Vehicle Fuel Tax shall be used as a short citation to refer to this article. 
Distributor or vehicle fuel distributor means any person who produces, refines, blends, compounds or manufactures vehicle fuel in the city, or transports or has transported vehicle fuel to any location in the city, or receives in the city vehicle fuel on which the city's vehicle fuel tax has not been paid; or sells vehicle fuel to a retail dealer for resale in the city. 
Distributor shall include any person who transports vehicle fuel into the city or receives vehicle fuel in the city for his own use and consumption, and not for sale or resale. 
Person means any individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, corporation, joint venture, joint stock company, receiver, trustee, conservator, legal representative, or other legally recognized entity. 
Retail dealer or retail vehicle fuel dealer means any person who is engaged in the business of selling vehicle fuel in the city to a purchaser for the purchaser's use or consumption, and not for resale in any form. 
Sale, resale, or purchase means any transfer of ownership or title or both, any exchange or any barter, whether conditional or otherwise, in any manner or by any means whatsoever for consideration. 
Sale at retail means any sale to a person for that person's use or consumption and not for resale to another. 
Tax means city's vehicle fuel tax. 
Use means the exercise of any right to or power over vehicle fuel incident to the ownership thereat including, but not limited to, the receipt of vehicle fuel by any person into a fuel supply tank of a vehicle. 
Vehicle means any machine or device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a rail, street, road, highway or otherwise upon land, in or upon water, or through the air. Vehicle includes without limitation automobiles, trucks, buses, trains, motorcycles, boats, airplanes, and helicopters. 
Vehicle fuel means any volatile and inflammable liquid or gas produced, blended or compounded for the purpose of or which is suitable for operating a vehicle, or which is used in propelling a vehicle. Vehicle fuel includes without limitation gasoline, gasohol, diesel oil, motor benzol, motor benzene, propane gas fuel, kerosene and "special fuel" as defined in the Illinois Motor Fuel Tax Law. 
(Ord. No. 18-59, § 2, 6-14-2018)  
Sec. 82-522. - Tax imposed. 
A tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege of purchasing or using, in the City of Calumet City, vehicle fuel purchased in a sale at retail. The tax shall be at a rate of five cents ($.05) per gallon of vehicle fuel. The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of the tax shall be upon the purchaser or user of the vehicle fuel, and nothing in this article shall be construed to impose a tax upon the occupation of selling or distributing vehicle fuel. It shall be a violation of this article for any distributor or retail dealer to fail to add this tax to the retail price of vehicle fuel or to absorb the tax. The tax shall be in addition to any and all other taxes. 
(Ord. No. 18-59, § 2, 6-14-2018)  
Sec. 82-523. - Payment on retail purchase. 
Use in the city shall be deemed to occur only at the place in the city where the vehicle fuel is transferred into the vehicle by which it is to be consumed. To the extent that a person has paid the tax imposed herein on the retail purchase of vehicle fuel, he shall be exempt from the payment of and liability for said tax on the use of such fuel. 
(Ord. No. 18-59, § 2, 6-14-2018)  
Sec. 82-524. - Collection. 
The city's vehicle fuel tax shall be collected by each vehicle fuel distributor who sells such fuel to a retail vehicle fuel dealer doing business in the city. Any distributor who shall pay the tax to the city shall collect the tax from any retail dealer to whom the distributor sells vehicle fuel. The retail dealer shall in turn then collect the tax from the purchaser of the vehicle fuel. Any distributor who sells vehicle fuel directly to a purchaser or user, for delivery in the city, and not for resale, shall collect the tax from the purchaser or user. 
If any retail vehicle fuel dealer receives vehicle fuel upon which the city's vehicle fuel tax has not been collected by the distributor, the retail dealer shall remit such tax directly to the city clerk or comptroller, as specified by ordinance, by the last day of the month following the month in which he received such vehicle fuel, and shall collect such tax from his purchasers. 
If any purchaser or user receives vehicle fuel upon which the city's vehicle fuel tax has not been collected by the distributor or retail dealer, such purchaser or user shall pay the tax directly to the city by the last day of the month following the month in which such purchaser or user made the taxable purchase or use of the vehicle fuel. 
Any tax remittance required to be made directly to the city shall be made to the city clerk or comptroller, as specified by ordinance, and shall be accompanied by a remittance form prescribed by the city clerk, or comptroller, as specified by ordinance. 
Any person who collects the city's vehicle fuel tax shall do so as a trustee for and on account of the city. 
(Ord. No. 18-59, § 2, 6-14-2018)  
Sec. 82-525. - Registration, return, and filing. 
Every vehicle fuel distributor doing business on june 1, 2018, shall register with the city clerk or comptroller, as specified by ordinance, by June 30, 2018. Every person becoming a distributor after that date shall register with the city clerk, or comptroller, as required by ordinance, within thirty (30) days after the commencement of such business. Every distributor shall file each month with the city clerk, or comptroller, as required by ordinance, a remittance return, containing a report of his sales of vehicle fuel to retail dealers or users in the city occurring in the prior month. The return shall be in a form prescribed and furnished by the city clerk, or comptroller, as required by ordinance. If mailed, the return must be postmarked on or before the last day of the month following the month for which the report is due. Each such return shall be accompanied by a remittance of the appropriate amount of tax applicable to the sales reported. Payment shall be made to the city clerk or comptroller, as required by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 18-59, § 2, 6-14-2018)  
Sec. 82-526. - Inventory report. 
By July 1, 2018, every retail vehicle fuel dealer shall file with the city clerk or comptroller, as prescribed by ordinance, on forms supplied by the city clerk or comptroller, as prescribed by ordinance, for that purpose, an inventory of all vehicle fuel in the retail dealer's possession on June 15, 2018 at 12:01 am. The owner or chief executive officer of the retail dealer shall sign the inventory report and attest under oath to its accuracy. With the inventory report, the retail dealer shall pay to the city the city's vehicle fuel tax due on the sale of all vehicle fuel in the retail dealer's possession on June 15, 2018 at 12:01 a.m. and for which such tax has not been collected on behalf of the city by a vehicle fuel distributor. 
(Ord. No. 18-59, § 2, 6-14-2018)  
Sec. 82-527. - Commission on tax paid when due. 
A distributor or retail dealer remitting the tax to the city shall be entitled to a commission of one (1) percent of the tax remitted, to compensate him for the cost of collection, filing returns, and supplying information to the city clerk or comptroller, as prescribed by ordinance, but in no event shall any commission be allowed on any tax not remitted when due. 
(Ord. No. 18-59, § 2, 6-14-2018)  
Sec. 82-528. - Failure to pay or file—Penalties and interest. 
Failure to pay or remit the tax or to file the remittance return required by this article shall be subject to the following penalties and interest: 
(a)  Any tax not paid or remitted when due shall bear interest at the rate of two (2) percent per month, or fraction thereof, until the tax is paid or remitted; 
(b)  In addition to any interest charged, any person who fails to pay or to remit the tax when due shall be subject to a late penalty of ten (10) percent of such tax; 
(c)  In addition to any interest or penalty charged above, any person who fails to file a remittance return when due shall be subject to a late filing penalty of ten (10) percent of the total tax liability due for the reporting period. 
Where the failure to pay or to remit the tax or to file the remittance return, in a timely manner is due to reasonable cause beyond the control of the person charged with filing and paying the tax, the penalties described in subsections (b) and (c) may be waived by the city clerk or comptroller, as prescribed by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 18-59, § 2, 6-14-2018)  
Sec. 82-529. - Recordkeeping. 
Every distributor and every retail dealer required to collect and remit the tax imposed herein shall keep accurate and complete books and records of his business of selling vehicle fuel, including the maintenance of all invoices and other source documents. Every purchaser or user shall keep accurate and complete books and records of his purchases and uses of vehicle fuel in the city, including the maintenance of all invoices and other source documents. All books and records shall be subject to inspection by the city clerk or comptroller, as prescribed by ordinance, or duly authorized agents or employees thereof, at all times during regular business hours. 
(Ord. No. 18-59, § 2, 6-14-2018)  
Sec. 82-530. - Sales and uses presumed taxable—Burden of proof. 
It shall be presumed that all sales and uses of vehicle fuel in the city are subject to tax under this article until the contrary is established. The burden of proving that a sale or use is not taxable hereunder shall be upon the distributor, retail dealer, purchaser or user so claiming. 
(Ord. No. 18-59, § 2, 6-14-2018)  
Sec. 82-531. - Exemptions. 
The tax imposed by this article shall not apply to the following sales or uses of vehicle fuel: 
(a)  Sale by a distributor to another distributor holding a valid registration certificate; 
(b)  Sale by a distributor to a retailer of vehicle fuel whose place of business is outside the city; 
(c)  Sale or use for purposes other than for propulsion or operation of a vehicle; 
(d)  Sale to or use by any "transportation agency" as defined in the Regional Transportation Authority Act, which is operated by, receiving a grant from or has a service agreement with the regional transportation authority or any of its service boards; 
(e)  Sale or use to the extent the tax imposed by this article would violate the Illinois or United States Constitution; 
(f)  Sale to or use by the federal government or any state or local governmental body; 
(g)  Sale to or use by any air common carrier, certified by the carrier to be used for consumption, shipment or storage in the conduct of its business as an air common carrier, for a flight destined for a destination outside the United States. 
(Ord. No. 18-59, § 2, 6-14-2018)  
Chapter 86 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses and permits and miscellaneous business regulations, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78; utilities, ch. 94; zoning, app. B. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 86-1—86-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - 9-1-1 EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM SURCHARGE 
 
Sec. 86-31. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply: 
Network connection means the number of voice-grade communication channels directly between a subscriber and a telecommunications carrier's public switched network without the intervention of any other telecommunications carriers switched network which would be required to carry the subscriber's interpremises traffic. 
Service address means the location of the subscriber's telecommunications facilities accessing the network connection or connection(s) that are subject to the surcharge. If this is not a defined location, service address shall mean the location of a subscriber's primary use of the network connection as defined by telephone number, authorization code or location in Illinois where bills are sent. 
Telecommunications carrier means any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, municipal corporation or political subdivision of this state; or a receiver, trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court engaged in the business of transmitting messages by means of electricity. 
(Code 1980, § 27.1-31; Ord. No. 90-10, § 5, 3-8-1990)  
Sec. 86-32. - Imposed. 
A surcharge is hereby imposed, subject to the provisions of section 86-33, upon the monthly billed subscribers of telecommunications carriers residing within the city for the funding of a 9-1-1 emergency telephone system. 
(Code 1980, § 27.1-32; Ord. No. 90-10, § 1, 3-8-1990)  
Sec. 86-33. - Referendum—Placed. 
A referendum was placed by the city clerk on the November 7, 1989, ballot for all legal voters residing in the city to vote upon the following question: 
"Shall the City of Calumet City impose a surcharge of up to ninety-five cents ($0.95) per month per network connection, which surcharge will be added to the monthly bill you receive for telephone or telecommunications charges for the purpose of installing an enhanced 9-1-1 emergency telephone system?"_______ YES _______ NO 
(Code 1980, § 27.1-33; Ord. No. 90-10, § 2, 3-8-1990) 
Editor's note— The preamble to Ord. No. 90-10 stated that "the result of said referendum reflected a majority voted in favor of the question submitted."  
Secs. 86-34—86-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE 
 
Sec. 86-71. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
Gross charges means the amount paid to the telecommunications retailer for the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications within the city, and for all services rendered in connection therewith, valued in money whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services, and property of every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the materials used, labor or service costs, or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended, the amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid. "Gross charges" for private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel point within the city, charges for the channel mileage between each channel point within the city, and charges for that portion of the interstate interoffice channel provided within the city. However, the term "gross charges" shall not include: 
(1)  Any amounts added to the purchaser's bill because of a charge made under: 
a.  the fee imposed by this section; 
b.  Additional charges added to a purchaser's bill under 220 ILCS 59-221 or 220 ILCS 5/9-222; 
c.  The tax imposed by the Telecommunications Excise Tax Act (35 ILCS 630/1 et seq.); 
d.  911 surcharges; or 
e.  The tax imposed by section 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code; 
(2)  Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside the city; 
(3)  Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of data or information or subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes, but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing equipment, tabulating equipment, or accounting equipment and also includes the usage of computers under a time-sharing agreement; 
(4)  Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein charges are disaggregated and separately identified from other charges; 
(5)  Charges to business enterprises certified under 220 ILCS 6/9-222.1 to the extent of such exemption and during the period of time specified by the city; 
(6)  Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly-owned subsidiaries or between the wholly-owned subsidiaries, and only to the extent that the charges between the parent corporation and wholly-owned subsidiaries or between wholly-owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the corporations and not the generation of profit other than a regulatory-required profit for the corporation rendering such services; 
(7)  Bad debts ("bad debt" means any portion of a debt that is related to a sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt deemed to be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that portion during the reporting period in which the payment is made); 
(8)  Charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated telecommunications devices; or 
(9)  Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided to the city. 
Public right-of-way means any municipal street, alley, water or public right-of-way dedicated or commonly used for utility purposes, including utility easements wherein the city has acquired the right and authority to locate or permit the location of utilities consistent with telecommunications facilities. The term "public right-of-way" shall not include any real or personal city property that is not specifically described in the previous sentence and shall not include city buildings and other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the public right-of-way. 
Retailer maintaining a place of business in this state or any like term means and includes any retailer having or maintaining within the State of Illinois, directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities, transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse, or other place of business, or any agent or other representative operating within this state under the authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of business or agent or other representative is located here permanently or temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in this state. 
Sale of telecommunications at retail means the transmitting, supplying or furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its wholly-owned subsidiaries or between wholly-owned subsidiaries, when the gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not for sale. 
Service address means the location of telecommunications equipment from which telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications services are received. If this is not a defined location, as in the case of wireless telecommunications, paging systems, maritime systems, air-to-ground systems, and the like, "service address" shall mean the location of the customer's primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by the location in Illinois where bills are sent. 
Telecommunications includes, but is not limited to, messages or information transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange services, private line services, specialized mobile radio services, or any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar facilities. Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the term "telecommunications" shall also include wireless telecommunications as hereinafter defined. The term "telecommunications" shall not include: 
(1)  Value added services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission. 
(2)  Purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by him to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the end-to-end communications. Retailer access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of intercompany facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision and used as a component of, or integrated into, end-to-end telecommunications service shall not be included in gross charges as sales for resale. 
(3)  The provision of cable services through a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C. sections 521 and following) as now or hereafter amended or cable or other programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the city through an open video system as defined in the Rules of the Federal Communications Commission (47 C.D.F. 76.1550 and following) as now or hereafter amended. 
Telecommunications provider means: 
(1)  Any telecommunications retailer; and 
(2)  Any person that is not a telecommunications retailer that installs, owns, operates or controls equipment in the public right-of-way that is used or designed to be used to transmit telecommunications in any form. 
Telecommunications retailer or retailer or carrier means and includes every person engaged in the business of making sales of telecommunications at retail as defined in this section. The city may, in its discretion, upon application, authorize the collection of the fee hereby imposed by any retailer not maintaining a place of business within this state, who, to the satisfaction of the city, furnishes adequate security to ensure collection and payment of the fee. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer to pay the fee upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications in the same manner and subject to the same requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of business within the city. 
Wireless telecommunications includes cellular mobile telephone services, personal wireless services as defined in section 704(C) of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (Public Law No. 104-104) 42 U.S.C. section 332(c)(7), as now or hereafter amended, including all commercial mobile radio services, and paging services. 
(Code 1980, § 27.1-44; Ord. No. 97-63, § 2, 10-28-1997)  
Sec. 86-72. - Registration of telecommunications providers. 
(a)  Every telecommunications provider as defined by this article shall register with the city within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this article or becoming a telecommunications provider, whichever is later, on a form to be provided by the city; provided, however, that any telecommunications retailer that has filed a return pursuant to section 86-74(c), of this article shall be deemed to have registered in accordance with this section. 
(b)  Every telecommunications provider who has registered with the city pursuant to section 86-72(a) has an affirmative duty to submit an amended registration form or current return as required by section 86-74(c), as the case may be, to the city within thirty (30) days from the date of the occurrence of any changes in the information provided by the telecommunications provider in the registration form or most recent return on file with the city. 
(Code 1980, § 27.1-45; Ord. No. 97-63, § 2, 10-28-1997)  
Sec. 86-73. - Fee required. 
(a)  A city telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee is hereby imposed upon all telecommunications retailers in the amount of one (1) percent of all gross charges charged by the telecommunications retailer to service addresses within the city for telecommunications originating or received in the city. 
(b)  Upon the effective date of the infrastructure maintenance fee authorized in this article, the city infrastructure maintenance fee authorized hereunder shall be the only fee or compensation for the use of all public rights-of-way within the city by telecommunications retailers. Imposition of the infrastructure maintenance fee provided under this article does not, however, serve as a limitation on the levying of any taxes or imposition of any fees otherwise authorized by law. 
(c)  The city telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee authorized by this section shall be collected, enforced, and administered as set forth in section 86-74 of this article. 
(Code 1980, § 27.1-46; Ord. No. 97-63, § 2, 10-28-1997)  
Sec. 86-74. - Collection, enforcement and administration. 
(a)  A telecommunications retailer shall charge to and collect from each customer an additional charge in an amount equal to the city infrastructure maintenance fee attributable to that customer's service address. 
(b)  Unless otherwise approved by the city council, the infrastructure maintenance fee shall be remitted by the telecommunications retailer to the city not later than the last day of the month subsequent to the month in which a bill is issued to the customer; provided, however, that the telecommunications retailer may retain an amount not to exceed two (2) percent of the city infrastructure maintenance fee collected by it to reimburse itself for expenses incurred in accounting for and remitting the fee. 
(c)  Remittance of the municipal infrastructure fee to the city shall be accompanied by a return, in a form to be prescribed by the city, which shall contain such information as the city may reasonably require. 
(d)  Any infrastructure maintenance fee required to be collected pursuant to this article and any such infrastructure maintenance fee collected by such telecommunications retailer shall constitute a debt owed by the telecommunications retailer to the city. The charge imposed under section 86-74(a) by the telecommunications retailer pursuant to this article shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the telecommunications retailer who provides such services until paid and, if unpaid, is recoverable at law in the same manner as the original charges for such services. 
(e)  If it shall appear that an amount of infrastructure maintenance fee has been paid that was not due under the provisions of this article, whether as a result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any infrastructure maintenance fee due, or to become due, under this article, from the telecommunications retailer who made the erroneous payment; provided, however, the city may request, and telecommunications retailer shall provide, written substantiation for such credit. However, no claim for such credit may be made more than three (3) years after the date of the erroneous payment unless: 
(1)  The credit is used only to offset a claim of underpayment made by the city within the applicable statutory period of limitations; and 
(2)  The credit derives from an overpayment made by the same telecommunications retailer during the applicable statutory period of limitations. 
(f)  Amounts paid under this article by telecommunications retailer shall not be included in the tax base under any of the following acts as described immediately below: 
(1)  "Gross charges" for purposes of the Telecommunications Excise Tax Act (35 ILCS 630/1 et seq.); 
(2)  "Gross receipts" for purposes of the municipal utility tax as prescribed in 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2; 
(3)  "Gross charges" for purposes of the municipal telecommunications tax; 
(4)  "Gross revenue" for purposes of the tax on annual gross revenue of public utilities prescribed in 220 ILCS 5/2-202. 
(g)  The city shall have the right, in its discretion, to audit the books and records of all telecommunications retailers subject to this article to determine whether the telecommunications retailer has properly accounted to the city for the city infrastructure maintenance fee. Any underpayment of the amount of the city infrastructure maintenance fee due to the city by the telecommunications retailer shall be paid to the city plus five (5) percent of the total amount of the underpayment determined in an audit, plus any costs incurred by the city in conducting the audit, in an amount not to exceed five (5) percent of the total amount of the underpayment determined in an audit. Said sum shall be paid to the city within twenty-one (21) days after the date of issuance of an invoice for same. 
(h)  The city manager/administrator, or his or her designee, may promulgate such further or additional regulations concerning the administration and enforcement of this article, consistent with its provisions, as may be required from time to time and shall notify all telecommunications retailers that are registered pursuant to section 86-72 of this article of such regulations. 
(Code 1980, § 27.1-47; Ord. No. 97-63, § 2, 10-28-1997)  
Sec. 86-75. - Compliance with other laws. 
Nothing in this article shall excuse any person or entity from obligations imposed under any law, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Generally applicable taxes; and 
(2)  Standards for construction on, over, under, or within, use of or repair of the public rights-of-way, including standards relating to free-standing towers and other structures upon the public rights-of-way, as provided; and 
(3)  Any liability imposed or the failure to comply with such generally applicable taxes or standards governing construction on, over, under or within, use of or repair of the public rights-of-way. 
(4)  Compliance with any ordinance or provision of the code concerning uses or structures not located on, over, or within the right-of-way. 
(Code 1980, § 27.1-48; Ord. No. 97-63, § 2, 10-28-1997)  
Sec. 86-76. - Existing franchises and licenses. 
Any franchise, license or similar agreement between telecommunications retailers and the city entered into before the effective date of this article regarding the use of public rights-of-way shall remain valid according to and for their stated terms except for any fees, charges or other compensation to the extent waived. 
(Code 1980, § 27.1-49; Ord. No. 97-63, § 2, 10-28-1997)  
Sec. 86-77. - Penalties. 
Any telecommunications provider who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to fine in accordance with the general penalty provisions of the City Municipal Code. 
(Code 1980, § 27.1-50; Ord. No. 97-63, § 2, 10-28-1997)  
Sec. 86-78. - Enforcement. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed as limiting any additional or further remedies that the city may have for enforcement of this article. 
(Code 1980, § 27.1-51; Ord. No. 97-63, § 2, 10-28-1997)  
Secs. 86-79—86-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PUBLIC TELEPHONES 
 
Sec. 86-111. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall mean as indicated below: 
Pay telephone means any publicly accessible self-service or coin or credit card operated telephone. 
Person means any natural person or his legal representative, partnership, corporation, company, trust, business entity or association, and any agent, employee, partner, officer, director, stockholder, associate or trustee thereof. 
Public way includes any public street or alley from property line to property line, any city owned parks, any and all sidewalks, and all parkways dedicated to public use. For purposes of this section, a pay telephone will be considered in the public way if any portion of the telephone or its enclosure is situated on or projects or hangs over the public way, or the telephone is so situated that it can be used by a person standing on the public way. 
(Code 1980, § 25-60; Ord. No. 97-67, § 1, 11-13-1997; Ord. No. 98-63, § 1, 10-8-1998)  
Sec. 86-112. - Placement of pay telephones in the public way. 
(a)  The city council shall have the authority to enter into contracts that grant to one (1) or more persons, subject to the conditions set forth in the contract and this article, the privilege of installing and maintaining pay telephones in the public way. The city council may also contract for the removal of telephones illegally installed or maintained in the public way. Any such contract may be approved as to form and legality by the city attorney. In the administration of this article, the city council shall consult and cooperate with all appropriate city departments. The city council may at any time cause to be advertised a request for proposals relating to such contracts. 
(b)  Such contracts and the method of awarding such contracts shall, to the greatest extent possible, be designed to: 
(1)  Discourage illegal drug sales and other criminal activities that are sometimes associated with and facilitated by pay telephones in the public way; 
(2)  Reduce the disturbance that pay telephones may tend to promote in residential areas; 
(3)  Reduce visual clutter in the public way; 
(4)  Reduce the unnecessary obstruction of pedestrian and vehicular traffic; 
(5)  Ensure the availability of pay telephones when they are needed for lawful purposes; and 
(6)  Provide adequate access to pay telephones by disabled persons. 
In addition to those considerations, the contracts may generate revenue for the city. 
(c)  Any contract entered into pursuant to this section shall provide for the privileges granted by the contract to be subject to the city council's authority to order the removal of a pay telephone pursuant to subsection (e) of this section. Any such contract shall also permit the city council to require pay telephones in the public way to have special features designed to reduce criminal activity. In addition, the contract must provide that the Alderman must be notified of the location of any pay telephone that is to be situated in the public way in his or her ward pursuant to this section. No person shall be awarded a contract under this section unless the person has a valid certificate of service authority to provide pay telephone service granted by the Illinois Commerce Commission where required by law. 
(d)  No person may install a pay telephone in the public way on or after the effective date of this article unless the installation is made pursuant to a contract entered into under this section. Beginning December 14, 1997, no pay telephone may remain in the public way other than pursuant to a contract entered into under this section. Any telephone installed or maintained in violation of this paragraph shall be subject to immediate removal at the owner's expense by the city. However, in the case of a telephone deemed to be in the public way as the result of this article, no such pay telephone shall be removed until at least seven (7) days after a representative of the city has affixed a notice on the telephone stating that it will be subject to removal within seven (7) days. A list of the locations at which such pay telephones are scheduled to be removed shall be made available for public inspection at least seven (7) days prior to removal of the telephones on the list. 
(e)  No later than thirty (30) days after the effective date of this section, every person who owns or maintains a pay telephone in the public way must file with the city clerk a list of the locations of all such telephones owned or maintained by that person. Any pay telephone in the public way that does not appear on such a list shall be subject to immediate removal at the owner's expense by the city beginning thirty-one (31) days after effective date of this section. 
(f)  The city council may, at any time after December 14, 1997, or at any time after the effective date of this section if pursuant to a contract under this section, by ordinance, order the removal of a particular pay telephone that is in the public way. Such an ordinance must identify the location of the telephone to be removed. Any pay telephone that is not removed within fourteen (14) days after the adoption of an ordinance ordering its removal shall be subject to immediate removal by the city at the owner's expense. 
(g)  Any pay telephone removed by the city pursuant to this section may be reclaimed by its owner within thirty (30) days after its removal. The owner must reimburse the city for the removal and storage cost before any such telephone may be reclaimed. Such cost shall also include the costs of removing any installation ancillary to the pay telephone, and the cost of restoring the public way to its original condition. Any telephone not so reclaimed within thirty (30) days may be disposed of as unclaimed property, and any coins remaining in a removed telephone shall become the property of the city and may be used to offset the cost of removal. Any contract for the removal of one (1) or more pay telephones may include a provision, in a form subject to the approval of the city attorney, for indemnification of the contractor by the city against claims and liabilities arising out of performance of the contract. 
(h)  Any person who installs or maintains a pay telephone in violation of this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. Each day that the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(i)  The city council shall have the authority to promulgate rules and regulations to implement this section. 
(j)  No provision of this section or any contract issued pursuant to this section may be applied to any transaction in interstate commerce to the extent to which such business may not, under the Constitution and statutes of the United States, be made the subject of regulation by the city. 
(Code 1980, § 25-61; Ord. No. 97-67, § 1, 11-13-1997; Ord. No. 98-63, § 1, 10-8-1998)  
Sec. 86-113. - Outdoor pay telephones prohibited. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall install or maintain any telephone booth, mounted telephone, or any other form of pay telephone or telecommunications device, not enclosed within the interior of a building, unless it is located on the public way and in accordance with section 86-112. Any outdoor pay telephone located on property other than the public way in violation of this section shall be removed by its owner, any person with control over the pay telephone, or the owner of real estate on which the pay telephone is located, within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this section, providing, however, that, if within said thirty (30) day period, the owner, person with control over the pay telephone, or the owner of real estate on which the pay telephone is located applies for a revocable certificate of registration as provided for in subsection (c) of this section, such removal shall be abated until a decision to issue or deny a certificate is made. 
(b)  Any person who violates any provision of subsection (a) shall be subject to a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the city council may issue a revocable certificate of registration jointly authorizing the owner of real property on which a telephone is to be located and a telecommunications company that will operate the telephone, subject to the conditions of this section, the installation or maintenance of a telephone booth, mounted telephone, or any other form of pay telephone or telecommunications device, not enclosed within the interior of a building and not on the public way, but permitted by this subsection (c). The certificate of registration shall create no legal rights or entitlements, and shall not be deemed to create any type of vested interest. The application for the certificate of registration shall designate a registered agent for receiving notices under this section. Applications shall be maintained by the City as confidential business records. The certification of registration, unless denied, shall be issued no later than thirty (30) days after a complete application for an eligible location is received. The city council shall issue a certificate of registration pursuant to this section for no more than two (2) telephones per business. No certificate of registration shall authorize a telephone situated 
(1)  On vacant property; 
(2)  On property on which there is situated an abandoned building; 
(3)  On property that is kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place that primarily sells alcoholic liquor at retail; or 
(4)  On property on which there is a building that is used primarily for residential purposes. 
Certificates of registration shall be issued for particular locations identified in the application therefor. The city council by rule may establish and impose an application fee or an annual registration fee or both for certificates of registration issued under this section. A copy of each application for a certificate of registration shall be mailed to the alderman in whose ward the proposed telephone is to be located within five (5) days after the application is received. 
(d)  Whenever the permits and license committee, upon recommendation of the chief of the police department, and/or the public safety committee, determines that it is not in the public interest for the telephone to remain on private property, or that the telephone may have a deleterious impact on the surrounding neighborhood, the city council shall initiate procedures to revoke the certificate of registration for that telephone. A certification by the alderman in whose ward the telephone is or is to be located setting forth facts establishing that it is not in the public interest for the telephone to remain on private property, or that the telephone has a deleterious impact on the surrounding neighborhood, shall be prima facie evidence that the certificate of registration is subject to revocation or should not be issued under this section. Whenever the city council makes such a determination with respect to a telephone for which a certificate of registration has been issued, the city council shall attempt to notify the registrant of the determination by mailing a notice to the registered agent or the registrant, and a representative of the city may enter upon any private property and place upon the telephone a notice stating that the certificate of registration is subject to revocation and that the registrant has a right to request, within seven (7) days of receiving such notice, a preliminary hearing at which the registrant will be given an opportunity to be heard in opposition to the revocation. The preliminary hearing shall be conducted before the public safety committee, shall be informal and shall provide the registrant with an opportunity to address the reasons for the city council's determination. If no preliminary hearing is requested or if the public safety committee determines that there is no reasonable cause for revocation of the certificate of registration after the preliminary hearing, the city council shall issue a notice of revocation and an order requiring the telephone and its appurtenances to be removed within seven (7) days after the order is issued pending a final determination. Telephones that are not timely removed shall be removed by a representative of the city. The owner of a telephone for which a notice of revocation of a certificate of registration has been issued may contest such determination by filing with the city council a request for a final hearing in accordance with section 86-116 of this article. No certificate of registration may be issued for a period of one (1) year after revocation for a telephone at a location with respect to which a previous certificate has been revoked. 
(e)  Outdoor pay telephones not lawfully installed or maintained pursuant to this code are hereby declared to be public nuisances subject to summary abatement upon due notice. A representative of the city may enter upon any private property within the city limits that he has reason to believe contains an outdoor pay telephone in violation of this section and may place upon the telephone a notice that the telephone must be removed within seven (7) days. Such notice shall also provide that if the telephone is not removed within seven (7) days, a representative of the city may remove the telephone and charge the cost of removal jointly and severally to its owner, operator, and the person who owns or controls the real property on which the telephone is located. 
(f)  If the costs to the city of removing telephones and their appurtenances pursuant to this section are not paid within thirty (30) days, the telephone shall be deemed abandoned and may be sold or destroyed. The costs of removing outdoor pay telephones shall be a debt to the city jointly and severally owed by the telephone's owner and operator, and any person who owns or controls the real property on which the telephone is located. Any coins remaining in a removed telephone shall become the property of the city and may be used to offset the cost of removal. 
(Code 1980, § 25-62; Ord. No. 97-67, § 1, 11-13-1997; Ord. No. 98-63, § 1, 10-8-1998)  
Sec. 86-114. - Use restricted. 
No outdoor public pay telephone shall have the capability to permit any user to accept a call. 
(Code 1980, § 25-63; Ord. No. 97-67, § 1, 11-13-1997; Ord. No. 98-63, § 1, 10-8-1998)  
Sec. 86-115. - Indoor payphones restricted. 
Any form of pay telephone or telecommunications device located within the interior of a building shall be limited to one such telephone or device per two thousand (2,000) square feet of interior space. Telephones or devices so permitted under this subsection shall not be subject to registration or licensing provisions otherwise required by this article. 
(Code 1980, § 25-64; Ord. No. 98-63, § 1, 10-8-1998)  
Sec. 86-116. - License denial or revocation. 
The denial by the city council of an application for a contract for telecommunication services on public way or a certificate of registration for telecommunication services on private property or the revocation of said contract or certificate shall be in writing, sent by certified mail to the registered agent listed on the application and shall state the reasons for the denial or revocation. Any person seeking to appeal the denial or revocation may do so by filing a written request for a hearing with the city clerk. Such a request must be filed within fourteen (14) days of the receipt of denial or revocation and a hearing must be held within thirty (30) days of receipt of the request and conducted in accordance with the procedures provided herein. The hearing shall be conducted before an impartial hearing officer appointed by the mayor. 
(Code 1980, § 25-65; Ord. No. 98-63, § 1, 10-8-1998)  
Sec. 86-117. - Hearing procedures. 
(a)  The hearing officer is authorized to conduct a hearing concerning any matter covered by this article and may determine factual and legal matters raised by the parties to the hearing. 
(b)  The hearing officer may: 
(1)  Examine any books, papers, records or memoranda bearing upon the business or activities of the applicant or licensee; 
(2)  Request the circuit court to issue subpoenas requiring the attendance of any person having a personal knowledge of any contested issues; 
(3)  Request the circuit court to issue subpoenas duces tecum for the production of books, records, papers or memoranda; 
(4)  Administer oaths; 
(5)  Take testimony; 
(6)  Make rulings as to the admissibility of evidence; and 
(7)  Take any other action as may be required for the expeditious conduct of the hearing. 
(c)  The hearing officer is not bound by the technical rules of evidence. No informality in any proceeding or in the manner of taking testimony or receiving evidence shall invalidate any order, decision, ruling or recommendation of the hearing officer or final administrative decision of the city council. 
(d)  If the circuit court issues a subpoena or subpoena duces tecum , the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Service shall be made as provided by the Illinois Civil Practice Law (735 ILCS 5/2-201 et seq.); 
(2)  Fees of witnesses for attendance and travel shall be the same as the fees of witnesses before the circuit court to the county and shall be paid after the witness is excused from further attendance; 
(3)  When a subpoena or subpoena duces tecum is issued at the instance of either party, the hearing officer may require that party to bear the cost of service and witness fees. 
(e)  At any hearing held under this article, the city council's initial decision to deny or revoke a license shall be presumed prima facie correct and the person contesting the decision shall have the burden of proving with books, records and other documentary or testimonial evidence that it is incorrect. 
(f)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall make a recommendation to the city council. The city council may adopt, reject or modify the recommendation based on a review of the record within seven (7) days of receiving the hearing officer's recommendation and shall issue a final decision. The city council shall give written notification to the applicant or licensee of the decision and the reasons for such decision. The city council's decision shall be a final decision reviewable under the Illinois Administrative Review Law (735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.). 
(Code 1980, § 25-66)  
Secs. 86-118—86-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND ANTENNAS 
 
Sec. 86-151. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth below: 
Alternative tower structure means manmade trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles and similar alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers. 
Antenna means any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on a tower, building or structure and used in communications that radiate or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications signals or other communication signals. 
Backhaul network means the lines that connect a provider's towers/cell sites to one (1) or more cellular telephone switching offices, and/or long distance providers, or the public switched telephone network. 
FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
Height means, when referring to a tower or other structure, the distance measured from the finished grade of the parcel to the highest point on the tower or other structure, including the base pad and any antenna. 
Pre-existing towers and pre-existing antennas means any tower or antenna for which a building permit or special use permit has been properly issued prior to the effective date of this ordinance, including permitted towers or antennas that have not yet been constructed so long as such approval is current and not expired. 
Tower means any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas for telephone, radio and similar communication purposes, including self-supporting lattice towers, guyed towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures, and the like. The term "tower" includes the structure and any support thereto. 
(Code 1980, § 27.1-72; Ord. No. 98-75, § 2, 12-21-1998)  
Sec. 86-152. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to establish general guidelines for the siting of wireless communications towers and antennas. The goals of this article are to: 
(1)  Protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse impacts of towers and antennas; 
(2)  Encourage the location of towers in non-residential areas; 
(3)  Minimize the total number of towers throughout the community; 
(4)  Strongly encourage the joint use of new and existing tower sites as a primary option rather than construction of additional single-use towers; 
(5)  Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimal; 
(6)  Encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and antennas through careful design, siting, landscape screening, and innovative camouflaging techniques; 
(7)  Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively, and efficiently; 
(8)  Consider the effects on the public health and safety by the existence of communication towers; and 
(9)  Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through engineering and careful siting of tower structures. 
In furtherance of these goals, the city shall give due consideration to the city's zoning map and existing land uses in approving sites for the location of towers and antennas. 
(Code 1980, § 27.1-71; Ord. No. 98-75, § 1, 12-21-1998)  
Sec. 86-153. - Applicability. 
(a)  New towers and antennas. All new towers or antennas in the city shall be subject to these regulations, except as provided in subsections (b) through (d) of this section, inclusive. 
(b)  Amateur radio station operators/receive-only antennas. This section shall not govern any tower, or the installation of any antenna, that is under seventy (70) feet in height and is owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for receive-only antennas. 
(c)  Pre-existing towers or antennas. Pre-existing towers and pre-existing antennas shall not be required to meet the requirements of this article, other than the requirements of section 86-154(f) and (g). 
(d)  AM array. For purposes of implementing this article, an AM array, consisting of one (1) or more tower units and supporting ground system, which functions as one (1) AM broadcasting antenna, shall be considered one (1) tower. Measurements for setbacks and separation distances shall be measured from the outer perimeter of the towers included in the AM array. Additional tower units may be added within the perimeter of the AM array by right. 
(Code 1980, § 27.1-73; Ord. No. 98-75, § 3, 12-21-1998)  
Sec. 86-154. - Requirements. 
(a)  Principal or accessory use. Antennas and towers may be considered either principal or accessory uses. A different existing use of an existing structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of an antenna or tower on such lot. 
(b)  Lot size. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a tower or antenna complies with local development regulations, including, but not limited to, setback requirements, lot coverage requirements, and other such requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even though the antennas or towers may be located on leased parcels within such lot. 
(c)  Inventory of existing sites. Each applicant for an antenna and/or tower shall provide to the director of inspectional services an inventory of its existing towers, antennas, or sites approved for towers or antennas, that are either within the jurisdiction of the city or within one (1) mile of the border thereof, including specified information about the location, height and design of each tower. The director of inspectional services may share such information with other applicants applying for administrative approvals or special use permits under this article or other organizations seeking to locate antennas within the jurisdiction of the city, provided, however, that the director of inspectional services is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable. 
(d)  Aesthetics. Towers and antennas shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. 
(2)  At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend them into the natural setting and surrounding buildings. 
(3)  If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. 
(e)  Lighting. Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the lighting alternatives and design chosen must cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views. 
(f)  State or federal requirements. All towers must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the towers and antennas governed by this article shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six (6) months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a different compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling state or federal agency. Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense. 
(g)  Building codes; safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable state or local building codes and the applicable standards for towers that are published by the Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time to time. If, upon inspection, the city concludes that a tower fails to comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have thirty (30) days to bring such tower into compliance with such standards. Failure to bring such tower into compliance within said thirty (30) days shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense. 
(h)  Measurement. For purposes of measurement, tower setbacks and separation distances shall be calculated and applied to facilities located in the city, irrespective of municipal and county jurisdictional boundaries. 
(i)  Not essential services. Towers and antennas shall be regulated and permitted pursuant to this article and shall not be regulated or permitted as essential services, public utilities, or private utilities. 
(j)  Public notice. For purposes of this article, any special use request, variance request, or appeal of the denial of a special use shall require public notice to all abutting property owners and all property owners of properties that are located within the corresponding separation distance listed in section 86-157(b)(5)b, Table 2, in addition to any notice otherwise required by the zoning code. 
(k)  Signs. No signs shall be allowed on an antenna or tower. 
(l)  Buildings and support equipment. Buildings and support equipment associated with antennas or towers shall comply with the requirements of section 86-158. 
(Code 1980, § 27.1-74; Ord. No. 98-75, § 4, 12-21-1998)  
Sec. 86-155. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  General. The uses listed in this section are deemed to be permitted uses and shall not require administrative approval or a special use permit. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following uses are specifically permitted: 
Antennas or towers located on property owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by the city, provided a lease authorizing such antenna or tower has been approved by the city. 
(Code 1980, § 27.1-75; Ord. No. 98-75, § 5, 12-21-1998)  
Sec. 86-156. - Administratively approved uses. 
(a)  General. The following provisions shall govern the issuance of administrative approvals for towers and antennas. 
(1)  The director of inspectional services may administratively approve the uses listed in this section. 
(2)  Each applicant for administrative approval shall apply to the director of inspectional services providing the information set forth in section 86-157(b)(1) and (3) of this article and a nonrefundable fee as established by resolution of the city council to reimburse the city for the costs of reviewing the application. 
(3)  After forwarding a copy of the application to the alderman in whose ward the proposed antenna tower is to be located, the director of inspectional services shall review the application for administrative approval and determine if the proposed use complies with sections 86-153, 86-157(b)(4) and (5) of this article. 
(4)  The director of inspectional services shall respond to each such application within sixty (60) days after receiving it by either approving or denying the application. If the director of inspectional services fails to respond to the applicant within said sixty (60) days, then the application shall be deemed to be approved. 
(5)  In connection with any such administrative approval, the director of inspectional services may, in order to obtain a shared use, administratively waive any zoning district setback requirements in section 86-157(b)(4) or separation distances between towers in section 86-157(b)(5) by up to fifty (50) percent. 
(6)  In connection with any such administrative approval, the director of inspectional services may, in order to encourage the use of monopoles, administratively allow the reconstruction of an existing tower to monopole construction. 
(7)  If an administrative approval is denied, the applicant shall file an application for a special use permit pursuant to section 86-157 prior to filing any appeal that may be available under the zoning code. 
(b)  List of administratively approved uses. The following uses may be approved by the director of inspectional services after conducting an administrative review: 
(1)  Locating a tower or antenna, including the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said tower or antenna, in any light industrial or heavy industrial zoning district, excluding TIF districts located within light industrial or heavy industrial zoning districts. 
(2)  Locating antennas on existing structures or towers consistent with the terms of subsections a. and b. below. 
a.  Antennas on existing structures. Any antenna which is not attached to a tower may be approved by the director of inspectional services as an accessory use to any commercial, industrial, professional, institutional, or multifamily structure of eight (8) or more dwelling units, provided: 
1.  The antenna does not extend more than thirty (30) feet above the highest point of the structure; 
2.  The antenna complies with all applicable FCC and FAA regulations; and 
3.  The antenna complies with all applicable building codes. 
b.  Antennas on existing towers. An antenna which is attached to an existing tower may be approved by the director of inspectional services and, to minimize adverse visual impacts associated with the proliferation and clustering of towers, collocation of antennas by more than one (1) carrier on existing towers shall take precedence over the construction of new towers, provided such collocation is accomplished in a manner consistent with the following: 
1.  A tower which is modified or reconstructed to accommodate the collocation of an additional antenna shall be of the same tower type as the existing tower, unless the director of inspectional services allows reconstruction as a monopole. 
2.  Height. 
(i)  An existing tower may be modified or rebuilt to a taller height, not to exceed thirty (30) feet over the tower's existing height, to accommodate the collocation of an additional antenna. 
(ii)  The height change referred to in subsection (i) above may only occur one (1) time per communication tower. 
(iii)  The additional height referred to in subsection (i) above shall not require an additional distance separation as set forth in section 86-157. The tower's premodification height shall be used to calculate such distance separations. 
3.  Onsite location. 
(i)  A tower which is being rebuilt to accommodate the collocation of an additional antenna may be moved onsite within fifty (50) feet of its existing location. 
(ii)  After the tower is rebuilt to accommodate collocation, only one (1) tower may remain on the site. 
(iii)  A relocated onsite tower shall continue to be measured from the original tower location for purposes of calculating separation distances between towers pursuant to section 86-157(b)(5). The relocation of a tower hereunder shall in no way be deemed to cause a violation of section 86-157(b)(5). 
(iv)  The onsite relocation of a tower which comes within the separation distances to residential units or residentially zoned lands as established in section 86-157(b)(5) shall only be permitted when approved by the director of inspectional services. 
(3)  New towers in nonresidential zoning districts. Locating any new tower in a non-residential zoning district other than light industrial or heavy industrial, provided a licensed professional engineer certifies the tower can structurally accommodate the number of shared users proposed by the applicant; the director of inspectional services concludes the tower is in conformity with the goals set forth in section 86-152 and the requirements of section 86-154; the tower meets the setback requirements in section 86-157(b)(4) and separation distances in section 86-157(b)(5); and the tower meets the following height and usage criteria: 
a.  For a single user, up to ninety (90) feet in height; 
b.  For two (2) users, up to one hundred twenty (120) feet in height; and 
c.  For three (3) or more users, up to one hundred fifty (150) feet in height. 
(4)  Locating any alternative tower structure in a zoning district other than industrial or heavy commercial that in the judgment of the director of inspectional services is in conformity with the goals set forth in section 86-152 of this article. 
(5)  Installing a cable microcell network through the use of multiple low-powered transmitters/receivers attached to existing wireline systems, such as conventional cable or telephone wires, or similar technology that does not require the use of towers. 
(Code 1980, § 27.1-76; Ord. No. 98-75, § 5, 12-21-1998)  
Sec. 86-157. - Special use permits. 
(a)  General. The following provisions shall govern the issuance of special use permits for towers or antennas by the zoning board of appeals: 
(1)  If the tower or antenna is not a permitted use under section 86-155 of this article or permitted to be approved administratively pursuant to section 86-156 of this article, then a special use permit shall be required for the construction of a tower or the placement of an antenna in all zoning districts. 
(2)  Applications for special use permits under this section shall be subject to the procedures and requirements of section 12.7 of Appendix B of the City of Calumet City Zoning Code, except as modified in this section. 
(3)  In granting a special use permit, the zoning board of appeals may impose conditions to the extent the zoning board of appeals concludes such conditions are necessary to minimize any adverse effect of the proposed tower on adjoining properties. 
(4)  Any information of an engineering nature that the applicant submits, whether civil, mechanical, or electrical, shall be certified by a State of Illinois licensed professional engineer. 
(5)  An applicant for a special use permit shall submit the information described in this section and a nonrefundable fee as established by resolution of the city council to reimburse the city for the costs of reviewing the application. 
(6)  A special use permit shall be required to place an antenna or tower in a TIF district, regardless of the zoning district in which it is located. 
(b)  Towers. 
(1)  Information required. In addition to any information required for applications for special use permits pursuant to section 12.7 of Appendix B of the Calumet City Zoning Code, applicants for a special use permit for a tower shall submit the following information: 
a.  A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type and height of the proposed tower, on-site land uses and zoning, adjacent land uses and zoning (including when adjacent to other municipalities), master plan classification of the site and all properties within the applicable separation distances set forth in section 86-157(b)(5), adjacent roadways, proposed means of access, setbacks from property lines, elevation drawings of the proposed tower and any other structures, topography, parking, and other information deemed by the director of inspectional services to be necessary to assess compliance with this article. 
b.  Legal description of the parent tract and leased parcel (if applicable). 
c.  The setback distance between the proposed tower and the nearest residential unit, platted residentially zoned properties, and unplatted residentially zoned properties. 
d.  The separation distance from other towers described in the inventory of existing sites submitted pursuant to section 86-154(c) shall be shown on an updated site plan or map. The applicant shall also identify the type of construction of the existing towers and the owner/operator of the existing towers, if known. 
e.  A landscape plan showing specific landscape materials. 
f.  Method of fencing, and finished color and, if applicable, the method of camouflage and illumination. 
g.  A description of compliance with sections 86-154(c), (d), (e), (f), (g), (j), (l), and (m), 86-157(b)(4), (b)(5) and all applicable federal, state or local laws. 
h.  A notarized statement by the applicant as to whether construction of the tower will accommodate collocation of additional antennas for future users. 
i.  Identification of the entitles providing the backhaul network for the towers described in the application and other cellular sites owned or operated by the applicant in the municipality. 
j.  A description of the suitability of the use of existing towers, other structures or alternative technology not requiring the use of towers or structures to provide the services to be provided through the use of the proposed new tower. 
k.  A description of the feasible locations of future towers or antennas within the city based upon existing physical, engineering, technological or geographical limitations in the event the proposed tower is erected. 
(2)  Factors considered in granting special use permits for towers. In addition to any standards for consideration of special use permit applications pursuant to section 12.7 of Appendix B of the Calumet City Zoning Code, the zoning board of appeals shall consider the following factors in determining whether to issue a special use permit, although the zoning board of appeals may waive or reduce the burden on the applicant of one (1) or more of these criteria if the zoning board of appeals concludes that the goals of this article are better served thereby: 
a.  Height of the proposed tower; 
b.  Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential district boundaries; 
c.  Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties; 
d.  Surrounding topography; 
e.  Surrounding tree coverage and foliage; 
f.  Design of the tower, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness; 
g.  Proposed ingress and egress; and 
h.  Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or alternative technologies not requiring the use of towers or structures, as discussed in section 86-157(b)(3) of this article. 
(3)  Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures or alternative technology. No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the zoning board of appeals that no existing tower, structure or alternative technology that does not require the use of towers or structures can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. An applicant shall submit information requested by the zoning board of appeals related to the availability of suitable existing towers, other structures or alternative technology. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower, structure or alternative technology can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna may consist of any of the following: 
a.  No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic area which meet applicant's engineering requirements. 
b.  Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet applicant's engineering requirements. 
c.  Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment. 
d.  The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing towers or structures, or the antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna. 
e.  The fees, costs or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development are presumed to be unreasonable. 
f.  The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing towers and structures unsuitable. 
g.  The applicant demonstrates that an alternative technology that does not require the use of towers or structures, such as a cable microcell network using multiple low-powered transmitters/receivers attached to a wireline system, is unsuitable. Costs of alternative technology that exceed new tower or antenna development shall not be presumed to render the technology unsuitable. 
(4)  Setbacks. The following setback requirements shall apply to all towers for which a special use permit is required; provided, however, that the zoning board of appeals may reduce the standard setback requirements if the goals of this article would be better served thereby: 
a.  Towers must be set back a distance equal to at least seventy-five (75) percent of the height of the tower from any adjoining lot line. 
b.  Guys and accessory buildings must satisfy the minimum zoning district setback requirements. 
(5)  Separation. The following separation requirements shall apply to all towers and antenna for which a special use permit is required; provided, however, that the zoning board of appeals may reduce the standard separation requirements if the goals of this article would be better served thereby. 
a.  Separation from off-site uses/designated areas. 
1.  Tower separation shall be measured from the base of the tower to the lot line of the off-site uses and/or designated areas as specified in Table 1, except as otherwise provided in Table 1. 
2.  Separation requirements for towers shall comply with the minimum standards established in Table 1. 
Table 1: 
Off-Site Use/Designated Area 	Separation Distance 
Single-family or duplex residential units 1 	200 feet or 300% height of tower whichever is greater 
Vacant single-family or duplex residentially zoned land which is either platted or has preliminary subdivision plan approval which is not expired 	200 feet or 300% height of tower 2 whichever is greater 
Vacant unplatted residentially zoned lands 3 	100 feet or 100% height of tower whichever is greater 
Existing multi-family residential units greater than duplex units 	100 feet or 100% height of tower whichever is greater 
Non-residentially zoned lands or non-residential uses 	None; only setbacks apply 
 
1 Includes modular homes and mobile homes used for living purposes. 
2 Separation measured from base of tower to closest building setback line. 
3 Includes any unplatted residential use properties without a valid preliminary subdivision plan or valid development plan approval and any multifamily residentially zoned land greater than duplex. 
b.  Separation distances between towers. 
1.  Separation distances between towers shall be applicable for and measured between the proposed tower and pre-existing towers. The separation distances shall be measured by drawing or following a straight line between the base of the existing tower and the proposed base, pursuant to a site plan, of the proposed tower. The separation distances (listed in linear feet) shall be as shown in Table 2. 
Table 2: Existing Towers - Types 
	Lattice 	Guyed 	Monopole 75 Ft.in Height or Greater 	Monopole Less than 75 Ft. in Height 
Lattice 	5,000 	5,000 	1,500 	750 
Guyed 	5,000 	5,000 	1,500 	750 
Monopole 75 Ft. in Height or Greater 	1,500 	1,500 	1,500 	750 
Monopole Less Than 75 Ft. in Height 	750 	750 	750 	750 
 
  
(6)  Security fencing. Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not less than six (6) feet in height and shall also be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device; provided, however, that the zoning board of appeals may waive such requirements, as it deems appropriate. 
(7)  Landscaping. The following requirements shall govern the landscaping surrounding towers for which a special use permit is required; provided, however, that the zoning board of appeals may waive such requirements if the goals of this article would be better served thereby. 
a.  Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant materials that effectively screens the view of the tower compound from property used for residences. The standard buffer shall consist of a landscaped strip at least four (4) feet wide outside the perimeter of the compound. 
b.  In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal, the landscaping requirement may be reduced or waived. 
c.  Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some cases, such as towers sited on large, wooded lots, natural growth around the property perimeter may be sufficient buffer. 
(Code 1980, § 27.1-77; Ord. No. 98-75, § 7, 12-21-1998)  
Sec. 86-158. - Buildings or other equipment storage. 
(a)  Antennas mounted on structures or rooftops. The equipment cabinet or structure used in association with antennas shall comply with the following: 
(1)  The cabinet or structure shall not contain more than twenty (20) square feet of gross floor area or be more than ten (10) feet in height. 
(2)  If the equipment structure is located on the roof of a building, the area of the equipment structure and other equipment and structures shall not occupy more than five (5) percent of the roof area. 
(3)  Equipment storage buildings or cabinets shall comply with all applicable building codes. 
(b)  Antennas mounted on utility poles or light poles. The equipment cabinet or structure used in association with antennas shall be located in accordance with the following: 
(1)  In residential districts, the equipment cabinet or structure may be located: 
a.  In a front or side yard provided the cabinet or structure is no greater than three (3) feet in height or seven (7) square feet of gross floor area and the cabinet/structure is located a minimum of fifty (50) feet from all lot lines. The cabinet/structure shall be screened by an evergreen hedge with an ultimate height of at least forty-two (42) to forty-eight (48) inches and a planted height of at least thirty-six (36) inches. 
b.  In a rear yard, provided the cabinet or structure is no greater than three (3) feet in height or ten (10) square feet in gross floor area. The cabinet/structure shall be screened by an evergreen hedge with an ultimate height of eight (8) feet and a planted height of at least thirty-six (36) inches. 
(2)  In commercial or industrial districts, the equipment cabinet or structure shall be no greater than twelve (12) feet in height or three hundred fifty (350) square feet in gross floor area. The structure or cabinet shall be screened by an evergreen hedge with an ultimate height of eight (8) feet and a planted height of at least thirty-six (36) inches. In all other instances, structures or cabinets shall be screened from view of all residential properties which abut or are directly across the street from the structure or cabinet by a solid fence seven (7) feet in height or an evergreen hedge with an ultimate height of eight (8) feet and a planted height of at least thirty-six (36) inches. 
(c)  Antennas located on towers. The related unmanned equipment structure shall not contain more than three hundred fifty (350) square feet of gross floor area or be more than twelve (12) feet in height, and shall be located in accordance with the minimum yard requirements of the zoning district in which located. 
(d)  Modification of building size requirements. The requirements of subsections (a) through (c) of this section may be modified by the director of inspectional services in the case of administratively approved uses or by the zoning board of appeals in the case of uses permitted by special use to encourage collocation. 
(Code 1980, § 27.1-78; Ord. No. 98-75, § 8, 12-21-1998)  
Sec. 86-159. - Removal of abandoned antennas and towers. 
Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or tower shall remove the same within ninety (90) days of receipt of notice from the city notifying the owner of such abandonment. Failure to remove an abandoned antenna or tower within said ninety (90) days shall be grounds to remove the tower or antenna at the owner's expense. If there are two (2) or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the tower. 
(Code 1980, § 27.1-79; Ord. No. 98-75, § 9, 12-21-1998)  
Sec. 86-160. - Nonconforming uses. 
(a)  Not an expansion of nonconforming use. Towers that are constructed, and antennas that are installed, in accordance with the provisions of this article shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a nonconforming use or structure. 
(b)  Pre-existing towers. Pre-existing towers shall be allowed to continue their usage as they presently exist. Routine maintenance (including replacement with a new tower of like construction and height) shall be permitted on such pre-existing towers. New construction other than routine maintenance on a pre-existing tower shall comply with the requirements of this article. 
(c)  Rebuilding damaged or destroyed nonconforming towers or antennas. Notwithstanding section 86-159, bona fide nonconforming towers or antennas that are damaged or destroyed may be rebuilt without having to first obtain administrative approval or a special use permit and without having to meet the separation requirements specified in sections 86-157(b)(4) and (5). The type, height and location of the tower onsite shall be of the same type and intensity as the original facility approval. Building permits to rebuild the facility shall comply with the then applicable building codes and shall be obtained within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date the facility is damaged or destroyed. If no permit is obtained or if said permit expires, the tower or antenna shall be deemed abandoned as specified in section 86-159. 
(Code 1980, § 27.1-80; Ord. No. 98-75, § 10, 12-21-1998)  
Secs. 86-161—86-174. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - STANDARDS FOR CONSTRUCTION OF FACILITIES IN THE RIGHTS-OF-WAY 
 
Sec. 86-175. - Purpose and scope. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this article is to establish policies and procedures for constructing facilities on rights-of-way within the city's jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the city rights-of-way and the city as a whole. 
(b)  Intent. In enacting this article, the city intends to exercise its authority over the rights-of-way in the city and, in particular, the use of the public ways and property by utilities, by establishing uniform standards to address issues presented by utility facilities, including without limitation: 
(1)  Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, bicycle paths, alleys, parkways and other public ways and places; 
(2)  Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic; 
(3)  Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the city's utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in rights-of-way or public property; 
(4)  Protect against environmental damage, including but not limited to damage to trees, from the installation of utility facilities; 
(5)  Protect against increased stormwater run-off due to structures and materials that increase impermeable surfaces; 
(6)  Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are installed; 
(7)  Preserve open space, particularly the tree-lined parkways that characterize the city's residential neighborhoods; 
(8)  Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the rights-of-way; and 
(9)  Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties adjacent to utility facilities locations. 
(c)  Facilities subject to this article. This article applies to all facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way within the jurisdiction of the city. A facility lawfully established prior to the effective date of this article may continue to be maintained, repaired and operated by the utility as presently constructed and located, except as may be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise, license or similar agreement. 
(d)  Franchises, licenses, or similar agreements. The city, in its discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the city rights-of-way. Utilities that are not required by law to enter into such an agreement may request that the city enter into such an agreement. In such an agreement, the city may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with this article. 
(e)  Effect of franchises, licenses, or similar agreements. 
(1)  Utilities other than telecommunications providers. In the event that a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise, license or similar agreement with the city, such franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof. 
(2)  Telecommunications providers. In the event of any conflict with, or inconsistency between, the provisions of this article and the provisions of any franchise, license or similar agreement between the city and any telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof. 
(f)  Conflicts with other ordinances. This article supersedes all ordinances or parts of ordinances adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict. In all cases the more restrictive requirement shall apply. 
(g)  Conflicts with state and federal laws. In the event that applicable federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this article, the utility shall comply with the requirements of this article to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws or regulations. 
(h)  Sound engineering judgment. The city shall use sound engineering judgment when administering this article and may vary the standards, conditions, and requirements expressed in this article when the city so determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the city to regulate its rights-of-way for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 07-128, § 2, 12-13-2007)  
Sec. 86-176. - Definitions. 
As used in this article and unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section. Any term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed to it in 92 Ill. Adm. Code § 530.30, unless the context clearly requires otherwise. 
AASHTO. American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials. 
ANSI. American National Standards Institute. 
Applicant. A person applying for a permit under this article. 
ASTM. American Society for Testing and Materials. 
Backfill. The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a trench or pit. 
Bore or boring. To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor. 
Cable operator. That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(5). 
Cable service. That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(6). 
Cable system. That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(7). 
Carrier pipe. The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be transported. 
Casing. A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as: carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices. 
City. The City of Calumet City, Cook County, Illinois. 
City designee. The person(s) or agency designated by the director of inspectional services or the director of public works of the city. 
Clear zone. The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a shoulder, a recoverable slope, a nonrecoverable slope, and a clear run-out area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO Roadside Design Guide. 
Coating. Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for protection against external corrosion. 
Code or City Code. Municipal Code of Calumet City, Illinois. 
Conductor. Wire carrying electrical current. 
Conduit. A casing or encasement for wires or cables. 
Construction or construct. The installation, repair, maintenance, placement, alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment in place of facilities. 
Cover. The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor. 
Crossing facility. A facility that crosses one (1) or more right-of-way lines of a right-of-way. 
Disrupt the right-of-way. For the purposes of this article, any work that obstructs the right-of-way or causes a material adverse effect on the use of the right-of-way for its intended use. Such work may include, without limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway. 
Emergency. Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety of the public using or in the vicinity of the right-of-way or immediate maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by the utility. 
Encasement. Provision of a protective casing. 
Engineer. The city engineer or his or her designee. 
Equipment. Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used to facilitate construction of facilities. 
Excavation. The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying bare by digging. 
Extra heavy pipe. Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation. 
Facility. All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including, but not limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas, vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles, conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables, and appurtenances thereto) located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights-of-way under this article. For purposes of this article, the term "facility" shall not include any facility owned or operated by the city. 
Freestanding facility. A facility that is not a crossing facility or a parallel facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump, or meter station. 
Frontage road. Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent to the highway where it is precluded by control of access on highway. 
Hazardous materials. Any substance or material which, due to its quantity, form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is determined by the city to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance of the environment, including, but not limited to explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiology (biological) agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance determined to be hazardous or toxic under any federal or state law, statute or regulation. 
Highway code. The Illinois Highway Code, 605 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq., as amended from time to time. 
Highway. A specific type of right-of-way used for vehicular traffic including rural or urban roads or streets. "Highway" includes all highway land and improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges, drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic. 
Holder. A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois Cable and Video Competition Law, 220 ILCS 5/21-401. 
ICC. Illinois Commerce Commission. 
IDOT. Illinois Department of Transportation. 
Jacking. Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means with or without boring. 
Jetting. Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to create a cavity ahead of the pipe. 
Joint use. The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two (2) or more utilities. 
J.U.L.I.E. The joint utility locating information for excavators utility notification program. 
Major intersection. The intersection of two (2) or more major arterial highways. 
Occupancy. The presence of facilities on, over or under right-of-way. 
Parallel facility. A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to the centerline of a right-of-way. 
Parkway. Any portion of the right-of-way not improved by street or sidewalk. 
Pavement cut. The removal of an area of pavement for access to facility or for the construction of a facility. 
Permittee. That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to this article. 
Petroleum products pipelines. Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates, propane, butane, or coal-slurry. 
Practicable. That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than that which is simply convenient. 
Pressure. The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig). 
Prompt. That which is done within a period of time specified by the city. If no time period is specified, the period shall be thirty (30) calendar days. 
Public entity. A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government, whether at local, state or federal level. 
Restoration. The repair of a right-of-way, easement, highway, roadway, or other area disrupted by the construction of a facility. 
Right-of-way or rights-of-way. Any street, alley, other land or waterway, dedicated or commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other similar purposes, including utility and/or drainage easements, in which the city has the right and authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of facilities other than those of the city. "Right-of-way" or "rights-of-way" shall not include any real or personal city property that is not specifically described in the previous two (2) sentences and shall not include city buildings, fixtures, and other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the right-of-way. 
Roadway. That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders. 
Sale of telecommunications at retail. The transmitting, supplying, or furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross charge made by one (1) such corporation to another such corporation is not greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not for sale. 
Security fund. That amount of security as required in this article. 
Shoulder. A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement. 
Sound engineering judgment. A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted engineering principles, practices and experience. 
Telecommunications. This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange service, private line services, mobile radio services, cellular mobile telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging service and any other form of mobile or portable one-way or two-way communications, and any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. "Private line" means a dedicated non-traffic sensitive service for a single customer that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel, or a group of such channels, from one (1) or more specified locations to one (1) or more other specified locations. "Telecommunications" shall not include value-added services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code and protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the end-to-end communications. "Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of cable services through a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C. Sections 521 and following), as now or hereafter amended, or cable or other programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the city through an open video system as defined in the Rules of the Federal Communications Commission (47 C.F.R. § 76.1500 and following), as now or hereafter amended. 
Telecommunications provider. Means any person that installs, owns, operates or controls facilities in the public right-of-way used or designed to be used to transmit telecommunications in any form. 
Telecommunications retailer. Means and includes every person engaged in making sales of telecommunications at retail as defined herein. 
Trench. A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an underground facility. 
Utility. The individual or entity owning or operating any facility as defined in this article. 
Vent. A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors from an underground casing. 
Video service. That term as defined in Section 21-201(v) of the Illinois Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007, 200 ILCS 21-201(v). 
Water lines. Pipelines carrying raw or potable water. 
Wet boring. Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material. 
(Ord. No. 07-128, § 2, 12-13-2007)  
Sec. 86-177. - Annual registration required. 
Every utility that occupies right-of-way within the city shall register on January 1 of each year with the city, providing the utility's name, address and regular business telephone and telecopy numbers, the name of one (1) or more contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility in connection with emergencies involving the utility's facilities in the right-of-way and a twenty-four-hour telephone number for each such person, and evidence of insurance as required in this article, in the form of a certificate of insurance. 
(Ord. No. 07-128, § 2, 12-13-2007)  
Sec. 86-178. - Permit required; applications and fees. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall construct (as defined in this article) any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within any city right-of-way which (1) changes the location of the facility, (2) adds a new facility, (3) disrupts the right-of-way (as defined in this article), or (4) materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility on, over, above, along, under across or within the right-of-way, without first filing an application with the city designee and obtaining a permit from the city therefor, except as otherwise provided in this article. No permit shall be required for installation and maintenance of service connections to customers' premises where there will be no disruption of the right-of-way. 
(b)  Permit application. All applications for permits pursuant to this article shall be filed on a form provided by the city and shall be filed in such number of duplicate copies as the city may designate. The applicant may designate those portions of its application materials that it reasonably believes contain proprietary or confidential information as "proprietary" or "confidential" by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly. 
(c)  Minimum general application requirements. The application shall be made by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall contain, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  The utility's name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers; 
(2)  The applicant's name and address, if different than the utility, its telephone, telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and its interest in the work; 
(3)  The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with respect to the application; 
(4)  A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed; 
(5)  Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the city: 
a.  A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the latest edition of the Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular traffic; and 
b.  An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant. The intended response shall include notification to the city and shall promote protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with ICC regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with this section unless the city finds that additional information or assurances are needed; 
(6)  Drawings and specifications showing the work proposed, including the certification of an Illinois registered professional engineer that such drawings, plans, and specifications comply with applicable codes, rules, and regulations. 
(7)  Evidence of insurance as required in this article; 
(8)  Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in this article; 
(9)  Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this article (see section entitled "variances"); and 
(10)  Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the city. 
(d)  Supplemental application requirements for specific types of utilities. In addition to the requirements of subsection (c) of this section, the permit application shall include the following items, as applicable to the specific utility that is the subject of the permit application: 
(1)  In the case of the installation of a new electric power, communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video service or natural gas distribution system, evidence that any "certificate of public convenience and necessity" or other regulatory authorization that the applicant is required by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to obtain, has been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority; 
(2)  In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size, design, construction class, and operating pressures; 
(3)  In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Public Water Supplies, have been satisfied; 
(4)  In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and water pollution requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Water Pollution Control and/or other local or state entities with jurisdiction, have been satisfied; or 
(5)  In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the design standard to be followed. 
e)  Applicant's duty to update information. Throughout the entire permit application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit, any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be submitted by the utility in writing to the city within thirty (30) calendar days after the change necessitating the amendment. 
(f)  Application fees. Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or such amount established by the city, as supplemented and amended from time to time. No application fee is required to be paid by any electricity utility that is paying the municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the Electricity Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act. 
(Ord. No. 07-128, § 2, 12-13-2007)  
Sec. 86-179. - Action on permit applications. 
(a)  City review of permit applications. Completed permit applications, containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the city designee within a reasonable time after filing. If the application does not conform to the requirements of applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the city designee shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the city designee is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this article and applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the city designee shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. In all instances, it shall be the duty of the applicant to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the city designee, that the construction proposed under the application shall be in full compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Additional city review of applications of telecommunications retailers. 
(1)  Pursuant to Section 4 of the Telephone Company Act, 220 ILCS 65/4, a telecommunications retailer shall notify the city that it intends to commence work governed by this article for facilities for the provision of telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of plans, specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the purpose and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the telecommunications retailer to the city not less than ten (10) calendar days prior to the commencement of work requiring no excavation and not less than thirty (30) calendar days prior to the commencement of work requiring excavation. The city designee shall specify the portion of the right-of-way upon which the facility may be placed, used and constructed. 
(2)  In the event that the city designee fails to provide such specification of location to the telecommunications retailer within either (i) ten (10) calendar days after service of notice to the city by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work not involving excavation for new construction or (ii) twenty-five (25) calendar days after service of notice by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work involving excavation for new construction, the telecommunications retailer may commence work without obtaining a permit under this article. 
(3)  Upon the provision of such specification by the city, where a permit is required for work pursuant to this article, the telecommunications retailer shall submit to the city an application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and documentation available regarding the facility to be constructed. Such application shall be subject to the requirements of subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Additional city review of applications of holders of state authorization under the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007. Applications by a utility that is a holder of a state-issued authorization under the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007 shall be deemed granted forty-five (45) calendar days after submission to the city, unless otherwise acted upon by the city, provided the holder has complied with applicable city codes, ordinances, and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 07-128, § 2, 12-13-2007)  
Sec. 86-180. - Effect of permit. 
(a)  Authority granted; no property right or other interest created. A permit from the city authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain activities in accordance with this article on city rights-of-way, and does not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon the rights of others who may have an interest in the rights-of-way. 
(b)  Duration. No permit issued under this article shall be valid for a period longer than six (6) months unless construction is actually begun within that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion. 
(c)  Pre-construction meeting required. No construction shall begin pursuant to a permit issued under this article prior to attendance by the permittee and all major contractors and subcontractors who will perform any work under the permit at a pre-construction meeting. The pre-construction meeting shall be held at a date, time and place designated by the city designee with such city representatives in attendance as the city deems necessary. The meeting shall be for the purpose of reviewing the work under the permit, and reviewing special considerations necessary in the areas where work will occur, including, without limitation, presence or absence of other utility facilities in the area and their locations, procedures to avoid disruption of other utilities, use of rights-of-way by the public during construction, and access and egress by adjacent property owners. 
(d)  Compliance with all laws required. The issuance of a permit by the city does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of the city and applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 07-128, § 2, 12-13-2007)  
Sec. 86-181. - Revised permit drawings. 
In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall submit a revised set of "as-built" drawings or plans to the city within ninety (90) calendar days after the completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans shall specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities deviate from the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the permit also deviates from the requirements of this article, it shall be treated as a request for variance as defined in this article. If the city denies the request for a variance, then the permittee shall either remove the facility from the right-of-way or modify the facility so that it conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or plans therefor. 
(Ord. No. 07-128, § 2, 12-13-2007)  
Sec. 86-182. - Insurance. 
(a)  Required coverages and limits. Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, each utility occupying right-of-way or constructing any facility in the right-of-way shall secure and maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring the utility as named insured and naming the city, and its elected and appointed officers, officials, consultants, agents, and employees as additional insureds on the policies listed in paragraphs (1) and (2) below: 
(1)  Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to as "X," "C," and "U" coverages) and products-completed operations coverage with limits not less than: 
a.  Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death to each person; 
(b)  Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for property damage resulting from any one (1) accident; and 
(c)  Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for all other types of liability; 
(2)  Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles with a combined single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal injury and property damage for each accident; 
(3)  Worker's compensation with statutory limits; and 
(4)  Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per employee and per accident. 
If the utility is not providing such insurance to protect the contractors and subcontractors performing the work, then such contractors and subcontractors shall comply with this section. 
(b)  Excess or umbrella policies. The coverages required by this section may be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a following-form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary policy exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy becomes effective to cover such loss. 
(c)  Copies required. The utility shall provide copies of any of the policies required by this section to the city within ten (10) calendar days following receipt of a written request therefor from the city. 
(d)  Maintenance and renewal of required coverages. The insurance policies required by this section shall contain the following endorsement: 
"It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30) calendar days after receipt by the City, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice addressed to the City Director of Inspectional Services and City Treasurer of such intent to cancel or not to renew." 
Within ten (10) calendar days after receipt by the city of said notice, and in no event later than ten (10) calendar days prior to said cancellation, the utility shall obtain and furnish to the city evidence of replacement insurance policies meeting the requirements of this section. 
(e)  Self-insurance. A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage and limit requirements required by subsection (a) of this section. A utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional insureds under subsection (a), or the requirements of subsections (b), (c) and (d) of this section. A utility that elects to self-insure shall provide to the city evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements required under subsection (a) of this section, such as evidence that the utility is a "private self insurer" under the Workers Compensation Act. 
(f)  Effect of insurance and self-insurance on utility's liability. The legal liability of the utility to the city and any person for any of the matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance required by this section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder. 
(g)  Insurance companies. All insurance provided pursuant to this section shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the State of Illinois. All insurance carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated "A-" or better and of a class size "X" or higher by A.M. Best Company. 
(Ord. No. 07-128, § 2, 12-13-2007)  
Sec. 86-183. - Indemnification. 
By occupying or constructing facilities in the right-of-way, a utility shall be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the city and its elected and appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and representatives harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney's fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers, employees, consultants, agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or occupancy of the rights-of-way, and in providing or offering service over the facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this article or by a franchise, license, or similar agreement; provided, however, that the utility's indemnity obligations hereunder shall not apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses arising out of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this article by the city, its officials, officers, employees, agents or representatives. 
(Ord. No. 07-128, § 2, 12-13-2007)  
Sec. 86-184. - Security. 
(a)  Purpose. The permittee shall establish a security fund in a form and in an amount as set forth in this section. The security fund shall be continuously maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee's sole cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit. The security fund shall serve as security for: 
(1)  The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements of this article. 
(2)  Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the city occasioned by the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations, orders, permits and other directives of the city issued pursuant to this article. 
(3)  The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims, costs, or expenses that the city may pay or incur by reason of any action or nonperformance by permittee in violation of this article including, without limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee is required by this article to perform that the city must perform itself or have completed as a consequence solely of the permittee's failure to perform or complete, and all other payments due the city from the permittee pursuant to this article or any other applicable law. 
(b)  Form. The permittee shall provide the security fund to the city in the form, at the permittee's election, of cash, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form acceptable to the city. Any letter of credit provided pursuant to this subsection shall, at a minimum: 
(1)  Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the city and the permittee; 
2)  Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by the city of any amounts covered by it; and 
(3)  Shall provide a location convenient to the city and within the State of Illinois at which it can be drawn. 
(c)  Amount. The dollar amount of the security fund shall be sufficient to provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right-of-way to at least as good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the permit, as determined by the city designee, and may also include reasonable, directly related costs that the city estimates are likely to be incurred if the permittee fails to perform such restoration. The reasonably estimated cost as described above shall be multiplied by one hundred five (105) percent to establish the security fund amount. Such costs shall include, when applicable, the cost of street repair or replacement, sidewalk repair or replacement, landscaping, the cost to repair or replace such other improvements as may exist on the premises prior to construction performed pursuant to the permit and, if necessary, an appropriate reserve to guarantee that landscaping shall survive a one-year period after restoration and to assure that all restoration is completed in a workmanlike manner. Where the construction of facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in phases in multiple locations in the city with each phase consisting of construction of facilities in one (1) location or a related group of locations, and where construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior to substantial completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the city designee may, in the exercise of sound discretion, allow the permittee to post a single amount of security which shall be applicable to each phase of the construction under the permit. The amount of the security fund for phased construction shall be equal to the greatest amount that would have been required under the provisions of this subsection (c) for any single phase. 
(d)  Withdrawals. The city, upon fourteen (14) calendar days' advanced written notice clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal rights under this subsection, may withdraw an amount from the security fund, provided that the permittee has not reimbursed the city for such amount within the fourteen-day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee: 
(1)  Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee hereunder; 
(2)  Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and unpaid; 
(3)  Fails to reimburse the city for any damages, claims, costs or expenses which the city has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any action or nonperformance by the permittee; or 
(4)  Fails to comply with any provision of this article that the city determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the security fund. 
(e)  Replenishment. Within fourteen (14) calendar days after receipt of written notice from the city that any amount has been withdrawn from the security fund, the permittee shall restore the security fund to the amount specified in subsection (c) of this section. 
(f)  Interest. The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued on the amount in the security fund be returned to the permittee by the city, upon written request for said withdrawal to the city, provided that any such withdrawal does not reduce the security fund below the minimum balance required in subsection (c) of this section. 
(g)  Closing and return of security fund. Upon completion of the work authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of the security fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate the city for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this article or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit, the security fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the property of the city to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs, loss or damage incurred by the city as a result of said revocation, provided that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to the permittee. 
(h)  Rights not limited. The rights reserved to the city with respect to the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the city, whether reserved by this article or otherwise authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said security fund shall affect any other right the city may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated. 
(Ord. No. 07-128, § 2, 12-13-2007)  
Sec. 86-185. - Permit suspension and revocation. 
(a)  City right to revoke permit. The city may revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this article for one (1) or more of the following reasons: 
(1)  Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete statements in the permit application; 
(2)  Noncompliance with this article; 
(3)  Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare; or 
(4)  Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in accordance with the permit and approved plans. 
(b)  Notice of revocation or suspension. The city shall send written notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this article stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the alternatives available to permittee under this section. 
(c)  Permittee alternatives upon receipt of notice of revocation or suspension. Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from the city, the permittee shall have the following options: 
(1)  Immediately provide the city with evidence that no cause exists for the revocation or suspension; 
(2)  Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the city, the deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such correction to the city within five (5) working days after receipt of the written notice of revocation; or 
(3)  Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way and restore the rights-of-way to the satisfaction of the city providing written proof of such removal to the city within ten (10) calendar days after receipt of the written notice of revocation. 
The city may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the time periods provided in this subsection. 
(d)  Stop work order. In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation or suspension, the city may issue a stop work order immediately upon discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within subsection (a) of this section. 
(e)  Failure or refusal of the permittee to comply. If the permittee fails to comply with the provisions of subsection (c) of this section, the city or its designee may, at the option of the city: (1) correct the deficiencies; (2) upon not less than twenty (20) calendar days' notice to the permittee, remove the subject facilities or equipment; or (3) after not less than thirty (30) calendar days' notice to the permittee of failure to cure the noncompliance, deem them abandoned and property of the city. The permittee shall be liable in all events to the city for all costs of removal. 
(Ord. No. 07-128, § 2, 12-13-2007)  
Sec. 86-186. - Change of ownership or owner's identity or legal status. 
(a)  Notification of change. A utility shall notify the city no less than thirty (30) calendar days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the right-of-way or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the former owner under the permit, if any, and applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, including this article, with respect to the work and facilities in the right-of-way. 
(b)  Amended permit. A new owner shall request that any current permit be amended to show current ownership within thirty (30) calendar days of assuming ownership responsibilities. If the new owner fails to have a new or amended permit issued in its name within said thirty-day period, the new owner shall be presumed to have accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the permit if the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the city's right-of-way. 
(c)  Insurance and bonding. All required insurance coverage or bonding must be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer. 
(Ord. No. 07-128, § 2, 12-13-2007)  
Sec. 86-187. - General construction standards. 
(a)  Standards and principles. All construction in the right-of-way shall be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws rules and regulations, and commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the principles and standards set forth in the following IDOT publications, as amended from time to time: 
(1)  Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction; 
(2)  Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special Provisions; 
(3)  Highway Design Manual; 
(4)  Highway Standards Manual; 
(5)  Standard Specifications for Traffic Control Items; 
(6)  Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (92 Ill. Adm. Code § 545); 
(7)  Flagger's Handbook; and 
(8)  Work Site Protection Manual for Daylight Maintenance Operations. 
(b)  Interpretation of municipal standards and principles. If a discrepancy exists between or among differing principles and standards required by this article, the city designee shall determine, in the exercise of sound engineering judgment, which principles apply and such decision shall be final. If requested, the city designee shall state which standard or principle will apply to the construction, maintenance, or operation of a facility in the future. 
(Ord. No. 07-128, § 2, 12-13-2007)  
Sec. 86-188. - Traffic control. 
(a)  Minimum requirements. The city's minimum requirements for traffic protection are contained in IDOT's Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices and this Code. 
(b)  Warning signs, protective devices, and flaggers. The utility is responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices and flaggers, when necessary, meeting applicable federal, state, and local requirements for protection of the public and the utility's workers when performing any work on the rights-of-way. 
(c)  Interference with traffic. All work shall be phased so that there is minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic. 
(d)  Notice when access is blocked. At least forty-eight (48) hours prior to beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any residence, business or institution, the utility shall notify the resident, business or institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of such work; provided, however, that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to this article, the utility shall provide such notice as is practicable under the circumstances. 
(e)  Compliance. The utility shall take immediate action to correct any deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the utility's attention by the city. 
(Ord. No. 07-128, § 2, 12-13-2007)  
Sec. 86-189. - Location of facilities. 
(a)  General requirements. In addition to location requirements applicable to specific types of utility facilities, all utility facilities, regardless of type, shall be subject to the general location requirements of this subsection. 
(1)  No interference with city facilities. No utility facilities shall be placed in any location if the city designee determines that the proposed location will require the relocation or displacement of any of the city's utility facilities or will otherwise interfere with the operation or maintenance of any of the city's utility facilities. 
(2)  Minimum interference and impact. The proposed location shall cause only the minimum possible interference with the use of the right-of-way and shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin said right-of-way. 
(3)  No interference with travel. No utility facility shall be placed in any location that interferes with the usual travel on such right-of-way. 
(4)  No limitations on visibility. No utility facility shall be placed in any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the right-of-way. 
(5)  Size of utility facilities. The proposed installation shall use the smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals, and/or cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of location, for the particular application. No signage shall be included except that which is mandated by applicable state statute or regulation and which is submitted to the city designee for prior approval as to size, color, location and compliance with the applicable statute or regulation. 
(b)  Parallel facilities located within highways. 
(1)  Overhead parallel facilities. An overhead parallel facility may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if it exists as an overhead utility prior to the adoption of this article and if the following criteria are met: 
a.  Lines are located as near as practicable to the right-of-way line and as nearly parallel to the right-of-way line as reasonable pole alignment will permit; 
b.  Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable from the curb with a minimum distance of two (2) feet (0.6 m) behind the face of the curb, where available; 
c.  Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement edge as practicable with minimum distance of four (4) feet (1.2 m) outside the outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone; 
d.  No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and 
e.  Any ground-mounted appurtenance is located within one (1) foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line or as near as possible to the right-of-way line. 
(2)  Underground parallel facilities. An underground parallel facility may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if: 
a.  The facility is located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not more than eight (8) feet (2.4 m) from and parallel to the right-of-way line; 
b.  A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit without disrupting the pavement); and 
c.  In the case of an underground power or communications line, the facility shall be located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not more than five (5) feet (1.5 m) from the right-of-way line and any aboveground appurtenance shall be located within one (1) foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line or as near as practicable. 
(c)  Facilities crossing highways. 
(1)  No future disruption. The construction and design of crossing facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of city highways may require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities. 
(2)  Cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities. Crossing facilities shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities. 
(3)  Ninety-degree crossing required. Crossing facilities shall cross at or as near to a ninety-degree angle to the centerline as practicable. 
(4)  Overhead power or communication facility. An overhead power or communication facility may cross a highway only if it exists as an overhead utility prior to the adoption of this article and if the following criteria are met: 
a.  It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC's rules entitled, "Construction of Electric Power and Communication Lines" (83 Ill. Adm. Code 305); 
b.  Poles are located within one (1) foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and 
3.  Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided. 
(5)  Underground power or communication facility. An underground power or communication facility may cross a highway only if: 
a.  The design materials and construction methods will provide maximum maintenance-free service life; and 
b.  Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is provided in the initial installation. 
(6)  Markers. The city may require the utility to provide a marker at each right-of-way line where an underground facility other than a power or communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may also be eliminated as provided in current federal regulations. (49 C.F.R. § 192.707 (1989).) 
(d)  Facilities to be located within particular rights-of-way. The city may require that facilities be located within particular rights-of-way that are not highways, rather than within particular highways. 
(e)  Freestanding facilities. 
(1)  The city may restrict the location and size of any freestanding facility located within a right-of-way. 
(2)  The city may require any freestanding facility located within a right-of-way to be screened from view by use of landscaping or other appropriate methods. 
(f)  Facilities installed above ground. Aboveground facilities may be installed only if: 
(1)  No other existing facilities in the area are located underground; 
(2)  New underground installation is not technically feasible and the permittee establishes to the satisfaction of the city that compliance requiring the installation of utilities and similar facilities be installed underground is not technically feasible; and 
(3)  The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting armless, single-pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and cable. Existing utility poles and light standards shall be used wherever practicable; the installation of additional utility poles is strongly discouraged. 
(4)  Prior to any aboveground installation the permittee establishes to the satisfaction of the city that (i) installation of the proposed aboveground facility is the only installation method feasible for the purpose to be served by the facility and, (ii) there is no other substitute location available where an underground installation capable of serving the same purpose as the above ground installation is feasible. 
(g)  Facility attachments to bridges or roadway structures. 
(1)  Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means of accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable supports and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are volatile, flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under significant pressure or potential, present high degrees of risk and such installations are not permitted. 
(2)  A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be based upon the following considerations: 
a.  The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in the event of damage to or failure of the facility; 
b.  The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway structure in the transportation system; 
c.  The alternative routings available to the utility and their comparative practicability; 
d.  The proposed method of attachment; 
e.  The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the proposed facility; 
f.  The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting; 
g.  The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and 
h.  The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared to the risk involved. 
(h)  Appearance standards. 
(1)  The city may prohibit the installation of facilities in particular locations in order to preserve visual quality. 
(2)  A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to the right-of-way user or to adjacent residents and property owners, and if it does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed. 
(Ord. No. 07-128, § 2, 12-13-2007)  
Sec. 86-190. - Construction methods and materials. 
(a)  Standards and requirements for particular types of construction methods. 
(1)  Boring or jacking. All work shall be done in accordance with the applicable articles of Section 552 of the IDOT Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction. 
a.  Pits and shoring. Boring or jacking under rights-of-way shall be accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the city designee from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or jacking shall be excavated no more than forty-eight (48) hours in advance of boring or jacking operations and backfilled within forty-eight (48) hours after boring or jacking operations are completed. While pits are open, they shall be clearly marked and protected by barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected, supported, braced, and maintained so that it will safely support all vertical and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking operation. 
b.  Directional boring. Directional boring is required except in those circumstances when it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city that it is not technically feasible. 
c.  Wet boring or jetting. Wet boring or jetting shall not be permitted under the roadway. 
d.  Borings with diameters greater than six (6) inches. Borings over six (6) inches (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside diameter of the following pipe by more than one (1) inch (25 mm), unless otherwise approved in advance by the city engineer. 
e.  Borings with diameters six (6) inches or less. Borings of six (6) inches or less in diameter may be accomplished by either directional drilling, jacking, guided with auger, or auger and following pipe method. 
f.  Tree preservation. Any facility located within the drip line of any tree designated by the city to be preserved or protected shall be bored under or around the root system. 
(2)  Trenching. Trenching for facility installation, repair, or maintenance on rights-of-way shall be done in accord with the applicable portions of Section 603 of IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction." 
a.  Length. The length of open trench shall be kept to the practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipe-line testing. Only one-half of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless special permission is obtained from the city designee. 
b.  Open trench and excavated material. Open trench and windrowed excavated material shall be protected as required by Chapter 6 of the Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Where practicable, the excavated material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as added protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved portion of the roadway. Where right-of-way width does not allow for windrowing excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material shall be hauled to an off-road location. 
(c)  Drip line of trees. The utility shall not trench within the drip line of any tree designated by the city to be preserved. 
(3)  Backfilling. 
a.  Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation of facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using methods and materials in accordance with IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction." When excavated material is hauled away or is unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used. 
b.  For a period of three (3) years from the date construction of a facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore any backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so ordered by the city designee, the utility, at its expense, shall within ten (10) calendar days of such order remove any pavement and backfill material to the top of the installed facility, place and properly compact new backfill material, and restore new pavement, sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to the proper grades, as determined by the city designee. 
(4)  Pavement cuts. Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth herein is permitted under this article, the following requirements shall apply: 
a.  Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled and compacted as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as designated by the city engineer. 
b.  Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the city. 
c.  All saw cuts shall be full depth. 
d.  For all rights-of-way which have been reconstructed with a concrete surface/base in the last seven (7) years, or resurfaced in the last three (3) years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to be an emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen before the time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a J.U.L.I.E. locate. 
(5)  Encasement. 
a.  Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either by one-piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the city. 
b.  The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one (1) foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line. No aboveground vent pipes shall be located in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of the highway. 
c.  In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or city-approved jointed pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is installed prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or mechanical joints are of a type approved by the city. Bell and spigot type pipe shall be encased regardless of installation method. 
d.  In the case of gas pipelines of sixty (60) psig or less, encasement may be eliminated. 
e.  In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines with installations of more than sixty (60) psig, encasement may be eliminated only if: (1) extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or repair and (2) cathodic protection of the pipe is provided; 
f.  If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does not disrupt the right-of-way. 
(6)  Minimum cover of underground facilities. Cover shall be provided and maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for minimum cover for the type of facility: 
Type of Facility 	Minimum Cover 
Electric lines 	30 inches (0.8 m) 
Communication, cable or video service lines 	18 to 24 inches (0.6 m, as determined by city)* 
Gas or petroleum products 	30 inches (0.8 m) 
Water line 	60 inches (1.6 m) 
Sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or drainage line 	48 inches (1.3 m) 
 
*Minimum cover for facilities crossing under streets shall be as determined by the city engineer. 
(b)  Standards and requirements for particular types of facilities. 
(1)  Electric power or communication lines. 
a.  Code compliance. Electric power or communications facilities within city rights-of-way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in conformity with the provisions of 83 Ill. Adm. Code Part 305 (formerly General Order 160 of the Illinois Commerce Commission) entitled "Rules for Construction of Electric Power and Communications Lines," and the National Electrical Safety Code. 
b.  Overhead facilities. If permitted per this article, overhead power or communication facilities shall use single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles shall be used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the installation so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be allowed if there is no feasible alternative and if guy wires are equipped with guy guards for maximum visibility. 
c.  Underground facilities. 
1.  Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing, provided that special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage when crossing improved entrances and side roads. 
2.  If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated only if: (a) the crossing is installed by the use of "moles," "whip augers," or other approved method which compress the earth to make the opening for cable installation or (b) the installation is by the open trench method which is only permitted prior to roadway construction. 
3.  Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the National Electrical Safety Code. 
d.  Burial of drops. All temporary service drops placed between November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known as snowdrops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting, unless otherwise permitted by the city. Weather permitting, utilities shall bury all temporary drops, excluding snowdrops, within ten (10) business calendar days after placement. 
(2)  Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines. Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines may be installed by: 
a.  The use of "moles," "whip augers," or other approved methods which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe; 
b.  Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway; 
c.  Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or 
d.  Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is not possible by other means. 
(3)  Gas transmission, distribution and service. Gas pipelines within rights-of-way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a city-approved manner and in conformance with the Federal Code of the Office of Pipeline Safety Operations, Department of Transportation, Part 192 — Transportation of Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum Federal Safety Standards (49 CFR § 192), IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction," and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations. 
(4)  Petroleum products pipelines. Petroleum products pipelines within rights-of-way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI Standard Code for Pressure Piping (Liquid Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems ANSI-B 31.4). 
(5)  Waterlines, sanitary sewer lines, stormwater sewer lines or drainage lines. Waterlines, sanitary sewer lines, storm[water] sewer lines, and drainage lines within rights-of-way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of the current "Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois." 
(6)  Ground-mounted appurtenances. Ground-mounted appurtenances to overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right-of-way, shall be provided with a vegetation-free area extending one (1) foot (305 mm) in width beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation-free area may be provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or similar material approved by the city designee. With the approval of the city designee shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be used in place of vegetation-free area. The housing for ground-mounted appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the surroundings. 
(c)  Materials. 
(1)  General standards. The materials used in constructing facilities within rights-of-way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's "Standards Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction," the requirements of the Illinois Commerce Commission, or the standards established by other official regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry. 
(2)  Material storage on right-of-way. No material shall be stored on the right-of-way without the prior written approval of the city designee. When such storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross arms, or other materials shall be distributed along the right-of-way prior to and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public or an obstacle to right-of-way maintenance or damage to the right-of-way and other property. If material is to be stored on right-of-way, prior approval must be obtained from the city. 
(3)  Hazardous materials. The plans submitted by the utility to the city shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities. 
(d)  Operational restrictions. 
(1)  Construction operations on rights-of-way may, at the discretion of the city, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are such that construction would result in extensive damage to the right-of-way or other property. 
(2)  These restrictions may be waived by the city designee when emergency work is required to restore vital utility services. 
(3)  Unless otherwise permitted by the city, the hours of construction are those set forth in the Code. 
(e)  Location of existing facilities. Any utility proposing to construct facilities in the city shall contact J.U.L.I.E. and ascertain the presence and location of existing aboveground and underground facilities within the rights-of-way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The city will make its permit records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying possible facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the city or by J.U.L.I.E., a utility shall locate and physically mark its underground facilities within forty-eight (48) hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance with the Illinois Underground Facilities Damage Prevention Act (220 ILCS 50/1 et seq.) 
(Ord. No. 07-128, § 2, 12-13-2007)  
Sec. 86-191. - Vegetation control. 
(a)  Electric utilities—Compliance with state laws and regulations. An electric utility shall conduct all tree trimming and vegetation control activities in the right-of-way in accordance with applicable Illinois laws and regulations and additionally, with such local franchise or other agreement with the city as permitted by law. 
(b)  Other utilities—Tree trimming permit required. Tree trimming that is done by any other utility with facilities in the right-of-way and that is not performed pursuant to applicable Illinois laws and regulations specifically governing same, shall not be considered a normal maintenance operation, but shall require the application for, and the issuance of a permit in addition to any other permit required under this article. 
(1)  Application for tree trimming permit. Applications for tree trimming permits shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by competent workers with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an expiration date in the interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished. 
(2)  Damage to trees. Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The city will require compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed without authorization. The formula developed by the International Society of Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation for damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The city may require the removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave them in an unacceptable condition. 
(c)  Specimen trees or trees of special significance. The city may require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of special significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side arm extensions, covered wire or other means. 
(d)  Chemical use. 
(1)  Except as provided in the following paragraph, no utility shall spray, inject or pour any chemicals on or near any trees, shrubs or vegetation in the city for any purpose, including the control of growth, insects or disease. 
(2)  Spraying of any type of brush-killing chemicals will not be permitted on rights-of-way unless the utility demonstrates to the satisfaction of the city designee that such spraying is the only practicable method of vegetation control. 
(Ord. No. 07-128, § 2, 12-13-2007)  
Sec. 86-192. - Removal, relocation, or modifications of utility facilities. 
(a)  Notice. Within ninety (90) calendar days following written notice from the city, a utility shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any utility facilities within the rights-of-way whenever the corporate authorities have determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any city improvement in or upon, or the operations of the city in or upon, the rights-of-way. 
(b)  Removal of unauthorized facilities. Within thirty (30) calendar days following written notice from the city, any utility that owns, controls, or maintains any unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the rights-of-way shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or appurtenances from the rights-of-way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances: 
(1)  Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law; 
(2)  If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant of a license or franchise, if required; 
(3)  If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance of a required permit in violation of this article; or 
(4)  If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted by the permittee's license or franchise. 
(c)  Emergency removal or relocation of facilities. The city retains the right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights-of-way of the city, as the city may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If circumstances permit, the city shall attempt to notify the utility, if known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if known, after cutting or removing a facility. 
(d)  Abandonment of facilities. Upon abandonment of a facility within the rights-of-way of the city, the utility shall notify the city within ninety (90) calendar days. Following receipt of such notice the city may direct the utility to remove all or any portion of the facility if the city designee determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare. In the event that the city does not direct the utility that abandoned the facility to remove it, by giving notice of abandonment to the city, the abandoning utility shall be deemed to consent to the alteration or removal of all or any portion of the facility by another utility or person. 
(Ord. No. 07-128, § 2, 12-13-2007)  
Sec. 86-193. - Cleanup and restoration. 
The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and terrain and other property within ten (10) calendar days after any portion of the rights-of-way are disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction or maintenance by the utility, all to the satisfaction of the city. This includes restoration of entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces, sidewalks, bicycle trails, landscaping and tree replacement shall be made using materials, vegetation, trees and methods approved by the city designee. Such cleanup and repair may be required to consist of backfilling, regrading, reseeding, resodding, removal of all flags and markers or any other requirement to restore the right-of-way to a condition substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to the commencement of the project. The time period provided in this section may be extended by the city designee for good cause shown. 
(Ord. No. 07-128, § 2, 12-13-2007)  
Sec. 86-194. - Maintenance and emergency maintenance. 
(a)  General. Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights-of-way are to be maintained by or for the utility in a manner satisfactory to the city and at the utility's expense. 
(b)  Emergency maintenance procedures. Emergencies may justify noncompliance with normal procedures for securing a permit: 
(1)  If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the right-of-way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the right-of-way including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations, adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility is available. 
(2)  In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the city designee or his or her duly authorized agent of the emergency, informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for protection of the traveling public and what will be required to make the necessary repairs. If the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free movement of traffic, the law enforcement agency providing police services for the city shall be notified immediately. 
(3)  In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to the traveling public. 
(c)  Emergency repairs. The utility must file in writing with the city a description of the repairs undertaken in the right-of-way within forty-eight (48) hours after an emergency repair. Restoration and cleanup shall be performed in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-128, § 2, 12-13-2007)  
Sec. 86-195. - Variances. 
(a)  Request for variance. A utility requesting a variance from one (1) or more of the provisions of this article must do so in writing to the city designee as a part of the permit application. The request shall identify each provision of this article from which a variance is requested and the reasons why a variance should be granted. 
(b)  Authority to grant variances. The city designee shall decide whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this article identified in the variance request on an individual basis. 
(c)  Conditions for granting of variance. The city designee may authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the variance has demonstrated that: 
(1)  One (1) or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such as terrain features or an irregular right-of-way line) create a special hardship that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and 
(2)  All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are impracticable in relation to the requested approach. 
(d)  Additional conditions for granting of a variance. As a condition for authorizing a variance, the city designee may require the utility requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions that may or may not be expressly contained within this article but which carry out the purposes of this article. 
(e)  Right to appeal. Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement, decision or determination, including denial of a variance, made by the city designee under the provisions of this article shall have the right to appeal to the city council, or such other board or commission as it may designate. The application for appeal shall be submitted in writing to the city clerk within thirty (30) calendar days after the date of such order, requirement, decision or determination. The city council may commence its consideration of the appeal at its next regularly scheduled meeting occurring at least seven (7) calendar days after the filing of the appeal. The city council shall timely decide the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 07-128, § 2, 12-13-2007)  
Sec. 86-196. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this article, or who fails or refuses to remedy a violation of any of the provisions of this article after being notified by the city designee of such a violation, shall be subject to a fine of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. Each day upon which such violation exists shall constitute a separate offense subject to a separate fine. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from pursuing such other lawful action as is necessary for the restraint, correction and abatement of any violation. There may be times when the city will incur delay or other costs, including third-party claims, because the utility will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this article. Unless the utility shows that another allocation of the cost of undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the utility shall bear the city's costs of damages and its costs of installing, maintaining, modifying, relocating, or removing the facility that is the subject of the permit. No other administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a permit-related cost apportionment of the city. Sanctions may be imposed upon a utility that does not pay the costs apportioned to it. 
(Ord. No. 07-128, § 2, 12-13-2007)  
Sec. 86-197. - Enforcement. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed as limiting any additional or further remedies that the city may have for enforcement of this article, as from time to time supplemented and amended. 
(Ord. No. 07-128, § 2, 12-13-2007)  
Secs. 86-198—86-259. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - CABLE AND VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEES 
 
Sec. 86-260. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
Cable service means that term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6). 
Commission means the Illinois Commerce Commission. 
Gross revenues means all consideration of any kind or nature, including, without limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind contributions received by the holder for the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable service or video service within the holder's cable service or video service area within the city. 
(1)  "Gross revenues" shall include the following: 
a.  Recurring charges for cable or video service. 
b.  Event-based charges for cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, pay-per-view and video-on-demand charges. 
c.  Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service equipment. 
d.  Service charges related to the provision of cable service or video service, including but not limited to activation, installation, and repair charges. 
e.  Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service or video service, including but not limited to service order and service termination charges. 
f.  Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges, and other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent payments. 
g.  A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for promotion or exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service within the city. The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the city divided by the total number of subscribers in relation to the relevant regional or national compensation arrangement. 
h.  Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service with respect to commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for promotion or exhibition of any products or services on the holder's network, such as a "home shopping" or similar channel, subject to subsection i. 
i.  In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled or integrated functionally with other services, capabilities, or applications, the portion of the holder's revenue attributable to the other services, capabilities, or applications shall be included in the gross revenue unless the holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from its books and records that are kept in the regular course of business. 
j.  The service provider fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b). 
(2)  "Gross revenues" do not include any of the following: 
a.  Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad debt, subject to 220 ILCS 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi). 
b.  Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the state-issued authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit, or discount is attributable to cable service or video service. 
c.  Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues received from services not classified as cable service or video service, including, without limitation, revenue received from telecommunication services, information services, or the provision of directory or Internet advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement, and electronic publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder to noncable service or nonvideo service in accordance with the holder's books and records and records kept in the regular course of business and any applicable laws, rules, regulations, standards, or orders. 
d.  The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which the purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee from the purchaser's subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that it will resell the service within the city and pay the fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b) with respect to the service. 
e.  Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the subscribers or the transaction by a city, state, federal, or any other governmental entity and collected by the holder of the state-issued authorization and required to be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales and use taxes. 
f.  Security deposits collected from subscribers. 
g.  Amounts paid by subscribers to "home shopping" or similar vendors for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as part of the cable service or video service. 
(3)  Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of the revenue as revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading the payment of the fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b) which would otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service. 
Holder means a person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401. 
Service means the provision of "cable service" or "video service" to subscribers and the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401. 
Service provider fee means the amount paid under this article and 220 ILCS 5/21-801 by the holder to a city for the service areas within its territorial jurisdiction. 
Video service means video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the selection or use of such video programming services, and which is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public right-of-way without regard to delivery technology, including Internet protocol technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332(d) or any video programming provided solely as part of, and via service that enables users to access content, information, electronic mail, or other services offered over the public Internet. 
(Ord. No. 07-129, § 2, 2-13-2007)  
Sec. 86-261. - Cable and video service provider fee imposed. 
(a)  Fee imposed. A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable service or video service in the city. 
(b)  Amount of fee. The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be five (5) percent of the holder's gross revenues. 
(c)  Notice to the city. The holder shall notify the city at least ten (10) days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service or video service in the city. 
(d)  Holder's liability. The holder shall be liable for and pay the service provider fee to the city. The holder's liability for the fee shall commence on the first day of the calendar month following thirty (30) days after receipt of the ordinance adopting this article by the holder. The ordinance shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on the holder's application notice sent pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401(b)(6) to the city. 
(e)  Payment date. The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on a quarterly basis, forty-five (45) days after the close of the calendar quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee. 
(f)  Exemption. The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing cable service or video service providers that have an existing franchise agreement with the city in which a fee is paid. 
(g)  Credit for other payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-301(c) with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may deduct the amount of such credit from the fees that operator owes under this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-129, § 2, 12-13-2007)  
Sec. 86-262. - Applicable principles. 
All determinations and calculations under this article shall be made pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles. 
(Ord. No. 07-129, § 2, 12-13-2007)  
Sec. 86-263. - No impact on other taxes due from holder. 
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to exempt a holder from any tax that is or may later be imposed by the city, including any tax that is or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with respect to cable service or video service. A state-issued authorization shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the city's simplified municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax as it applies to any telephone service provided by the holder. A state-issued authorization shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the local unit of government's 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges. 
(Ord. No. 07-129, § 2, 12-13-2007)  
Sec. 86-264. - Audits of cable and video service provider. 
(a)  Audit requirement. The city will notify the holder of the requirements it imposes on other cable service or video service providers to submit to an audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the same requirements the city imposes on other cable service or video service providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder's books and records and to recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the requirements of the city. If all local franchises between the city and cable operator terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted by the city pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act, 50 ILCS 45/1 et seq. No acceptance of amounts remitted should be construed as an accord that the amounts are correct. 
(b)  Additional payments. Any additional amount due after an audit shall be paid within thirty (30) days after the city's submission of an invoice for the sum. 
(Ord. No. 07-129, § 2, 12-13-2007)  
Sec. 86-265. - Late fees and payments. 
All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by ordinances adopted by the city pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act, 50 ILCS 45/1 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 07-129, § 2, 12-13-2007)  
Secs. 86-266—86-289. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER PROTECTION LAW 
 
Sec. 86-290. - Customer Service and Privacy Protection Law. 
(a)  Adoption. The regulations of 220 ILCS 5/70-501 are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the cable or video providers offering services within the city's boundaries. 
(b)  Amendments. Any amendment to the Cable and Video Customer Protection Law that becomes effective after the effective date of this article shall be incorporated into this article by reference and shall be applicable to cable or video providers offering services within the city. However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by the city shall not be incorporated into this article by reference without formal action by the corporate authorities of the city. 
(Ord. No. 07-130, § 2, 12-13-2007)  
Sec. 86-291. - Enforcement. 
The city does hereby pursuant to law declare its intent to enforce all of the customer service and privacy protection standards of the Cable and Video Protection Law with respect to complaints received from residents within the city. 
(Ord. No. 07-130, § 2, 12-13-2007)  
Sec. 86-292. - Penalties. 
The city, pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/70-501(r)(1), does hereby provide for a schedule of penalties for any material breach of the Cable and Video Protection Law by cable or video providers in addition to the penalties provided in the law. The monetary penalties shall apply on a competitively neutral basis and shall not exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each day of the material breach, and shall not exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for each occurrence of a material breach per customer. 
(a)  Material breach means any substantial failure of a cable or video provider to comply with service quality and other standards specified in any provision of the law. 
(b)  The city shall give the cable or video provider written notice of any alleged material breaches of the law and allow such provider at least thirty (30) days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach. 
(c)  A material breach, for the purposes of assuming penalties, shall be deemed to occur for each day that a material breach has not been remedied by the cable or video service provider after the notice in (b). 
(Ord. No. 07-130, § 2, 12-13-2007)  
Sec. 86-293. - Customer credits. 
The city hereby adopts the schedule of customer credits for violations. Those credits shall be as provided for in the provisions of 220 ILCS 5/70-501(s) and applied on the statement issued to the customer for the next billing cycle following the violation or following the discovery of the violation. The cable or video provider is responsible for providing the credits and the customer is under no obligation to request the credit. 
(Ord. No. 07-130, § 2, 12-13-2007)  
Secs. 86-294—86-300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES 
 
Sec. 86-301. - Purpose and scope. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this article is to establish regulations, standards and procedures for the siting and collocation of small wireless facilities on rights-of-way within the city's jurisdiction, or outside the rights-of-way on property zoned by the city exclusively for commercial or industrial use, in a manner that is consistent with the Act. 
(b)  Conflicts with other ordinances. This article supersedes all ordinances or parts of ordinances adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict. 
(c)  Conflicts with state and federal laws. In the event that applicable federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this article, the wireless provider shall comply with the requirements of this article to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 18-40, § 1, 7-26-2018)  
Sec. 86-302. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
Antenna means communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services. 
Applicable codes means uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or local amendments to those codes, including the National Electric Safety Code. 
Applicant means any person who submits an application and is a wireless provider. 
Application means a request submitted by an applicant to the city for a permit to collocate small wireless facilities, and a request that includes the installation of a new utility pole for such collocation, as well as any applicable fee for the review of such application. 
Collocate or collocation means to install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure or utility pole. 
Communications service means cable service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(6), as amended; information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(24), as amended; telecommunications service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(53), as amended; mobile service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(53), as amended; or wireless service other than mobile service. 
Communications service provider means a cable operator, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(5), as amended; a provider of information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(24), as amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(51), as amended; or a wireless provider. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission of the United States. 
Fee means a one-time charge. 
Historic district or historic landmark means a building, property, or site, or group of buildings, properties, or sites that are either (i) listed in the National Register of Historic Places or formally determined eligible for listing by the Keeper of the National Register, the individual who has been delegated the authority by the federal agency to list properties and determine their eligibility for the National Register, in accordance with Section VI.D.1.a.i through Section VI.D.l.a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement codified at 47 CFR Part 1, Appendix C; or (ii) designated as a locally landmarked building, property, site, or historic district by an ordinance adopted by the city pursuant to a preservation program that meets the requirements of the Certified Local Government Program of the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office or where such certification of the preservation program by the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office is pending. 
Law means a federal or state statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order, or local ordinance or resolution. 
Micro wireless facility means a small wireless facility that is not larger in dimension than twenty-four (24) inches in length, fifteen (15) inches in width, and twelve (12) inches in height and that has an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than eleven (11) inches. 
Municipal utility pole means a utility pole owned or operated by the city in public rights-of-way. 
Permit means a written authorization required by the city to perform an action or initiate, continue, or complete a project. 
Person means an individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association, trust, or other entity or organization. 
Public safety agency means the functional division of the federal government, the state, a unit of local government, or a special purpose district located in whole or in part within this state, that provides or has authority to provide firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other emergency services to respond to and manage emergency incidents. 
Rate means a recurring charge. 
Right-of-way means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated for compatible use. Right-of-way does not include city-owned aerial lines. 
Small wireless facility means a wireless facility that meets both of the following qualifications: (i) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an imaginary enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet; and (ii) all other wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with the facility is cumulatively no more than twenty-five (25) cubic feet in volume. The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of equipment volume: Electric meter, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services. 
Utility pole means a pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part by a communications service provider or for electric distribution, lighting, traffic control, or a similar function. 
Wireless facility means equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network, including: (i) equipment associated with wireless communications; and (ii) radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration. Wireless facility includes small wireless facilities. Wireless facility does not include: (i) the structure or improvements on, under, or within which the equipment is collocated; or (ii) wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber optic cable that is between wireless support structures or utility poles or coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or directly associated with an antenna. 
Wireless infrastructure provider means any person authorized to provide telecommunications service in the state that builds or installs wireless communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider but is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the application submitted to the city. 
Wireless provider means a wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services provider. 
Wireless services means any services provided to the general public, including a particular class of customers, and made available on a nondiscriminatory basis using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided using wireless facilities. 
Wireless services provider means a person who provides wireless services. 
Wireless support structure means a freestanding structure, such as a monopole; tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless facilities. Wireless support structure does not include a utility pole. 
(Ord. No. 18-40, § 1, 7-26-2018)  
Sec. 86-303. - Regulation of small wireless facilities. 
(a)  Permitted use. Small wireless facilities shall be classified as permitted uses and subject to administrative review, except as provided in paragraph (9) regarding height exceptions or variances, but not subject to zoning review or approval if they are collocated (i) in rights-of-way in any zoning district, or (ii) outside rights-of-way in property zoned exclusively for commercial or industrial use. 
(b)  Permit required. An applicant shall obtain one (1) or more permits from the city to collocate a small wireless facility. An application shall be received and processed, and permits issued shall be subject to the following conditions and requirements: 
(1)  Application requirements. A wireless provider shall provide the following information to the city, together with the city's small cell facilities permit application, as a condition of any permit application to collocate small wireless facilities on a utility pole or wireless support structure: 
a.  Site specific structural integrity and, for a municipal utility pole, make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is defined in Section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989; 
b.  The location where each proposed small wireless facility or utility pole would be installed and photographs of the location and its immediate surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on which each proposed small wireless facility would be mounted or location where utility poles or structures would be installed. This should include a depiction of the completed facility; 
c.  Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is defined in Section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989, for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application as it is proposed to be installed; 
d.  The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility; 
e.  A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each small wireless facility covered by the application, if approved; and 
f.  Certification that the collocation complies with the collocation requirements and conditions contained herein, to the best of the applicant's knowledge. 
g.  In the event that the proposed small wireless facility is to be attached to an existing pole owned by an entity other than the city, the wireless provider shall provide legally competent evidence of the consent of the owner of such pole to the proposed collocation. 
(2)  Application process. The city shall process applications as follows: 
a.  The first completed application shall have priority over applications received by different applicants for collocation on the same utility pole or wireless support structure. 
b.  An application to collocate a small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or wireless support structure, or replacement of an existing utility pole or wireless support structure shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and shall be deemed approved if the city fails to approve or deny the application within ninety (90) days after the submission of a completed application. 
However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the city in writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than seventy-five (75) days after the submission of a completed application. 
The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the ninetieth day after submission of the complete application or the tenth day after the receipt of the deemed approved notice by the city. The receipt of the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the city's denial of the permit request within the time limits as provided under this article. 
c.  An application to collocate a small wireless facility that includes the installation of a new utility pole shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and deemed approved if the city fails to approve or deny the application within one hundred twenty (120) days after the submission of a completed application. 
However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the city in writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than one hundred five (105) days after the submission of a completed application. 
The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the one hundred twentieth day after submission of the complete application or the tenth day after the receipt of the deemed approved notice by the city. The receipt of the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the city's denial of the permit request within the time limits as provided under this article. 
d.  The city shall deny an application which does not meet the requirements of this article. 
If the city determines that applicable codes, ordinances or regulations that concern public safety, or the collocation requirements and conditions contained herein require that the utility pole or wireless support structure be replaced before the requested collocation, approval shall be conditioned on the replacement of the utility pole or wireless support structure at the cost of the provider. 
The city shall document the basis for a denial, including the specific code provisions or application conditions on which the denial is based, and send the documentation to the applicant on or before the day the city denies an application. 
The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the city and resubmit the revised application once within thirty (30) days after notice of denial is sent to the applicant without paying an additional application fee. The city shall approve or deny the revised application within thirty (30) days after the applicant resubmits the application or it is deemed approved. Failure to resubmit the revised application within thirty (30) days of denial shall require the application to submit a new application with applicable fees, and recommencement of the city's review period. 
The applicant must notify the city in writing of its intention to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, which may be submitted with the revised application. 
Any review of a revised application shall be limited to the deficiencies cited in the denial. However, this revised application does not apply if the cure requires the review of a new location, new or different structure to be collocated upon, new antennas, or other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility. 
e.  Pole attachment agreement. Within thirty (30) days after an approved permit to collocate a small wireless facility on a municipal utility pole, the city and the applicant shall enter into a master pole attachment agreement, provided by the city for the initial collocation on a municipal utility pole by the application. For subsequent approved permits to collocate on a small wireless facility on a municipal utility pole, the city and the applicant shall enter into a license supplement of the master pole attachment agreement. 
(3)  Completeness of application. Within thirty (30) days after receiving an application, the city shall determine whether the application is complete and notify the applicant. If an application is incomplete, the city must specifically identify the missing information. An application shall be deemed complete if the city fails to provide notification to the applicant within thirty (30) days after all documents, information and fees specifically enumerated in the city's permit application form are submitted by the applicant to the city. 
Processing deadlines are tolled from the time the city sends the notice of incompleteness to the time the applicant provides the missing information. 
(4)  Tolling. The time period for applications may be further tolled by: 
a.  An express written agreement by both the applicant and the city; or 
b.  A local, state or federal disaster declaration or similar emergency that causes the delay. 
(5)  Consolidated applications. An applicant seeking to collocate small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the city shall be allowed, at the applicant's discretion, to file a consolidated application and receive a single permit for the collocation of up to twenty-five (25) small wireless facilities if the collocations each involve substantially the same type of small wireless facility and substantially the same type of structure. 
If an application includes multiple small wireless facilities, the city may remove small wireless facility collocations from the application and treat separately small wireless facility collocations for which incomplete information has been provided or that do not qualify for consolidated treatment or that are denied. The city may issue separate permits for each collocation that is approved in a consolidated application. 
(6)  Duration of permits. The duration of a permit shall be for a period of not less than five (5) years, and the permit shall be renewed for equivalent durations unless the city makes a finding that the small wireless facilities or the new or modified utility pole do not comply with the applicable city codes or any provision, condition or requirement contained in this article. 
If the Act is repealed as provided in Section 90 therein, renewals of permits shall be subject to the applicable city code provisions or regulations in effect at the time of renewal. 
(7)  Means of submitting applications. Applicants shall submit applications, supporting information and notices to the city by personal delivery at the city's designated place of business, by regular mail postmarked on the date due or by any other commonly used means, including electronic mail. 
(c)  Collocation requirements and conditions. 
(1)  Public safety space reservation. The city may reserve space on municipal utility poles for future public safety uses, for the city's electric utility uses, or both, but a reservation of space may not preclude the collocation of a small wireless facility unless the city reasonably determines that the municipal utility pole cannot accommodate both uses. 
(2)  Installation and maintenance. The wireless provider shall install, maintain, repair and modify its small wireless facilities in safe condition and good repair and in compliance with the requirements and conditions of this article. The wireless provider shall ensure that its employees, agents or contracts that perform work in connection with its small wireless facilities are adequately trained and skilled in accordance with all applicable industry and governmental standards and regulations. 
(3)  No interference with public safety communication frequencies. The wireless provider's operation of the small wireless facilities shall not interfere with the frequencies used by a public safety agency for public safety communications. 
A wireless provider shall install small wireless facilities of the type and frequency that will not cause unacceptable interference with a public safety agency's communications equipment. 
Unacceptable interference will be determined by and measured in accordance with industry standards and the FCC's regulations addressing unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum licensed by a public safety agency. 
If a small wireless facility causes such interference, and the wireless provider has been given written notice of the interference by the public safety agency, the wireless provider, at its own expense, shall remedy the interference in a manner consistent with the abatement and resolution procedures for interference with public safety spectrum established by the FCC including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR 90.672 through 47 CFR 90.675. 
The city may terminate a permit for a small wireless facility based on such interference if the wireless provider is not in compliance with the Code of Federal Regulations cited in the previous paragraph. Failure to remedy the interference as required herein shall constitute a public nuisance. 
(4)  [Collocation on utility poles.] The wireless provider shall not collocate small wireless facilities on city utility poles that are part of an electric distribution or transmission system within the communication worker safety zone of the pole or the electric supply zone of the pole. 
However, the antenna and support equipment of the small wireless facility may be located in the communications space on the city utility pole and on the top of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the wireless provider complies with applicable codes for work involving the top of the pole. 
For purposes of this subparagraph, the terms "communications space", "communication worker safety zone", and "electric supply zone" have the meanings given to those terms in the National Electric Safety Code as published by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers. 
(5)  [Compliance with codes.] The wireless provider shall comply with all applicable codes and local code provisions or regulations that concern public safety. 
(6)  [Compliance with design standards.] The wireless provider shall comply with written design standards that are generally applicable for decorative utility poles, or reasonable stealth, concealment and aesthetic requirements that are set forth in a city ordinance, written policy adopted by the city, a comprehensive plan or other written design plan that applies to other occupiers of the rights-of-way, including on a historic landmark or in a historic district. 
(7)  Alternate placements. Except as provided in this collocation requirements and conditions section, a wireless provider shall not be required to collocation small wireless facilities on any specific utility pole, or category of utility poles, or be required to collocate multiple antenna systems on a single utility pole. However, with respect to an application for the collocation of a small wireless facility associated with a new utility pole, the city may propose that the small wireless facility be collocated on an existing utility pole or existing wireless support structure within one hundred (100) feet of the proposed collocation, which the applicant shall accept if it has the right to use the alternate structure on reasonable terms and conditions, and the alternate location and structure does not impose technical limits or additional material costs as determined by the applicant. 
If the applicant refuses a collocation proposed by the city, the applicant shall provide written certification describing the property rights, technical limits or material cost reasons the alternate location does not satisfy the criteria in this paragraph. 
(8)  Height limitations. The maximum height of a small wireless facility shall be no more than ten (10) feet above the utility pole or wireless support structure on which the small wireless facility is collocated. 
New or replacement utility poles or wireless support structures on which small wireless facilities are collocated may not exceed the higher of: 
a.  Ten (10) feet in height above the tallest existing utility pole, other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place on the date the application is submitted to the city, that is located within three hundred (300) feet of the new or replacement utility pole or wireless support structure and that is in the same right-of-way within the jurisdictional boundary of the city, provided the city may designate which intersecting right-of-way within three hundred (300) feet of the proposed utility pole or wireless support structures shall control the height limitation for such facility; or 
b.  Forty-five (45) feet above ground level. 
(9)  Height exceptions or variances. If an applicant proposes a height for a new or replacement pole in excess of the above height limitations on which the small wireless facility is proposed for collocation, the applicant shall apply for a variance in conformance with procedures, terms and conditions set forth in subsection 12.6 of the zoning ordinance [appendix B]. 
(10)  Contractual design requirements. The wireless provider shall comply with requirements that are imposed by a contract between the city and a private property owner that concern design or construction standards applicable to utility poles and ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way. 
(11)  Ground-mounted equipment spacing. The wireless provider shall comply with applicable spacing requirements in applicable codes and ordinances concerning the location of ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way if the requirements include a waiver, zoning or other process that addresses wireless provider requests for exception or variance and do not prohibit granting of such exceptions or variances. 
(12)  Undergrounding regulations. The wireless provider shall comply with local code provisions or regulations concerning undergrounding requirements that prohibit the installation of new or the modification of existing utility poles in a right-of-way without prior approval if the requirements include a waiver, zoning or other process that addresses requests to install such new utility poles or modify such existing utility poles and do not prohibit the replacement of utility poles. 
(13)  Collocation completion deadline. Collocation for which a permit is granted shall be completed within one hundred eighty (180) days after issuance of the permit, unless the city and the wireless provider agree to extend this period or a delay is caused by make-ready work for a municipal utility pole or by the lack of commercial power or backhaul availability at the site, provided the wireless provider has made a timely request within sixty (60) days after the issuance of the permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and the additional time to complete installation does not exceed three hundred sixty (360) days after issuance of the permit. Otherwise, the permit shall be void unless the city grants an extension in writing to the applicant. 
(d)  Application fees. Application fees are imposed as follows: 
(1)  Applicant shall pay an application fee of six hundred fifty dollars ($650.00) for an application to collocate a single small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or wireless support structure, and three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) for each small wireless facility addressed in a consolidated application to collocate more than one (1) small wireless facility on existing utility poles or wireless support structures. 
(2)  Applicant shall pay an application fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each small wireless facility addressed in an application that includes the installation of a new utility pole for such collocation. 
(3)  Notwithstanding any contrary provision of state law or local ordinance, applications pursuant to this section shall be accompanied by the required application fee. Application fees shall be non-refundable. 
(4)  The city shall not require an application, approval or permit, or require any fees or other charges, from a communications service provider authorized to occupy the rights-of-way, for: 
a.  Routine maintenance; 
b.  The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities that are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless provider notifies the city at least ten (10) days prior to the planned replacement and includes equipment specifications for the replacement of equipment consistent with subsection (b)(1)d.; or 
c.  the installation, placement, maintenance, operation or replacement of micro wireless facilities suspended on cables that are strung between existing utility poles in compliance with applicable safety codes. 
(5)  Wireless providers shall secure a permit from the city to work within rights-of-way for activities that affect traffic patterns or require lane closures. 
(e)  Exceptions to applicability. Nothing in this article authorizes a person to collocate small wireless facilities on: 
(1)  Property owned by a private party or property owned or controlled by the city or another unit of local government that is not located within rights-of-way, or a privately owned utility pole or wireless support structure without the consent of the property owner; 
(2)  Property owned, leased, or controlled by a park district, forest preserve district, or conservation district for public park, recreation or conservation purposes without the consent of the affected district, excluding the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in an affected district that are under the jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code; or 
(3)  Property owned by a rail carrier registered under Section 18c-7201 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, Metra Commuter Rail or any other public commuter rail service, or an electric utility as defined in Section 16-102 of the Public Utilities Act, without the consent of the rail carrier, public commuter rail service, or electric utility. The provisions of this article do not apply to an electric or gas public utility or such utility's wireless facilities if the facilities are being used, developed and maintained consistent with the provisions of subsection (i) of Section 16-108.5 of the Public Utilities Act. 
For the purposes of this subsection, "public utility" has the meaning given to that term in Section 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act. Nothing in this article shall be construed to relieve any person from any requirement (a) to obtain a franchise or a state-issued authorization to offer cable service or video service or (b) to obtain any required permission to install, place, maintain, or operate communications facilities, other than small wireless facilities subject to this article. 
(f)  Pre-existing agreements . Existing agreements between the city and wireless providers that relate to the collocation of small wireless facilities in the right-of-way, including the collocation of small wireless facilities on city utility poles, that are in effect on June 1, 2018, remain in effect for all small wireless facilities collocated on the city's utility poles pursuant to applications submitted to the city before June 1, 2018, subject to applicable termination provisions contained therein. Agreements entered into after June 1, 2018, shall comply with this article. 
A wireless provider that has an existing agreement with the city on the effective date of the act may accept the rates, fees and terms that the city makes available under this article for the collocation of small wireless facilities or the installation of new utility poles for the collocation of small wireless facilities that are the subject of an application submitted two (2) or more years after the effective date of the Act by notifying the city that it opts to accept such rates, fees and terms. The existing agreement remains in effect, subject to applicable termination provisions, for the small wireless facilities the wireless provider has collocated on the city's utility poles pursuant to applications submitted to the city before the wireless provider provides such notice and exercises its option under this paragraph. 
(g)  Annual recurring rate. A wireless provider shall pay to the city an annual recurring rate to collocate a small wireless facility on a city utility pole located in a right-of-way that equals: 
(1)  Two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year; or 
(2)  The actual, direct and reasonable costs related to the wireless provider's use of space on the city utility pole. 
If the city has not billed the wireless provider actual and direct costs, the fee shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00) payable on the first day after the first annual anniversary of the issuance of the permit or notice of intent to collocate, and on each annual anniversary date thereafter. 
(h)  Abandonment. A small wireless facility that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned. The owner of the facility shall remove the small wireless facility within ninety (90) days after receipt of written notice from the city notifying the wireless provider of the abandonment. 
The notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, by the city to the owner at the last known address of the wireless provider. If the small wireless facility is not removed within ninety (90) days of such notice, the city may remove or cause the removal of such facility pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment agreement for municipal utility poles or through whatever actions are provided for abatement of nuisances or by other law for removal and cost recovery. 
A wireless provider shall provide written notice to the city if it sells or transfers small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the city. Such notice shall include the name and contact information of the new wireless provider. 
(Ord. No. 18-40, § 3, 7-26-2018)  
Sec. 86-304. - Dispute resolution. 
The Circuit Court of Cook shall have exclusive jurisdiction to resolve all disputes arising under the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act. Pending resolution of a dispute concerning rates for collocation of small wireless facilities on municipal utility poles within the right-of-way, the city shall allow the collocating person to collocate on its poles at annual rates of no more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year per municipal utility pole, with rates to be determined upon final resolution of the dispute. 
(Ord. No. 18-40, § 3, 7-26-2018)  
Sec. 86-305. - Indemnification. 
A wireless provider shall indemnify and hold the city harmless against any and all liability or loss from personal injury or property damage resulting from or arising out of, in whole or in part, the use or occupancy of the city improvements or right-of-way associated with such improvements by the wireless provider or its employees, agents, or contractors arising out of the rights and privileges granted under this article and the Act. A wireless provider has no obligation to indemnify or hold harmless against any liabilities and losses as may be due to or caused by the sole negligence of the city or its employees or agents. A wireless provider shall further waive any claims that they may have against the city with respect to consequential, incidental, or special damages, however caused, based on the theory of liability. 
(Ord. No. 18-40, § 3, 7-26-2018)  
Sec. 86-306. - Insurance. 
The wireless provider shall carry, at the wireless provider's own cost and expense, the following insurance: 
(a)  Property insurance for its property's replacement cost against all risks; 
(b)  Workers' compensation insurance, as required by law; or 
(c)  Commercial general liability insurance with respect to its activities on the city improvements or rights-of-way to afford minimum protection limits consistent with its requirements of other users of city improvements or rights-of-way, including coverage for bodily injury and property damage. 
The wireless provider shall include the city as an additional insured on the commercial general liability policy and provide certification and documentation of inclusion of the city in a commercial general liability policy prior to the collocation of any wireless facility. 
A wireless provider may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage and limit requirement required by the city. A wireless provider that self-insures is not required, to the extent of the self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the name of additional insureds under this section. A wireless provider that elects to self-insure shall provide to the city evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage limits required by the city. 
(Ord. No. 18-40, § 3, 7-26-2018)  
Chapter 90 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Fire lanes, § 30-2; law enforcement, ch. 46; soliciting from occupants of vehicles, § 54-1014; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 62; traffic hazards for signs, § 70-5; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78. 
State Law reference— Motor vehicles and traffic generally, 625 ILCS. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 90-1. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, except when the context otherwise requires and except where another definition set forth in another article of this chapter and applicable to that article or a designated part thereof is applicable. 
Loading zone means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. (Code 1980, § 17-1) 
State Law reference— Definitions, 625 ILCS 5/1-201 et seq.  
Secs. 90-2—90-6. - Reserved.  
Sec. 90-7. - Adoption of Illinois Vehicle Code by reference. 
There is hereby adopted by reference, by the City of Calumet City, the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/1=100). 
(Code 1980, § 17-17; Ord. No. 92-5, § 1, 2-13-1992)  
Sec. 90-8. - Obedience required. 
It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required by this chapter. 
(Code 1980, § 17-2)  
Sec. 90-9. - Accidents. 
The driver of a vehicle which has collided with, or been in an accident with, any vehicle, person or property in such a manner as to cause injury or damage shall stop immediately and render such assistance as may be possible, and give his true name and residence to the injured person or any other persons requesting the same on behalf of the injured person, or the owner of the property damaged, and to a policeman, if one is present. A report of each such accident shall be given by the driver of each vehicle concerned to the chief of police within twenty-four (24) hours after the accident. 
(Code 1980, § 17-12) 
State Law reference— Accidents generally, 625 ILCS 5/11-401 et seq.  
Sec. 90-10. - Sound device restrictions; violation, penalty. 
(a)  No person shall play, use, operate or permit to be played, used or operated, any radio, tape recorder, cassette player or other device for receiving broadcast sound or producing recorded sound if the device is located: 
(1)  On the public way; or 
(2)  In any motor vehicle on the public way; 
and if the sound generated by the device is clearly audible to a person with normal hearing at a distance greater than seventy-five (75) feet. This section shall not apply to any person participating in a parade or public assembly for which a permit has been obtained pursuant to section 62-281 and section 62-301 et seq., of this Code. 
(b)  Any person who violates this section shall be subject to a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) for a first offense, one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a second offense committed within a one (1) year period, and five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a third or subsequent offense committed within a one (1) year period. 
(Code 1980, § 17-65; Ord. No. 96-53, § 1, 8-8-1996)  
Sec. 90-11. - Riding on outside of vehicle. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride upon the fenders, running board or outside step of any vehicle. 
(Code 1980, § 17-107)  
Sec. 90-12. - Opening vehicle doors. 
No person shall open the door of a vehicle on the side available to moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, and can be done without interfering with the movement of other traffic, nor shall any person leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers. 
(Code 1980, § 17-109)  
Sec. 90-13. - Through street closure. 
The following streets and portions of streets are hereby designated as closed streets: 
159th Street, at its intersection with State Line Road; traffic on 159th Street between Legion Drive and State Line Road shall hereafter travel in both easterly and westerly directions. 
(Code 1980, § 17-114; Ord. No. 96-76, § 1, 12-12-1996)  
Sec. 90-14. - Pedestrians. 
(a)  Any person walking along and upon improved roadways shall keep on the left of the paved portion, or on the left shoulder thereof, and upon a vehicle traveling in their vicinity when they are walking on such paved portion they shall step off to the left. 
(b)  Where sidewalks are provided it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway except at a crosswalk. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for pedestrians to impede the flow of traffic or obstruct traffic or in any way interfere with traffic in the City of Calumet City, by walking in the roadway other than at a crosswalk or intersection. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian who is under the influence of intoxicating liquors to be walking upon any roadway of this City. 
(e)  Whenever a minor has been detained by the police for a violation of this ordinance, that minor's legal guardian shall be notified as soon as practicable. The minor shall only be released from custody to that minor's legal guardian. 
(f)  When a minor violates this ordinance, that minor's legal guardian shall pay a fine of not less than $25 and not more than $500 for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 04-64, §§ 1—6, 9-9-2004)  
Secs. 90-15—90-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 90-41. - Authority to direct traffic; unauthorized directing. 
Members of the police department, and special police assigned to traffic duty, are hereby authorized to direct all traffic in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, or in emergencies as public safety or convenience may require. Except in case of emergency it shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by law to direct or attempt to direct traffic. 
(Code 1980, § 17-3)  
Sec. 90-42. - Directing traffic at fire. 
The fire department officer in command, or any fireman designated by him, may exercise the powers and authority of a policeman in directing traffic at the scene of any fire, or where the fire department has responded to an emergency call for so long as fire department equipment is on the scene, in the absence of or in assisting the police. 
(Code 1980, § 17-5) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 30.  
Sec. 90-43. - Right to bail. 
Any person arrested for a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be released upon proper bail being furnished as required by state law. The police officer in command at the station may, in the absence of a police magistrate or justice of the peace, prescribe the amount of bail or bond in each instance; provided, that any arrested person may, at his own request, have the amount of such bond set as provided by state law. 
(Code 1980, § 17-7)  
Sec. 90-44. - Towing cars away. 
(a)  The police department and all members thereof assigned to traffic duty are hereby authorized to remove and tow away, or have removed and towed away by commercial towing service, any car or other vehicle illegally parked in any place where such parked vehicle creates or constitutes a traffic hazard, blocks the use of a fire hydrant, or obstructs or may obstruct the movement of any emergency vehicle. 
(b)  Any car or other vehicle parked on any of the streets during the hours when parking thereon is prohibited may also be removed and towed away as herein provided. 
(c)  Cars so towed away for illegal parking shall be stored in a safe place and shall be restored to the owner of operator of such car upon payment of a fee as follows: 
On weekdays between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. ..... $10.00 
From 6:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. and on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays ..... 12.50 
within twenty-four (24) hours after the time such car was removed, plus an additional storage fee for each additional twenty-four (24) hours or fraction thereof of one dollar ($1.00) for outside storage and one dollar and fifty cents ($1.50) for inside storage. 
(Code 1980, § 17-13)  
Secs. 90-45—90-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - VIOLATIONS 
 
Sec. 90-71. - Presumption of owner's responsibility. 
The fact that an automobile or motor vehicle which is illegally operated or parked is registered with the secretary of state in the name of said alleged violator, or, in the alternative, in the event that a vehicle sticker issued by a municipality has been issued in the name of and to the alleged violator, shall be considered prima facie proof that said alleged violator was in control of or was the operator of the automobile or motor vehicle at the time of such alleged violation. 
(Code 1980, § 17-11; Ord. of 6-24-1966, § 4)  
Sec. 90-72. - Citations; compromising penalty. 
(a)  A police officer is authorized to arrest a person without a warrant because of a violation of this Code concerning: 
(1)  The parking of a vehicle in a designated prohibited area; 
(2)  A restriction on the length of time a vehicle may be there parked; 
(3)  The purchase and display of a vehicle license sticker; 
(4)  Parking in metered zones. 
(b)  Said police officer may, in lieu of the filing of a complaint in court, in the first instance issue to such alleged violator a citation: 
(1)  Advising said person that he has violated a specified section of this Code; 
(2)  Requesting him to make payment in an amount applicable to said alleged violation as set forth in this section as settlement of said violation claim; and 
(3)  Informing him that upon failure to so settle, a complaint will be filed in the circuit court, charging him with such violation. 
(c)  Pursuant to said citation, the person so accused of said violation may settle and compromise such violation claim by paying to the city the applicable amount within a period to be specified in said citation. Such payment shall be made in accordance with the instructions contained in the citation, at the office of the city clerk who shall issue a receipt for the money so received and promptly remit said amount to the city treasurer to be credited to the proper municipal fund. 
(d)  In the event that the person to whom said citation is issued fails to settle and pay said violation claim within the prescribed time, or within a period of time specified in a final notice (if one is served upon him) then the peace officer is authorized to cause a notice to appear to be served upon said alleged violator and is authorized to file a complaint and to prosecute the same in the circuit court. 
(e)  The violation claim described in the citation to be issued pursuant to the terms of this section may be settled, compromised and paid in the respective amounts set forth in section 90-74, schedule of fines/penalties of this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 17-15; Ord. of 6-24-1966, §§ 1—5; Ord. No. 88-24, § 1, 10-13-1988; Ord. No. 96-22, § 1, 4-11-1996)  
Sec. 90-73. - Alternative penalties; compliance tickets. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, any person accused of a violation of any section of this chapter in relation to which the violation can be rectified by correction of the violation alleged, or failing to purchase, obtain and/or display any permit or license required pursuant to any other provision of this Code which requires the purchase of a license or permit, or failing to wear a seatbelt when required to do so, pursuant to the issuance of a compliance ticket, except a traffic offense for which a court appearance is required pursuant to law may settle and compromise that ticket by paying to the city a fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) and showing proof of the correction of the violation (i.e. replacement of the faulty equipment, purchase of the required license or permit) within ten (10) days from the date such alleged violation was committed or by paying to the city the sum of forty dollars ($40.00), subsequent to said ten (10) day period and prior to thirty (30) days from the date such alleged violation was committed and showing proof of the correction of the violation. 
(b)  Compliance tickets shall be issued as a courtesy in lieu of instituting a prosecution for the alleged offense. If the person accused of the violation does not settle the claim, the compliance ticket will be converted to a complaint, or a uniform traffic complaint or notice to appear will be issued for that violation, and that person shall be subject to the general penalties set forth in this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 17-18; Ord. No. 92-5, § 2, 2-13-1992) 
_____ 
Sec. 90-74. - Schedule of fines/penalties. 
The fines and penalties which shall be imposed for the violation of vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) shall be as follows: 
Fine Schedule 	General Fine 
Amount 	Handicapped 
Fine Amount 	Traffic 
Compliance 
Upon service of a "Violation Notice" issued and paid prior to the commencement of the 1st Hearing Date, the fine amount will be: 	$50.00 	$100.00 	$50.00 
Having failed to pay the fine amount specified in Step 1 prior to or on the 1st Hearing Date, the fine amount, if paid prior to the 2nd Hearing Date, will be: 	$100.00 	$150.00 	$100.00 
Having failed to pay the fine amount specified in Step 2 prior to the 2nd Hearing Date, the fine amount, if paid on the 2nd Hearing Date or prior to the 3rd Hearing Date, will be: 	$200.00 	$200.00 	$200.00 
Having failed to pay the fine amount specified in Step 3 prior to the 3rd Hearing Date, the fine amount, if paid on the 3rd Hearing Date or upon the finding of liability for the violation, after failure to appear at the 3rd Hearing, will be: 	$250.00 	$250.00 	$250.00 
 
(Code 1980 § 17-168; Ord. No. 03-63, § 1, 10-23-2003; Ord. No. 03-67, § 1, 11-13-2003) 
_____ 
Secs. 90-75—90-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - AUTOMATED TRAFFIC ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-68, § 2, adopted Dec. 21, 2010, amended art. II, §§ 90-81—90-93, in its entirety as set out herein. Formerly, art. II, §§ 90-81—90-86, pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 90-81. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used herein, shall have ascribed to them the following meanings, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Automated traffic law enforcement system means a device within the city with one (1) or more motor vehicle sensors working in conjunction with a red light signal to produce recorded images of motor vehicles entering an intersection against a steady or flashing red signal indication in violation of Section 11-306 of the Illinois Vehicle Code ("Code"), 625 ILCS 5/11-306, or similar violation of the City Municipal Code. 
Disregarding a traffic control device means failure to stop and remain stopped before an intersection that is controlled by a red signal as provided for in Section 11-306 of the Illinois Vehicle Code or a similar provision of the City Municipal Code. 
No turn on red means where the motor vehicle comes to a complete stop and does not enter the intersection as defined by Section 1-132 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, during the cycle of the red signal indication unless one (1) or more pedestrians are present, even if the motor vehicle stops at a point past a stop line or crosswalk where a driver is required to stop, as specified in subsection (c) of Section 11-306 of the Illinois Vehicle Code or a similar provision of the City Municipal Code. 
Recorded images means images produced by the automated traffic law enforcement system, which consists of either two (2) or more photographs; two (2) or more microphotographs; two (2) or more electronic images; or a video recording showing the motor vehicle and, on at least one (1) image or portion of the recording, clearly identifying the registration plate number of the motor vehicle. 
Traffic compliance administrator means the person appointed as ordinance enforcement administrator through section 2-943 of the City Municipal Code and shall have the following additional powers: adopt, distribute and process automated traffic law violation notices and other notices required by this division, collect money paid as fines and penalties, operate the automated traffic law enforcement system, and make certified reports to the Secretary of State as required by this division. 
(Ord. No. 10-68, § 2, 12-21-2010)  
Sec. 90-82. - Violations. 
It shall be a violation of this division for a vehicle to disregard a traffic control device or turn on red in violation of Section 11-306 of the Illinois Vehicle Code. All violations must be reviewed and approved by a law enforcement officer of the city. 
(Ord. No. 10-68, § 2, 12-21-2010)  
Sec. 90-83. - Defenses. 
The following may be considered defenses by the hearing officer for a violation of section 90-82: 
(1)  That the motor vehicle or registration plates of the motor vehicle were stolen before the violation occurred, and not under the control of or in the possession of the owner at the time of the violation; 
(2)  That the driver of the vehicle passed through the intersection when the light was red either (i) in order to yield the right-of-way to an emergency vehicle or (ii) as part of a funeral procession. 
To demonstrate that the motor vehicle or the registration plates were stolen before the violation occurred and were not under the control or possession of the owner at the time of the violation, the owner must submit proof that a report concerning the stolen motor vehicle or registration plates was filed with a law enforcement agency in a timely manner. 
(Ord. No. 10-68, § 2, 12-21-2010)  
Sec. 90-84. - Notice of violation. 
When the automated traffic law enforcement system records a motor vehicle entering an intersection in violation of section 90-82, the city shall issue a written notice of violation to the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle, which shall be delivered by U.S. mail within thirty (30) days after the Illinois Secretary of State notifies the city of the identity of the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle, and in no event later than ninety (90) days following the violation. The city shall only be required to notify a lessee if the leasing company/lessor provides the lessee's name by an affidavit and a copy of the lease within sixty (60) days of the notice's issuance. If the driver information is not provided within sixty (60) days, the leasing company/lessor may be found liable. If any notice to an address is returned as undeliverable, a second notice shall be sent to the last known address recorded in a United States Post Office-approved database of the owner or lessee of the cited vehicle. The second notice shall be made by first-class mail, postage prepaid. 
A notice of violation associated with an automated traffic law violation shall require a review of the associated recorded image by the traffic compliance administrator, who shall inspect the image and determine whether the motor vehicle was being operated in violation of section 90-82, or whether one (1) of the defenses enumerated in section 90-83 is visibly applicable upon inspection. Upon determination that the recorded image captures a violation and that no defense applies, the notice of violation shall be served upon the registered vehicle owner in the manner provided for above. The traffic compliance administrator shall retain a copy of all violation notices, recorded images and other correspondence mailed to the owner of the vehicle. Each notice of violation shall constitute evidence of the facts contained in the notice and is admissible in any proceeding alleging a violation of the above-noted statutory and local provisions and shall be prima facie evidence of a violation, subject to rebuttal on the basis of the defenses established in this division. 
The notice of violation shall include the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle, as indicated by the records of the Secretary of State, or, if such information is outdated or unattainable, then the last known address recorded in a United States Post Office-approved database; 
(2)  The make (only if discernable) and registration number of the motor vehicle involved in the violation; 
(3)  The violation charged; 
(4)  The location where the violation occurred; 
(5)  The date and time of the violation; 
(6)  A copy of the recorded images; 
(7)  The amount of the civil penalty and the date by which the penalty should be paid (fourteen (14) days from the date of issuance), if a hearing is not requested, and a statement that the payment of the fine shall operate as a final disposition of the violation; 
(8)  A statement that a failure to pay the civil penalty by the date noted may result in an additional late fee being assessed against the owner or lessee; 
(9)  The amount of the late fee; 
(10)  A statement that the failure to pay by the date specified will result in a final determination of liability and may result in the suspension of driving privileges for the registered owner of the vehicle; 
(11)  A statement that the recorded images constitute prima facie evidence of a violation; 
(12)  A statement that the person may elect to proceed by paying the fine or challenging the charge in court, by mail or by administrative hearing; and 
(13)  A statement of how an administrative hearing may be requested. 
(Ord. No. 10-68, § 2, 12-21-2010)  
Sec. 90-85. - Hearing. 
The owner of a vehicle being operated in violation of section 90-82 may request a hearing by the respond-by date on the notice of violation (fourteen (14) days from the date of issuance), to challenge the evidence or set forth an applicable defense. The notice of violation shall constitute evidence of the facts contained in the notice and is admissible in any proceeding alleging a violation of section 90-82. The notice of violation shall be prima facie evidence of a violation, subject to rebuttal on the basis of the defenses established in section 90-83. 
The owner's failure to appear at the hearing will result in a finding of liability. In the event of a failure to appear, a "findings, decision and order" letter will be sent to the owner. The owner's failure to pay the amount by the date specified in that letter will result in a final determination. 
(Ord. No. 10-68, § 2, 12-21-2010)  
Sec. 90-86. - Non-residents. 
Where the registered owner or lessee of the cited vehicle is not a resident of the city but seeks to contest the merits of the alleged violation, such person may contest the charges using the same available defenses as stated above, but rather than attend the administrative hearing, they may submit any and all documentary evidence to the traffic compliance administrator no later than the hearing date, together with a written statement reflecting that they are non-residents of the city. The traffic compliance administrator shall forward all timely-submitted materials to the hearing officer for review and determination. 
(Ord. No. 10-68, § 2, 12-21-2010)  
Sec. 90-87. - Final determination. 
A final determination of an automated traffic law violation(s) liability shall occur: 
(1)  Following the failure to pay the total assessed fine or penalty after the hearing officer's determination of vehicular standing, parking, compliance regulation or automated traffic law violation(s) liability within the required twenty-five (25) days and the exhaustion of or the failure to exhaust any administrative review procedures hereinafter set forth; or 
(2)  Where a person fails to appear at a prior requested administrative hearing provided to contest the alleged standing, parking or compliance regulation violation(s) on the date and at the time and place specified in a prior served or mailed notice, or fails to appear at the hearing for an automated traffic law violation on the date and at the time and place specified in a prior mailed notice. The hearing officer's determination of vehicular standing, parking, compliance regulation or automated traffic law violation(s) liability shall become final upon the exhaustion of or the failure to exhaust any administrative or judicial review procedures hereinafter set forth: 
a.  Upon denial of a timely petition to set aside that determination; or 
b.  Upon the expiration of the period for filing a petition without a filing having been made. 
(Ord. No. 10-68, § 2, 12-21-2010)  
Sec. 90-88. - Notice of determination of liability. 
A determination of automated traffic law violation liability shall occur following failure to pay the fine or penalty, or to contest the alleged violation within fourteen (14) days of the notice of violation. Where a person fails to appear at a hearing to contest the alleged violation in the time and manner specified in a prior mailed notice, the hearing officer will enter findings, decision and order's determination of automated traffic law violation liability which shall become final: (a) upon denial of a timely petition to set aside that determination, or (b) upon expiration of the period for filing such a petition without a filing having been made. If a person appears at a hearing and is found liable or contests the violation by mail and is found liable, the hearing officer will enter findings, decision and order, which is a final determination of automated traffic law violation liability that is a final, appealable order. 
(Ord. No. 10-68, § 2, 12-21-2010)  
Sec. 90-89. - Notice of final determination. 
A notice of final determination shall be sent following the final determination of automated traffic law violation liability and the conclusion of judicial review. The notice of final determination shall include the following information: 
(1)  A statement that the unpaid fine is a debt due and owing to the city; and 
(2)  A warning that a failure to pay any fine due and owing to the City of Calumet City within fourteen (14) days may result in a petition to the Circuit Court of Cook County to have the unpaid fine rendered as a judgment or may result in the suspension of the person's drivers license for failure to pay fines or penalties for five (5) or more violation under this division. 
(Ord. No. 10-68, § 2, 12-21-2010)  
Sec. 90-90. - Petitions to set aside determination. 
A petition to set aside determination of an automated traffic law violation must be filed with or mailed to the traffic control administrator within fourteen (14) days of the date of mailing of the notice of determination of liability. The grounds for the petition are limited to: 
(1)  The person was not the owner or lessee of the cited vehicle on the date of the violation notice was issued; 
(2)  The person having already paid the fine for the violation in question; and 
(3)  Excusable failure to appear at or request a new date for a hearing. 
Upon receipt of a timely petition to set aside the determination of liability, the hearing officer shall review the petition to determine if cause has been shown to set aside the determination. If cause has been shown, the city shall forward the petitioner a new hearing date on which the petitioner must appear to present his case. The city shall notify the petitioner of the hearing officer's decision to grant a hearing or deny the petition within fourteen (14) days of the city's receipt. 
(Ord. No. 10-68, § 2, 12-21-2010)  
Sec. 90-91. - Notice of impending driver's license suspension. 
A notice of impending driver's license suspension shall be sent to the person liable for any fine or penalty that remains due and owing on five (5) or more violations of this division. The notice of impending drivers license suspension shall state the following information: 
(1)  The failure to pay the fine owing within forty-five (45) days of the notice's date will result in the city notifying the Secretary of State that the person is eligible for initiation of suspension proceedings under Section 6-306.5 of the Illinois Vehicle Code; 
(2)  A statement that the person may obtain a copy of the original ticket imposing a fine by sending a self-addressed, stamped envelope to the city along with a request for the copy. 
The notice of impending driver's license suspension shall be sent by first-class mail, postage prepaid, to the address recorded with the Secretary of State or, if any notice to that address is returned as undeliverable, to the last known address recorded in a United States Post Office-approved database. 
(Ord. No. 10-68, § 2, 12-21-2010)  
Sec. 90-92. - Driver's license suspension. 
The traffic compliance administrator, by certified report, shall request that the Secretary of State suspend the driving privileges of an owner of a registered vehicle who has failed to pay any fine or penalty due and owing as a result of five (5) automated traffic violations. The report shall be certified and contain the following: 
(1)  The name, last known address as recorded with the Secretary of State, as provided by the lessor of the cited vehicle at the time of lease, or as recorded in a United States Post Office-approved database if any notice sent under this division is returned as undeliverable, and driver's license number of the person who failed to pay the fine or penalty and the registration number of any vehicle known to be registered to such person in a state; 
(2)  The name of the municipality making the report pursuant to this section; and 
(3)  A statement that a notice of impending driver's license suspension has been sent to the person named in the report at the address recorded with the Secretary of State or at the last address known to the lessor of the cited vehicle at the time of the lease or, if any notice sent under this division is returned as undeliverable at the last known address recorded at a United States Post Office-approved database; the date on which such notice was sent; and address to which such notice was sent. 
The traffic compliance administrator shall notify the Secretary of State whenever a person named in the certified report has paid the previously recorded fine or penalty or whenever the municipality determines that the original report was in error. A certified copy of such notification shall also be given upon request and at no additional charge to the person named therein. 
Any person receiving notice from the Secretary of State that their driving privileges may be suspended at the end of a specified period may challenge the accuracy of the certified report prepared by the traffic compliance administrator. The person shall, within seven (7) days after having received notice from the Secretary of State, request an opportunity to speak with the traffic compliance administrator to challenge the accuracy of the certified report. If the traffic compliance administrator determines that the original report was in error due to the fact that the person challenging the report was not the owner or lessee of the vehicle or that the person has already paid their fine for the five (5) or more automated traffic violations, the traffic compliance administrator shall immediately notify the Secretary of State of such error in a subsequent certified report. 
(Ord. No. 10-68, § 2, 12-21-2010)  
Sec. 90-93. - Penalty. 
The owner (or lessee) of a motor vehicle is subject to a penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per automated traffic law violation. In the event that such penalty is not paid within fourteen (14) days after service of a final determination of liability, an additional one hundred dollar ($100.00) late payment penalty shall be imposed. A penalty shall not apply if the driver of the motor vehicle received a uniform traffic citation from a police officer at the time of the violation. The city may not charge court costs or hearing fees to persons found liable after exercising their right to appear and contest the violation at an administrative hearing. 
(Ord. No. 10-68, § 2, 12-21-2010)  
Sec. 90-94. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - IMMOBILIZATION PROGRAM[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-9, § 2, adopted Feb. 24, 2011, set out provisions intended for use as div. 4, §§ 90-87—90-92. For purposes of sequential numbering of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as div. 4, §§ 90-95—90-100. 
 
Sec. 90-95. - Established. 
The police chief or designee is hereby authorized to direct and supervise a program of vehicle immobilization for the purpose of enforcing the parking regulations of the Code. The program of vehicle immobilization shall provide for immobilizing any eligible vehicle registered to the owner by immobilizing in place of towing as defined herein. The administration of the immobilization program shall be handled by the ordinance enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. 11-9, § 2, 2-24-2011)  
Sec. 90-96. - Vehicles eligible for immobilization; procedure. 
If the eligible vehicle is parked or left in violation of any provision of the Municipal Code for which the vehicle is subject to an immediate tow, or in any place where it constitutes an obstruction or hazard, or where it impedes city workers during such operations as snow removal, the vehicle may be towed or relocated to a legal parking place and there restrained. 
(1)  When the registered owner of any vehicle has accumulated three (3) or more final determinations of parking violation or automated traffic law enforcement system liability for which the fines and penalties, if applicable, have not been paid in full, the ordinance enforcement officer shall cause a notice of impending vehicle immobilization to be sent a prescribed in this division. 
(2)  The notice of impending vehicle immobilization shall state the name and address of the registered owner, the state registration number of the vehicle or vehicles registered to the owner, and the serial number of parking violation notices which have resulted in final determination of liability for which the fines or penalties remain unpaid. 
(3)  Failure to pay the fines and penalties owed within twenty-one (21) days from the date of the notice will result in the inclusion of the state registration number of the vehicle or vehicles of the owner on an immobilization list. 
(4)  A person may challenge the validity of the notice of impending vehicle immobilization by requesting a hearing and appearing in person to submit evidence which would conclusively disprove liability. Upon a request for a hearing, the ordinance enforcement officer shall schedule the hearing for the next regular hearing date. 
(5)  Documentary evidence which would conclusively disprove liability shall be based solely on the following grounds: 
a.  That all fines and penalties for the parking violations cited in the notice have been paid in full; or 
b.  That the registered owner has not accumulated three (3) or more final determinations of parking violation or automated traffic law enforcement system liability which were unpaid at the time the notice of impending vehicle immobilization was issued. 
(6)  The hearing on eligibility for impoundment shall not provide a venue for a collateral attack on the original determinations of liability except to contest service of process. 
(Ord. No. 11-9, § 2, 2-24-2011)  
Sec. 90-97. - Post-immobilization towing notice. 
Upon immobilization of an eligible vehicle, a post immobilization and towing notice shall be sent to the owner, or if the vehicle is immobilized in place, affixed to the vehicle in a conspicuous place. 
(1)  The affixed notice shall warn that the vehicle is immobilized and that any attempt to move the vehicle may result in its damage. The notice shall also state that the unauthorized removal of or damage to the immobilization restraint is a violation of ILCS ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 16-1 and 21-1, the Illinois Criminal Code. The notice shall also provide information specifying how release of the immobilization restraint may be had, and how the registered owner may obtain a post-immobilization hearing. If the restraint has not been released within twenty-four hours of its placement, the restraint shall be released and the vehicle towed and impounded. 
(2)  A post-towing notice shall be mailed to the registered owner of a vehicle immobilized by towing. The notice shall contain: 
a.  The date and time the vehicle was towed. 
b.  The location from which it was towed. 
c.  The case number. 
d.  Reference to the cause of the tow for immobilization. 
e.  A statement that the vehicle is subject to towing and storage charges. 
f.  The name, address, telephone number, and hours of operation of the storage facility where the vehicle can be claimed upon payment of towing storage fees, fines and penalties owed. 
(Ord. No. 11-9, § 2, 2-24-2011)  
Sec. 90-98. - Release of immobilized vehicles. 
The owner of an immobilized vehicle or other authorized person may secure the release of the vehicle by paying the immobilization, towing and storage fees provided herein, and all fines and penalties remaining due on each final determination of parking violation liability issued to that person. 
(Ord. No. 11-9, § 2, 2-24-2011)  
Sec. 90-99. - Post-immobilization hearing. 
(a)  The owner of an immobilization vehicle shall have the right to a post-immobilization hearing to determine whether the immobilization or any subsequent towing and impoundment was erroneous, if the owner files a written request for a hearing with the ordinance enforcement officer within fourteen (14) days after immobilization or fourteen (14) days of the date of the notice sent pursuant to subsection (b) herein, whichever is later. The determination of the hearing officer regarding the validity of the immobilization shall become final for the purpose of judicial review under the Administrative Review Law of Illinois upon issuance. 
(b)  Within ten (10) days after a vehicle has been impounded, a notice of impoundment shall be sent by first-class mail, to the address of the registered owner as listed with the Secretary of State. The notice shall state that the owner has the right to request a post-immobilization and post-towing hearing as provided in subsection (a) herein, and that if the vehicle is not claimed within thirty (30) days from the date of the notice, the vehicle may be sold or otherwise disposed of in accordance with ILCS ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-208, the Illinois Vehicle Code. 
(c)  The fee for immobilization in place shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) and/or a fee for towing subsequent to the immobilization and a storage fee for every twenty-four (24) hour period the vehicle is retained shall be assessed. No fees shall be assessed for any immobilization or tow which has been determined to be erroneous. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to relocate or tow any vehicle restrained by an immobilization device without the approval of the police chief or designee. The registered owner of the immobilized vehicle and any person who relocates an immobilized vehicle in violation of this division shall each be subject to a penalty of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for the violation. 
(Ord. No. 11-9, § 2, 2-24-2011)  
Sec. 90-100. - Driver's license suspension. 
(a)  When a person has failed to pay any fine or penalty due and owing pursuant to this subchapter on ten (10) or more parking violations or five (5) or more automated traffic law violations, the ordinance enforcement officer shall cause a notice of impending driver's license suspension to be sent in the form as required by the Secretary of State. The notice shall state that failure to pay the amount owing within forty-five (45) days of the date of the notice will result in the city notifying the Secretary of State that the person is eligible for initiation of suspension proceedings pursuant to ILCS ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-306.5, the Illinois Vehicle Code. 
(b)  If a person sent a notice pursuant to subsection (a) above fails to pay the amount owing within the time stated on the notice, the ordinance enforcement officer may file with the Secretary of State, a certified report, in accordance with Section 6-206.5(c) of the Illinois Vehicle Code, that the person is eligible for initiation of suspension proceedings. The ordinance enforcement officer shall assess a twenty dollars ($20.00) filing fee against the person named in the certified report to reimburse the city for the expense of preparing and filing the certified report with the Secretary of State. 
(c)  A person named in a certified report filed pursuant to subsection (b) above may, within twenty-one (21) days of the date of the notice sent by the Secretary of State pursuant to Section 6-306.5(b) of the Illinois Vehicle Code; file with the ordinance enforcement officer a written statement and supporting documentation to challenge the report; provided, however, the grounds for such challenge shall be limited to the person not having been the owner or lessee of the vehicle or vehicles receiving ten (10) or more parking violation notices on the date or dates the notices were issued; or the person having already paid the fine and penalty for the ten (10) or more violations indicated on the report. The ordinance enforcement officer shall send notice of the decision on the challenge of the report after receipt thereof. The challenge to the eligibility for suspension proceedings, and any hearing requested under subsection (e) below, shall not provide a venue for a collateral attack on the original determinations of liability except to contest service of process. 
(d)  If a person named in a certified report has paid the previously reported fine or penalty or if the report is determined by the ordinance enforcement officer to be in error, the ordinance enforcement officer shall notify the Secretary of State in accordance with Section 6-206.5(d) of the Illinois Vehicle Code. A certified copy of the notification shall be given, upon request and at no charge, to the person named therein. 
(e)  An administrative hearing to contest an impending suspension or suspension may be had upon filing a written request with the Secretary of State. The filing fee for this hearing shall be twenty dollars ($20.00), to be paid at the time the request is made. The city shall reimburse the Secretary of State for all reasonable costs incurred by the Secretary as a result of filing a certified report, including, but not limited to, the costs of providing the required notice and the costs incurred by the Secretary in any hearing conducted with respect to the report and any appeal from a hearing. 
(Ord. No. 11-9, § 2, 2-24-2011)  
Sec. 90-101. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNS, SIGNALS, DEVICES AND MARKINGS 
 
Sec. 90-102. - Ratified. 
The existence of all official traffic-control signs, signals, devices and markings, including parking meters, in existence on June 9, 1975, is hereby ratified and confirmed and all such signs, signals, devices and markings, including parking meters, shall be considered to have been authorized by the mayor and city council. 
(Code 1980, § 17-29)  
Sec. 90-103. - Posting signs, etc. 
The chief of police or any other person designated by the mayor or council shall post or erect or install all traffic-control signals and markings necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1980, § 17-14)  
Sec. 90-104. - Obedience required. 
(1)  Obedience to and required traffic-control devices. 
(a)  The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-control device applicable thereto placed or held in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in this chapter. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to leave the roadway and travel across private property to avoid an official traffic-control device. 
(c)  No provision of this chapter for which official traffic-control devices are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the alleged violation an official device is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state that official traffic-control devices are required, such section shall be effective even though no devices are erected or in place. 
(d)  Whenever any official traffic-control device is placed or held in position approximately conforming to the requirements of this chapter and purports to conform to the lawful requirements pertaining to such device, such device shall be presumed to have been so placed or held by the official act or direction of lawful authority, and comply with the requirements of this chapter, unless the contrary shall be established by competent evidence. 
(e)  The driver of a vehicle approaching a traffic-control signal on which no signal light facing such vehicle is illuminated shall stop before entering the intersection in accordance with rules applicable in making a stop at a stop sign. 
(2)  Conformance to standards prescribed by state law; maintenance and placement. All official traffic-control devices designated for a particular purpose shall conform to the standards adopted in accordance to law by the department of transportation. 
(3)  Traffic-control signal legend. 
(a)  Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals exhibiting different colored lights or color lighted arrows, successively one at a time or in combination, only the colors green, red and yellow shall be used, except for special pedestrian signals carrying a word legend, and the lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows: 
1.  Green indication 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal may proceed straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits either such turn. Vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is exhibited. 
b.  Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal, shown alone or in combination with another indication, may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow, or such other movement as is permitted by other indications shown at the same time. Such vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection. 
c.  Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal, as provided in subsection (4), pedestrians facing any green signal, except when the sole green signal is a turn arrow, may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk. 
2.  Steady yellow indication 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular yellow or yellow arrow signal is thereby warned that the related green movement is being terminated or that a red indication will be exhibited immediately thereafter. 
b.  Pedestrians facing a steady circular yellow or yellow arrow signal, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal as provided in subsection (4), are thereby advised that there is insufficient time to cross the roadway before a red indication is shown and no pedestrian shall then start to cross the roadway. 
3.  Steady red indication 
a.  Except as provided in subsection (3)(a)3.c. of this section, vehicular traffic facing a steady circular red signal alone shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if there is no such stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if there is no such crosswalk, then before entering the intersection, and shall remain standing until an indication to proceed is shown. 
b.  Except as provided in subsection (3)(a)3.c. of this section, vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow signal shall not enter the intersection to make the movement indicated by the arrow and, unless entering the intersection to make a movement permitted by another signal, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line; but if there is no such stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection; or if there is no such crosswalk, then before entering the intersection, and shall remain standing until an indication permitting the movement indicated by such red arrow is shown. 
c.  Except when a sign is in place prohibiting a turn, or state authorities by rule or regulation prohibit any such turn, vehicular traffic facing any steady red signal may cautiously enter the intersection to turn right, or to turn left from a one-way street into a one-way street, after stopping as required by subsection (3)(a)3.a. or b. of this section. After stopping, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time such driver is moving across or within the intersection or junction or roadways. Such driver shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk. 
d.  Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal as provided in subsection (4), pedestrians facing a steady circular red or red arrow signal alone shall not enter the roadway. 
(b)  If an official traffic-control signal is erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this section shall be applicable except as to provisions which by their nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be at a traffic sign or a marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made or, in the absence of such sign or marking, the stop shall be made at the signal. 
(4)  Pedestrian-control signals. Whenever special pedestrian-control signals exhibiting the words "Walk" or "Don't Walk" or the illuminated symbols of a walking person or an upraised palm are in place such signals shall indicate as follows: 
(a)  Walk or walking person symbol. Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the roadway in the direction of the signal, and shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles. 
(b)  Don't walk or upraised palm symbol. No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in the direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partly completed his crossing on the walk signal or walking person symbol shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety island while the "Don't Walk" signal or upraised palm symbol is illuminated, steady, or flashing. 
(5)  Flashing signals. Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in conjunction with a traffic-control device it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows: 
(a)  Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop at a clearly marked stop line; but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection; or if none, then at a point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the intersection and the right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign. 
(b)  Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the intersection or past such signal only with caution. 
(c)  Exception. This section does not apply at railroad grade crossings. Conduct of drivers of vehicles approaching railroad grade crossings shall be governed by applicable provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code. 
(6)  Display of unauthorized signs, signals or markings. 
(a)  No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking, or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic-control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the movement of traffic or the effectiveness of an official traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal. 
(b)  No person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit upon any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising. 
(c)  Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and the authority having jurisdiction over the highway is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed without notice. 
(7)  Interference with official traffic-control devices or railroad signs or signals. No person shall without lawful authority attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down, or remove any official traffic-control device; or any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield, or insignia thereon; or any other part thereof. 
(Ord. No. 06-70, §§ 1—7, 8-24-2006)  
Secs. 90-105—90-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - VEHICLE OPERATION  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 90-151. - Careless driving. 
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle in the city in a careless, reckless or wanton manner, or carelessly so as to endanger life or property. 
(Code 1980, § 17-46) 
State Law reference— Reckless driving, 65 ILCS 5/11-503.  
Sec. 90-152. - Speed restrictions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to drive any motor vehicle on any street not under the jurisdiction of the state department of public works and buildings, or the county, in an urban district within the city at a speed in excess of twenty-five (25) miles per hour, or in an alley at a speed in excess of five (5) miles per hour. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to drive any vehicle on any highway outside the urban district at a speed of more than fifty-five (55) miles per hour. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to drive any vehicle of the first division towing another vehicle, outside of an urban district at more than fifty-five (55) miles per hour, in an urban district at more than thirty (30) miles per hour, or fifteen (15) miles per hour in an alley. 
(d)  If the mayor and city council by ordinance set other limits after an engineering or traffic survey, then such limits shall govern the rate of speed on the streets indicated in such ordinance. Appropriate signs shall be posted showing such speed limits. 
(e)  The fact that the speed of a vehicle does not exceed the applicable maximum speed limit does not relieve the driver from the duty to decrease speed when approaching and crossing an intersection, when approaching and going around a curve, when approaching a hillcrest, when traveling upon any narrow or winding roadway or when special hazards exist with respect to pedestrians or other traffic by reason of weather or highway conditions; and speed shall be decreased as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person or vehicle on or entering the highway in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of all person to use due care. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful to drive any vehicle on a street or highway within the city under the jurisdiction of the state department of public works and buildings, or of the county, at a speed exceeding that lawfully set for such street. 
(g)  The speed of all vehicles of the second division shall be as follows: 
(1)  If the vehicle is designed and used for pulling or carrying freight and has a gross weight of eight thousand (8,000) pounds or less (including the weight of the vehicle and maximum load), and is equipped with pneumatic tires, the maximum is fifty (50) miles per hour outside of an urban district, thirty (30) miles per hour in an urban district, and fifteen (15) miles per hour in an alley; but if such vehicle is equipped with two (2) or more solid tires, the maximum is ten (10) miles per hour at all times and in all locations. 
(2)  If the vehicle is designed and used for pulling or carrying freight and has a gross weight of more than eight thousand (8,000) pounds (including the weight of the vehicle and maximum load), and is equipped with pneumatic tires, the maximum is fifty (50) miles per hour outside of an urban district, and thirty (30) miles per hour in an urban district, and fifteen (15) miles per hour in an alley; but if such vehicle is equipped with two (2) or more solid tires, the maximum is ten (10) miles per hour at all times and in all locations. 
(3)  If the vehicle is designed and used for carrying more than seven (7) passengers, and is equipped with pneumatic tires, the maximum is fifty-five (55) miles per hour. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful to drive any motor vehicle on Paxton Avenue North from Dolton Road to the river, at a speed greater than twenty-five (25) miles per hour. 
(i)  It shall be unlawful to drive any motor vehicle on the 600 block of Jeffrey Avenue, at a speed greater than twenty (20) miles per hour. 
(j)  It shall be unlawful to drive any motor vehicle on Ring Road at a speed greater than twenty (20) miles per hour. 
(k)  It shall be unlawful to drive any motor vehicle between Hirsch Avenue and River Drive on River Oaks Drive, at a speed greater than thirty-five (35) miles per hour. 
(l)  It shall be unlawful to drive any motor vehicle between State Line Road to Superior Avenue on Pulaski Road, at a speed greater than thirty (30) miles per hour. 
(m)  It shall be unlawful to drive any motor vehicle between Superior Avenue to Torrence Avenue on Pulaski Road, at a speed greater than thirty-five (35) miles per hour. 
(n)  It shall be unlawful to drive any motor vehicle on Warren Avenue between Wentworth Avenue and State Line Road at a speed greater than twenty (20) miles per hour. 
(o)  It shall be unlawful to drive any motor vehicle on Crandon Avenue between Stewart Avenue and State Street at a speed greater than thirty (30) miles per hour. 
(p)  It shall be unlawful to drive any motor vehicle in the Ginger Ridge Complex at a speed greater than twenty (20) miles per hour. 
(q)  It shall be unlawful to drive any motor vehicle on Clyde Avenue between Harding Avenue and State Street at a speed greater than twenty (20) miles per hour. 
(Code 1980, § 17-47; Ord. No. 81-27, § 1, 8-27-1981; Ord. No. 89-29, § 1, 8-24-1989; Ord. No. 91-25, § 1, 6-27-1991; Ord. No. 92-60, § 1, 12-10-1992; Ord. No. 93-14, § 1, 5-28-1993; Ord. No. 98-46, § 1, 7-23-1998; Ord. No. 01-42, § 1, 8-9-2001; Ord. No. 03-04, § I, 2-13-2003; Ord. No. 08-39, § 2, 6-26-2008) 
State Law reference— Speed generally, 625 ILCS 5/11-601 et seq.  
Sec. 90-153. - One-way streets. 
The following street is hereby designated as a one-way street: 
Warren Street eastbound from Burnham Avenue to State Line. 
(Code 1980, § 17-113; Ord. No. 95-73, § 1, 12-28-1995)  
Sec. 90-154. - One-way alleys. 
[The following are hereby designated as one-way alleys:] 
(a)  The alley behind 460 Oglesby and Crandon shall be one-way eastbound. 
(b)  The alley on the 10 block bounded by 156th Place and 157th Street, eastbound. 
(c)  The alley between Superior and Buffalo from Wilson to the T-alley north of Wilson shall be northbound only. 
(d)  The east-west alley between Sibley Boulevard and Harding Avenue between Torrence Avenue and Saginaw Avenue shall be one-way westbound only. 
(e)  The north-south alley between Sibley Boulevard and Harding Avenue between Torrence Avenue and Saginaw Avenue shall be one-way northbound only. 
(f)  The alley one (1) block south of Sibley Boulevard between Superior and Buffalo, eastbound. 
(g)  The ten-block alley between Detroit and Forestdale Park, eastbound. 
(Ord. No. 05-60, § 1, 9-8-2005; Ord. No. 06-25, § 1, 5-11-2006; Ord. No. 06-36, § 1, 6-8-2006; Ord. No. 06-41, § 1, 6-8-2006; Ord. No. 06-46, § 1, 6-22-2006; Ord. No. 06-64, § 1, 8-10-2006)  
Sec. 90-155. - Trucks prohibited; weight restrictions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to be in control of, to drive, to move on, upon or across or for the owner to cause or knowingly permit to be driven, or moved on, upon or across any highway, street, roadway, or alley within the corporate limits of the city, any vehicle or combination of vehicles with a gross weight, registered weight, gross vehicle weight rating or gross combined vehicle weight rating of more than sixteen thousand (16,000) pounds (eight (8) tons), on the following streets: 
(1)  On old 159th Street from Burnham to Wentworth. 
(2)  On State Line Road from Michigan City Road to 169th Street. 
(3)  On Pulaski from Michigan City Road to Burnham. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to be in control of, to drive, to move on, upon or across or for the owner to cause or knowingly permit to be driven, or moved on, upon or across, any highway, street, roadway, or alley within the corporate limits of the city, any vehicle or combination of vehicles with a gross weight, registered weight, gross vehicle weight rating or gross combined weight rating of more than ten thousand (10,000) pounds, on the following streets: 
(1)  Sibley Boulevard from Burnham to Stateline Road. 
(2)  River Oaks Drive from Torrence to State Line Road. 
(Ord. No. 06-30, § 1, 5-25-2006; Ord. No. 07-78, § 1, 7-26-2007; Ord. No. 11-42, § 2, 7-28-2011) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-42, § 2, adopted July 28, 2011, changed the title of § 90-155 from "Trucks prohibited" to "Trucks prohibited; weight restrictions". This historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes.  
Sec. 90-156. - Truck traffic prohibited—Residential streets. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to be in control of, to drive, to move on, upon or across or for the owner to cause or knowingly permit to be driven, or moved on, upon or across, any residential street, roadway, or alley within the corporate limits of the city, any vehicle or combination of vehicles with a gross weight, registered weight, gross vehicle weight rating or gross combined vehicle weight rating of more than ten thousand (10,000) pounds on all residential streets within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  The exception to this section is for local deliveries only located on said street as long as the delivery route cannot be made by taking an alternate route. Any vehicle owned by the city shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 11-41, § 2, 7-28-2011)  
Secs. 90-157—90-183. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - TURNING MOVEMENTS 
 
Sec. 90-184. - U-turns. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction unless such movement can be made in safety and without backing into traffic or otherwise interfering with traffic. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to make a U-turn at any place where such turns are prohibited by ordinance. Such prohibition shall be indicated by appropriate signs. 
(Code 1980, § 17-79) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate turns, 625 ILCS 5/11-208(a)(9).  
Sec. 90-185. - Left turns or right turns restricted. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to turn left at any of the following intersections within the city: 
Prairie Avenue at Sibley Boulevard, eastbound. 
Prairie Avenue at Sibley Boulevard, westbound. 
Torrence Avenue (Illinois 83) at 153rd Street, northbound, between 4:00 p.m. and 7:00 p.m. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to turn right at any of the following intersections within the city: 
Lucas and Campbell at the southwest corner. 
(c)  The commissioner of streets and alleys and the chief of police are hereby authorized and directed to post the proper signs on the herein provided streets in accordance with the terms and conditions of this section. 
(Code 1980, § 17-80; Ord. No. 91-6, § 1, 2-28-1991; Ord. No. 95-14, § 1, 4-27-1995; Ord. No. 03-56, §§ I, II, 9-25-2003) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate turns, 625 ILCS 5/11-208(a)(9).  
Secs. 90-186—90-210. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - RIGHT-OF-WAY; YIELD STREETS AND STOP STREETS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78. 
 
Sec. 90-211. - Through streets. 
The streets and parts of streets of the city designated by ordinance as through streets are hereby declared to be through streets. The driver of a vehicle shall stop at the entrance to a through street and shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles which have entered the intersection or which are approaching so close on a through street as to constitute an immediate hazard, unless directed otherwise by a traffic officer or a traffic-control signal. 
(Code 1980, § 17-57) 
State Law reference— Authority to designate through streets, 625 ILCS 5/11-208(a)(6).  
Sec. 90-212. - Stop intersections. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle shall stop in obedience to a stop sign at an intersection where a stop sign is erected pursuant to ordinance, at one (1) or more entrances thereto, and shall proceed cautiously, yielding to the vehicles not so obliged to stop which are within the intersection or approaching so close as to constitute an immediate hazard, unless traffic at such intersection is controlled by a police officer on duty, in which event the directions of the police officer shall be complied with. 
(b)  The following are hereby designated as stop intersections in the City of Calumet City: 
Elizabeth and Lincoln, northbound and southbound on Lincoln. 
Legion Drive and Warren Street, eastbound on Warren and northbound on Legion Drive. 
Legion Drive and Webb Street, westbound on Webb and northbound on Legion Drive. 
Superior and 162nd Street, northbound and southbound on Superior. 
157th Street eastbound at Forsythe Avenue. 
(Code 1980, § 17-58; Ord. No. 92-18, § 1, 4-199-1992; Ord. No. 95-65, § 1, 11-21-1995; Ord. No. 98-2, § 1, 1-22-1998; Ord. No. 06-55, § 1, 7-13-2006; Ord. No. 10-28, § 2, 5-13-10) 
State Law reference— Authority to designate stop intersections, 625 ILCS 5/11-208.  
Sec. 90-213. - Four-way stops. 
The following intersections are designated as four-way stop intersections: 
Bensley Avenue and Memorial Drive. 
Bensley Avenue and 153rd Street. 
Crandon and Stewart. 
Douglas Avenue and Sibley Boulevard. 
Freeland and Warren. 
Freeland Avenue/Wilson Avenue, northbound to southbound. 
Lincoln and Waltham. 
Manistee Avenue and Cleveland Avenue. 
Muskegon and Stewart. 
Prairie and Stewart Avenue. 
Shirley Drive and 163rd Street. 
Sibley Boulevard and Freeland Avenue. 
Superior Avenue and Pulaski Road. 
Wilson Avenue and Oglesby Avenue. 
157th Street and Greenbay Avenue. 
159th Street at Edgewood Drive. 
161st Street and Hirsch Avenue. 
161st Street and Imperial. 
164th Street and Kenilworth Drive. 
165th Street and Forest Avenue. 
165th Street and Shirley Drive. 
166th Street and Kenilworth. 
166th Street and Shirley Drive. 
(Code 1980, § 17-111; Ord. No. 91-44, § 1, 10-24-1991; Ord. No. 91-52, § 2, 11-14-1991; Ord. No. 95-43, § 1, 8-24-1995; Ord. No. 96-21, § 1, 4-11-1996; Ord. No. 98-27, § 1, 5-28-1998; Ord. No. 98-29, § 1, 5-28-1998; Ord. No. 99-55, § 1, 9-9-1999; Ord. No. 00-1, § 1, 1-13-2000; Ord. No. 01-40, § 1, 8-9-2001; Ord. No. 02-27, § I, 6-27-2002; Ord. No. 03-15, § 1, 5-8-2003; Ord. No. 03-16, 5-22-2003; Ord. No. 05-14, § 1, 2-24-2005; Ord. No. 06-54, § 1, 7-13-2006; Ord. No. 06-59, § 1, 7-27-2006; Ord. No. 06-72, § 1, 9-14-2006; Ord. No. 06-91, § 1, 11-20-2006; Ord. No. 08-19, § 2, 3-27-2008; Ord. No. 08-21, § 2, 4-3-2008; Ord. No. 08-38, § 2, 6-26-2008; Ord. No. 10-28, § 3, 5-13-2010; Ord. No. 12-60, § 2, 12-27-2012; Ord. No. 15-27, § 2, 7-9-2015)  
Sec. 90-214. - Three-way stops. 
The following intersections, in addition to existing ordinanced three-way stops, are hereby designated as three-way stop intersections: 
Campbell Avenue at 156th Street. 
Cunningham Drive and River Drive. 
Forest Avenue and Forest Place. 
Harding Avenue and Superior Avenue. 
Legion Drive and Warren Street. 
Legion Drive and Webb Street. 
May Street and 155th Street. 
159th Street at Edgewood Drive. 
159th Street at Hirsch Avenue. 
159th Street at Price Avenue. 
160th Place and Balmoral. 
161st and Arthur Street. 
Lincoln Avenue and Lincoln Place. 
(Code 1980, § 17-112; Ord. No. 95-42, § 1, 8-24-1995; Ord. No. 95-55, § 1, 10-12-1995; Ord. No. 95-70, § 1, 12-14-1995; Ord. No. 96-62, § 1, 9-26-1996; Ord. No. 96-69, § 1, 11-14-1996; Ord. No. 97-15, § 1, 3-13-1997; Ord. No. 97-28, § 1, 5-22-1997; Ord. No. 97-55, § 1, 10-9-1997; Ord. No. 97-61, § 1, 10-23-1997; Ord. No. 97-70, § 1, 12-4-1997; Ord. No. 98-16, § 1, 4-23-1998)  
Sec. 90-215. - Two-way stops. 
The following locations shall be designated two-way stop intersections: 
Arthur Street and Woodview Avenue. 
Calhoun Avenue at Cleveland Avenue. 
Harding Avenue at Campbell Avenue. 
Pulaski Road and Forsythe Avenue. 
Stewart Avenue at Campbell Avenue. 
Stoney Island Avenue at Harding Avenue. 
166th and Gordon. 
(Code 1980, § 17-112.5; Ord. No. 98-58, § 1, 9-10-1998; Ord. No. 03-35, § 2, 7-24-2003; Ord. No. 03-42, § 2, 8-28-2003; Ord. No. 09-6, § 2, 3-12-2009; Ord. No. 10-5, § 2, 1-28-2010; Ord. No. 15-57, § 2, 12-21-2015)  
Sec. 90-216. - One-way stop locations. 
The following locations shall be designated and signed as a stop intersection: 
Entrance onto Calumet Way from the alleyway behind Corus Bank. 
Entrance onto Sibley Boulevard from Campbell Avenue. 
On Clyde Avenue behind Kay Motors. 
(Code 1980, § 17-115; Ord. No. 97-37, § 1, 6-26-1997; Ord. No. 99-53, § 1, 8-26-1999; Ord. No. 03-14, § I, 5-8-2003)  
Sec. 90-217. - Stop sign at Ruth Street and Legion Drive. 
The intersection of westbound Ruth Street at Legion Drive shall be designated as a stop intersection. 
(Code 1980, § 17-116; Ord. No. 97-70, § 2, 12-4-1997)  
Sec. 90-218. - Stop signs on east and west bound Stewart Avenue at Buffalo Avenue. 
The intersection of eastbound Steward Avenue and the intersection of westbound Stewart Avenue at Buffalo Avenue shall both be designated as stop intersections. 
(Code 1980, § 17-118; Ord. No. 02-41, § I, 8-8-2002)  
Sec. 90-219. - Stop signs on east and west bound 153rd Street at Gordon Avenue. 
The intersection of eastbound 153rd Street and the intersection of westbound 153rd Street at Gordon Avenue shall both be designated as stop intersections. 
(Code 1980, § 17-119; Ord. No. 02-40, § I, 8-8-2002)  
Sec. 90-220. - Merrill Avenue. 
It shall be illegal to enter Merrill Avenue behind the alley at 1874 Sibley Boulevard. 
(Ord. No. 06-77, § 1, 9-25-2006)  
Sec. 90-221. - Stop signs on eastbound and westbound 163rd Street at Gordon Avenue. 
The intersections of eastbound 163rd Street and westbound 163rd Street at Gordon Avenue shall both be designated as stop intersections. 
(Ord. No. 16-28, § 2, 8-11-2016)  
Secs. 90-222—90-266. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES 
 
Sec. 90-267. - Driving on closed streets. 
No driver of any vehicle, except an authorized emergency vehicle while engaged in emergency duty, shall drive such vehicle upon any street or highway which is officially closed to traffic and which is plainly indicated as such by officially erected signs, barricades or other traffic-control devices. 
(Code 1980, § 17-103)  
Secs. 90-268—90-300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 90-301. - Prohibited in specified places. 
Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control device, no person shall: 
(1)  Stop, stand or park a vehicle: 
a.  On the city parkway located on the east side of State Line Avenue; 
b.  On all city parkways west of State Line Avenue except on Burnham Avenue from River Oaks Drive to the river, the parkway located in front of Our Lady of Knock School and Church located on 163rd Street, and the parkway along the north boundary of Finneran Park. 
c.  On the south side of Pulaski Road in front of 755 Pulaski Road (Thornton Fractional North High School). 
d.  On the east side of Golf Court between Waltham Street and Mason Street. 
e.  At 202, 155th Place. 
f.  On the north side of 153rd Street, between Hoxie and Torrence Avenue. 
g.  On the east side of Muskegon, fifteen (15) feet North of Pulaski to corner. 
h.  On the east side of Manistee and Muskegon from Sibley fifteen (15) feet North. 
i.  On Manistee and Marquette, the west sides thereof, north of Sibley to the east-west alley. 
j.  On Manistee and Muskegon on the west side thereof from fifteen (15) feet south of Sibley. 
k.  On Manistee and Muskegon on the east side thereof, south of Sibley to the east-west alley. 
l.  On the west side of Lincoln from the corner of 155th Place to 768 Lincoln. 
m.  River Drive on the east side, from the second utility pole north of the River; on the west side of River Drive from the fire hydrant north to the river. 
n.  Sibley Boulevard at the northeast corner of Sibley and Forsythe Avenue for a distance of sixty (60) feet from the intersection. 
o.  165th Street from Burnham Avenue to Veterans Park, both sides, between 5:00 p.m. and 8:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, from April 1 until September 1. 
p.  On the northwest corner of Sibley Boulevard and Luella Avenue. 
q.  On Pulaski Road, at the southwest corner of Pulaski and Price Avenue, for a distance not to exceed sixty (60) feet, west of the intersection on the south side of Pulaski Road. 
r.  On the west side of Wentworth Avenue, starting at the corner of 162nd Street north for a distance not to exceed sixty (60) feet. 
s.  On Downs Drive at 1601 Downs Drive at the southwest corner of Downs Drive and Yates Avenue for a distance of sixty-seven (67) feet from the intersection. 
t.  On the south side of 165th Street and the west side of Gordon Avenue adjacent to Schrum School (school bus vehicles are exempt). 
u.  On both sides of Michigan City Road between Paxton Avenue and Merrill Avenue. 
v.  On the west side of Madison Avenue, north of Sibley Boulevard, for a distance not to exceed one hundred eighteen (118) feet. 
w.  On the north side of Pulaski Road, east of Gordon Avenue, for a distance not to exceed sixty (60) feet. 
x.  On the southwest corner of Burnham Avenue and Memorial Drive from the sidewalk on Burnham Avenue going west along Memorial Drive for sixteen (16) feet. 
y.  On the cul-de-sacs at Harbor Avenue and Paxton Avenue and Harbor Avenue and Yates Avenue. 
z.  On Forsythe Avenue from Sibley Boulevard to State Street. 
aa.  On the south side of 158th Street west of Paxton Avenue for three (3) blocks. 
bb.  Between no parking signs posted at 548 Harrison Avenue and at 656 Freeland Avenue. 
cc.  On the southeast corner of East End Avenue just off Sibley Boulevard. 
dd.  At the northeast corner of Freeland and Sibley Boulevard on Freeland Street in front of 634 Sibley Boulevard. 
ee.  On the north side of Memorial Drive and its Parkway from Torrence Avenue west to the first north-south alleyway and from Torrence Avenue east to the first north-south alleyway. 
ff.  On the northwest corner of Freeland Avenue and Sibley Boulevard for a distance of thirty (30) feet west from the intersection. 
gg.  On Patricia starting at 1634 Patricia to the alley. 
hh.  In the alley between Cornell Avenue and Stoney Island running from Stewart Avenue to Harding Avenue. 
ii.  On both sides of Arthur Street from River Oaks Drive running south to the alley. 
jj.  On the west side of Madison Avenue, south of Sibley Boulevard. 
kk.  On the west side of Merrill Avenue from Wilson Avenue to the alley on the south side of Sibley Boulevard. 
ll.  On the east side and west side of Campbell north for a distance of one hundred thirty-five (135) feet. 
mm.  East on Cleveland Avenue at Exchange Avenue. 
nn.  On Campbell Avenue at Virginia. 
oo.  On the east side of State Line Road from River Oaks Drive Wilson Avenue to Schrum Road. 
pp.  On the west side of State Line Road from River Oaks Drive Wilson Avenue to Schrum Road. 
qq.  On the south side of Warren Street between Legion Drive on the west and State Line Drive on the east. 
rr.  On both sides of Superior Avenue from Stewart Avenue to Sibley Boulevard. 
ss.  [Reserved.] 
tt.  On all sides of Regency Court, east of Huntington Avenue. 
uu.  On west side of Manistee from 153rd Street to the police station parking lot entrance. 
vv.  At 925 Harding Avenue. 
ww.  From Sibley Boulevard, south twenty-five (25) feet on the west side of Marquette. 
xx.  Southwest Corner of Exchange Avenue and Lucas Avenue. 
yy.  On both sides of 161st Street from Burnham Avenue to the alley. 
zz.  On the east side of Lincoln Avenue from State Street heading north one hundred seventy-five (175) feet. 
aaa.  On the south side of Michigan City Road from Stateline Road west to Wentworth Avenue. 
bbb.  On the north side of Michigan City Road from Stateline Road west to Legion Drive. 
ccc.  On both sides of Stateline Road from Highland to Michigan City Road. 
ddd.  On 159th Street at Stateline Road around the entire dead-end cul-de-sac. 
eee.  On 159th Street south from Stateline Road to Legion Drive on the south side of the street. 
(2)  Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except momentarily to pick up or discharge passengers on the east side of Wentworth Avenue at approximately 675 Wentworth Avenue at the driveway entrance; the area between driveways and the area between the driveway and Sibley Boulevard located at the Madison Avenue southeast corner of Sibley Boulevard. 
[(3)  Reserved.] 
(4)  Stop, stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, during the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, on the following designated streets: 
On Clyde Avenue from Sibley Boulevard North to the alley. 
On the east side of Yates Avenue from Sibley Boulevard to Harding Avenue. 
On the west side of Calhoun Avenue between Sibley Boulevard and Harding Avenue. 
(5)  Park or allow to remain standing any motor vehicle on the hereinafter described street within the city for more than a period of fifteen (15) minutes: 
On the east side of Lincoln Avenue from Pulaski Road to the alley. 
On 154th Place in front of the building commonly referred to as 410 154th Place, Monday through Friday, for the exclusive purpose of dropping off or picking up children attending day care in the said building. 
(6)  Stop, stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, during the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. on school days only, on the north side of Memorial Drive from Wentworth Avenue to Lincoln Avenue. School bus vehicles are exempt from this provision. 
(7)  Park or allow to remain standing any motor vehicle on the hereinafter described street within the city for more than a period of thirty (30) minutes: 
On the north side of Pulaski Road west of Wentworth Avenue (one (1) parking space) (204 Pulaski Road). 
(8)  There shall be a designation of "No Parking At Any Time" on the south side of Wilson Avenue, between Wentworth Avenue and Lincoln Avenue. 
(9)  Stop, stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. and also 2:30 p.m. and 3:30 p.m. on school days only, on the south side of Memorial Drive from Wentworth Avenue west to the end of the school building, approximately four hundred fifty (450) feet. 
(10)  Stop, stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, for more than a period of two (2) hours between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, on the east side of Hirsch Avenue from the corner of Sibley Boulevard and Hirsch Avenue northward, to the entrance of the building and parking lot. 
(11)  Stop, stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, on the north side of 155th Street between Superior Avenue and the driveway entrance to Thornton Fractional North High School. School bus vehicles are exempt from this provision. 
(12)  Stop, stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, for more than a period of two (2) hours at any time at 239 Pulaski Road. 
(13)  Park or allow to remain standing a vehicle, whether occupied or not, for more than a period of fifteen (15) minutes between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, at 505, 507, 511 and 515 Burnham Avenue. 
(14)  Reserved. 
(15)  Park or allow to remain standing a vehicle owned or operated by a business at any time, whether occupied or not, on Memorial Drive between Saginaw Avenue on the east and the alley on the west. 
(16)  Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except momentarily to pick up or discharge passengers, on any street having a curbside mailbox erected at the edge of a roadway during the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, except federal holidays. Any such vehicle creating or constituting an obstruction to the use of a curbside mailbox is hereby subject to removal by towing as herein provided in accordance with section 90-44. 
(17)  Stand or park a truck, whether occupied or not, on State Street between Stoney Island Avenue and Paxton Avenue. 
(18)  Stand or park a truck on any vacant lot adjacent to any residential structure. 
(19)  Stand or park a truck or bus on 158th Place between Paxton and Greenwood. 
(20)  Park or allow to remain standing any motor vehicle on the east side of State Line Road between Schrum Road and River Oaks Road for a period of more than ten (10) minutes. 
(21)  No truck shall be permitted at any time on Prairie Avenue between Harding Avenue and Sibley Boulevard. 
(22)  Park a truck, whether occupied or not, in the alley west of Cornell Avenue between Stewart Avenue and Harding Avenue. 
(23)  Stand or park a semi-truck or trailer on either side of State Street from Burnham Avenue to State Line Road except as follows: 
a.  While expeditiously loading or unloading freight, materials or merchandise between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.; 
b.  While effecting emergency repairs when a vehicle is so disabled as to render it unsafe to proceed further; 
c.  Vehicles and equipment engaged in street construction, maintenance and repair or construction, maintenance or repair of public service utilities. 
(Code 1980, § 17-121; Ord. No. 83-9, § 1, 3-24-1983; Ord. No. 86-7, § 1, 3-13-1986; Ord. No. 87-2, § 1, 2-12-1987; Ord. No. 89-30, § 1, 8-24-1989; Ord. No. 89-47, § 1, 12-14-1989; Ord. No. 90-13, § 1, 3-22-1990; Ord. No. 90-39, § 1, 9-13-1990; Ord. No. 91-39, § 1, 9-26-1991; Ord. No. 92-11, § 1, 2-27-1992; Ord. No. 92-21, § 1, 6-11-1992; Ord. No. 92-34, § 1, 8-27-1992; Ord. No. 93-21, § 1, 6-24-1993; Ord. No. 93-29, § 1, 9-23-1993; Ord. No. 93-37, § 1, 10-28-1993; Ord. No. 94-8, § 1, 3-24-1994; Ord. No. 94-15, § 1, 5-12-1994; Ord. No. 95-18, § 1, 5-11-1995; Ord. No. 95-23, § 1, 6-8-1995; Ord. No. 95-41, § 1, 8-24-1995; Ord. No. 95-50, § 1, 9-28-1995; Ord. No. 95-51, § 1, 9-28-1995; Ord. No. 95-54, § 1, 10-12-1995; Ord. No. 95-64, § 1, 11-9-1995; Ord. No. 96-13, § 1, 1-25-1996; Ord. No. 96-16, § 1, 2-8-1996; Ord. No. 96-57, § 1, 8-22-1996; Ord. No. 97-27, § 1, 5-22-1997; Ord. No. 97-31, § 1, 6-12-1997; Ord. No. 97-36, § 1, 6-26-1997; Ord. No. 98-17, § 1, 4-3-1998; Ord. No. 98-19, § 1, 4-23-1998; Ord. No. 98-20, § 1, 4-23-1998; Ord. No. 98-25, § 1, 5-14-1998; Ord. No. 98-40, § 1, 7-9-1998; Ord. No. 98-55, § 1, 9-10-1998; Ord. No. 99-54, § 1, 8-26-1999; Ord. No. 99-65, § 1, 12-9-1999; Ord. No. 99-66, § 1, 12-9-1999; Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 2-10-2000; Ord. No. 00-32, § 1, 5-25-2000; Ord. No. 01-10, § 1, 2-22-2001; Ord. No. 01-26, § 1, 7-5-2001; Ord. No. 01-44; § 1, 8-23-2001; Ord. No. 01-52, § 1, 9-27-2001; Ord. No. 02-04, § 1, 2-14-2002; Ord. No. 02-05, § 1, 2-14-2002; Ord. No. 02-15, § I, 5-9-2002; Ord. No. 02-16, § I, 5-9-2002; Ord. No. 02-17, § I, 5-9-2002; Ord. No. 02-28, § I, 6-27-2002; Ord. No. 02-32, § I, 7-25-2002; Ord. No. 02-35, § I, 7-25-2002; Ord. No. 02-42, § I, 8-8-2002; Ord. No. 04-63, § 1, 9-9-2004; Ord. No. 04-77, § 1, 11-11-2004; Ord. No. 05-01, § 1, 1-13-2005; Ord. No. 05-02, § 1, 1-13-2005; Ord. No. 05-16, § 1, 4-14-2005; Ord. No. 05-37, § 1, 6-9-2005; Ord. No. 05-83, § 1, 11-21-2005; Ord. No. 05-86, § 1, 12-8-2005; Ord. No. 06-13-06, § 1, 2-9-2006; Ord. No. 06-56, § 1, 7-13-2006; Ord. No. 06-97, § 1, 12-14-2006; Ord. No. 08-2, § 2, 1-10-2008; Ord. No. 08-56, § 4, 8-14-2008; Ord. No. 08-71, § 2, 10-23-2008; Ord. No. 09-21, § 2, 5-28-2009; Ord. No. 09-38, § 2, 8-13-2009; Ord. No. 10-11, § 2, 2-11-2010; Ord. No. 12-20, § 2, 5-10-2012; Ord. No. 13-13, § 2, 4-11-2013; Ord. No. 13-46, § 2, 9-12-2013; Ord. No. 14-12, § 2, 3-13-2014; Ord. No. 14-22, § 2, 4-10-2014; Ord. No. 14-53, § 2, 11-13-2014; Ord. No. 15-40, § 2, 9-10-2015; Ord. No. 17-18, § 2, 6-8-2017) 
State Law reference— Parking prohibitions generally, 625 ILCS 5/11-1303.  
Sec. 90-302. - Obstructing street. 
No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten (10) feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicle traffic, except that a driver may stop temporarily during the actual loading or unloading of passengers, or when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signs or signals or a police officer. 
(Code 1980, § 17-122)  
Sec. 90-303. - Obstructing alley. 
No person shall park a vehicle within any alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than eight (8) feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic. 
(Code 1980, § 17-123)  
Sec. 90-304. - Parking during snow removal. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand, park or leave unattended a motor vehicle, for a period longer than three (3) minutes, where snow is present at a depth of two (2) or more inches and a sign is posted indicating a snow route. The following streets shall be designated as snow routes: 
155th Street 	Lincoln Avenue 
156th Street 	Luella Avenue 
157th Street 	Madison Avenue 
163rd Street 	Marquette Avenue 
166th Street 	Memorial Drive 
Arthur Avenue 	Prairie Avenue 
Buffalo Avenue 	Price Avenue 
Calhoun Avenue 	Pulaski Road 
	Ring Road 
Cleveland Avenue 	Schrum Road 
Clyde Avenue 	Stanley Boulevard 
Crandon Avenue 	State Street 
Forsythe Avenue 	Stewart Avenue 
Harbor Drive 	Superior Avenue 
Harding Avenue 	Warren Avenue 
Highland Street 	Wilson Avenue 
Legion Drive 	Yates Avenue 
 
(b)  The police department and all members thereof assigned to traffic duty, are hereby authorized to remove and tow away or to have removed or towed away by a commercial towing service, any car or other vehicle illegally parked in violation of this section, and the reasonable costs thereof shall be paid by the owner or operator of said vehicle. 
(c)  The commissioner of streets and alleys and the chief of police are hereby authorized and directed to take the necessary steps to post the proper signs on the herein provided streets in accordance with the terms and conditions of this section. 
(d)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. 
(Code 1980, § 17-124; Ord. No. 79-57, § 1, 9-8-79; Ord. No. 14-32, § 2, 6-26-2014; Ord. No. 14-69, § 2, 12-29-2014) 
State Law reference— Authority to prohibit parking during snow removal, 625 ILCS 5/11-208(a)(13).  
Sec. 90-305. - Parking prohibited when posted. 
(a)  For the purpose of facilitating temporary uses of the public way requiring the absence of parked vehicles, including but not limited to, street cleaning, athletic events, parades and special events, the mayor, police chief, or public works director, is authorized to cause to be posted temporary signs on any public street, designating specific areas, dates and/or times that parking is prohibited, and giving notice that vehicles parked in violation of the temporary prohibition shall be towed away. Such notice shall be posted at the designated "no-parking" area not less than forty-eight (48) hours prior to the effective date of the parking ban. Notice shall be posted not less than every fifty (50) feet. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this section to park any vehicle on any street in violation of a sign posted pursuant to this section, and the violator shall be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each day the vehicle is illegally parked. This fine shall be in addition to any fees for towing the vehicle. 
(c)  Where any sign has been posted pursuant to subsection (a) of this section for the required period of time, the police chief or his designated agent is authorized to tow any vehicle parked in violation of the parking prohibition to an authorized storage facility, or, if practical, to the nearest lawful public parking space. 
(d)  The owner of any vehicle towed pursuant to this section shall be liable for the cost of towing actually incurred by the city, and for any storage fees, in addition to any fine pursuant to subsection (b) of this section. 
(Code 1980, § 17-125; Ord. No. 03-57, 9-25-2003)  
Sec. 90-306. - Removal of unattended vehicles. 
Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any bridge or causeway, or in any tunnel where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic, such officer is hereby authorized to provide for the removal of such vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety. 
(Code 1980, § 17-126)  
Sec. 90-307. - Reserved.  
Sec. 90-308. - Cab and bus stands. 
No vehicle other than a licensed taxicab shall be parked in any area designated by ordinance as a cabstand; no vehicle other than a bus shall be parked in a place designated by ordinance as a bus loading zone. 
(Code 1980, § 17-128)  
Sec. 90-309. - Loading zones. 
It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to stand a passenger vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary for the loading or unloading of passengers, not to exceed thirty (30) minutes, in any place designated by the mayor and city council as a loading zone and marked as such, or in any of the following designated places: 
(1)  At any place not to exceed seventy-five (75) feet along the curb before the entrance to any hospital or hotel at any time. 
(2)  At any place not to exceed seventy-five (75) feet along the curb before the entrance to a public building between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except on Sunday. 
(3)  Directly in front of the entrance to any theater at any time that the theater is open. 
(Code 1980, § 17-129)  
Sec. 90-310. - Two-hour parking. 
(a)  No person shall park or allow to remain standing any motor vehicle on the streets described in this section, within the city, for more than a period of two (2) hours: 
Memorial Drive at the southeast corner thereof and Hirsch Avenue proceeding east to the alley (555 Memorial Drive). 
Pulaski Road (south side) from the alley west of State Line to approximately fifty (50) feet west of Douglas Avenue. 
Wentworth Avenue at the intersection of Wilson Avenue North to the alley (546 Wentworth Avenue). 
The south side of 155th Street from Burnham Avenue east to the first driveway. 
(b)  The commissioner of streets and alleys and the chief of police are hereby authorized and directed to take the necessary steps to post the proper signs on the herein provided streets in accordance with the terms and conditions of this section. 
(Code 1980, § 17-130; Ord. No. 88-25, § 1, 10-13-1988; Ord. No. 94-42, § 1, 7-28-1994; Ord. No. 01-03, § 1, 2-8-2001)  
Sec. 90-311. - Parking for purposes of sale. 
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle upon any street for the purpose of displaying it for sale, or to park any vehicle upon any business street from which vehicle merchandise is peddled. 
(Code 1980, § 17-131)  
Sec. 90-312. - One-hour parking. 
(a)  No person shall park or allow to remain standing, any motor vehicle on the streets described in this section, within the city, for more than a period of one (1) hour, during the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.: 
110 Pulaski Road. 
131 Pulaski Road. 
135 Pulaski Road. 
137 Pulaski Road. 
(b)  No person shall park or allow to remain standing, any motor vehicle on the streets described in this section, within the city, for more than a period of one (1) hour, during the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m.: 
On the east side of Superior from Pulaski Road north to the east/west alley. 
(c)  The commissioner of streets and alleys and the chief of police are hereby authorized and directed to post the proper signs on the herein provided streets in accordance with the terms and conditions of this section. 
(Code 1980, § 17-132; Ord. No. 91-3, § 1, 2-14-1991; Ord. No. 91-12, § 1, 5-23-1991; Ord. No. 91-21, §§ 1, 2, 6-13-1991)  
Sec. 90-313. - Parking on private property. 
It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle on any private property without the consent of the owner of the property. 
(Code 1980, § 17-134)  
Secs. 90-314, 90-315. - Reserved.  
Sec. 90-316. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 08-56, adopted Aug. 14, 2008, deleted § 90-316 which pertained to campers, trailers and residential parking and derived from the 1970 and 1980 Codes; Ord. No. 77-52, adopted Dec. 22, 1977; and Ord. No. 98-28, adopted May 28, 1998.  
Sec. 90-317. - Handicapped parking. 
(a)  Generally. There shall be designated by the city council, from time to time, areas prohibiting parking by any person other than a handicapped person. Any person other than a handicapped person who parks in said designated areas shall violate the provisions of this section and shall be subject to the penalty provided for by ordinance. 
(b)  Definitions. 
(1)  The following persons shall be classified as handicapped persons relating to the use of handicapped parking spaces in the city: 
a.  Any natural person who has temporarily or permanently lost the use of one (1) or both legs. 
b.  Any natural person who is temporarily or permanently disabled to a degree where such person is unable to move without the aid of some mechanical device such as crutches or a wheelchair or the aid of another person. 
c.  Any motor vehicle bearing registration plates issued to a physically handicapped person pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/3-616, or to a disabled veteran pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/3-609. 
(2)  A restricted handicapped parking area is an area so marked by signs clearly indicating such, posted in public parking areas at the discretion of the city. The parking space as provided hereunder shall be at least sixteen (16) feet wide, parallel to the curb. 
(c)  Regulation. No motor vehicle shall occupy any parking space in the city which is designated and marked for the use of handicapped persons only, unless such vehicle is operated by a person defined handicapped according to subsection (b) of this section. Parking privileges granted by this section are strictly limited to the person to whom the special registration plates, special decal or device were issued and to qualified operators acting under his express direction while the disabled person is present. 
(d)  Enforcement. The police department of the city shall enforce this section through the issuance of citations and the towing of vehicles in violation. It shall be prohibited to park any motor vehicle which is not bearing registration plates or decals issued to a physically handicapped person pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/3-616 or 625 ILCS 5/11-1302.2 or to a disabled veteran pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/3-609, as evidence that the vehicle is operated by or for a handicapped person or disabled veteran, in any parking place, including any private or public off-street parking facility specifically reserved, by the posting of an official sign, for motor vehicles bearing such registration plates. 
(e)  Permits. The city clerk and police department shall be authorized to issue numbered cards (not more than two (2) per applicant) to handicapped persons desiring to use handicapped parking zones in the city. Such cards shall be displayed on the dashboard of the vehicle and visible through the front windshield, or slipped onto the visor. 
(f)  Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be punished by a fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per offense. 
All fines herein shall be subject to Chapter 2, Article IX, Code enforcement, of the City of Calumet City Municipal Code. 
(g)  Signed areas. The following areas are hereby designated as restricted handicapped parking areas by the city council, and appropriate signs shall be posted clearly indicating such areas: 
1275 Balmoral Avenue 
1303 Balmoral Avenue 
309 Bensley Avenue 
311 Bensley Avenue 
343 Bensley Avenue 
347 Bensley Avenue 
353 Bensley Avenue 
363 Bensley Avenue 
355 Bensley Avenue 
380 Bensley Avenue 
384 Bensley 
387 Bensley Avenue 
407 Bensley Avenue 
502 Bensley Avenue 
591 Bensley Avenue 
642 Bensley 
412 Bensley Avenue 
371 Buffalo 
379 Buffalo 
397 Buffalo 
646 Buffalo 
650 Buffalo Avenue 
651 Buffalo Avenue 
659 Buffalo Avenue 
664 Buffalo Avenue 
747 Buffalo Avenue 
757 Buffalo Avenue 
760 Buffalo Avenue 
761 Buffalo 
764 Buffalo 
781 Buffalo Avenue 
808 Buffalo Avenue 
1301 Buffalo Avenue 
778 Burnham 
1318—1321 Burnham Avenue 
275 Calhoun Avenue 
299 Calhoun 
302 Calhoun 
671 Calhoun Avenue 
792 Campbell 
295 Chappel Avenue 
303 Chappel 
355 Chappel Avenue 
386 Chappel Avenue 
390 Chappel Avenue 
646 Chappel Avenue 
650 Chappel Avenue 
653 Chappel Avenue 
282 Clyde Avenue 
295 Clyde 
461 Clyde 
262 Cornell Avenue 
287 Cornell Avenue 
290 Cornell Avenue 
374 Cornell Avenue, #1B 
374 Cornell Avenue, #1D 
274 Crandon Avenue 
303 Crandon Avenue 
307 Crandon 
311 Crandon Avenue 
315 Crandon Avenue 
339 Crandon Avenue 
341 Crandon Avenue 
352 Crandon Avenue 
360 Crandon Avenue 
361 Crandon 
389 Crandon Avenue 
395 Crandon Avenue 
398 Crandon Avenue 
452 Crandon Avenue 
490 Crandon Avenue 
495 Crandon Avenue 
499 Crandon Avenue 
113 Detroit Street 
127 Detroit Street 
136 Detroit 
553 Douglas Avenue 
678 Douglas Avenue 
1637 Downs Drive 
1641 Downs Drive 
493 East End Avenue 
106 Elizabeth Street 
217 Elizabeth Street 
294 Escanaba Avenue 
500 Exchange Avenue 
532 Exchange Avenue 
644 Exchange Avenue 
666 Exchange Avenue 
1364 Forest Avenue 
1379 Forest Avenue 
106 Forestdale Park 
514 Forsythe Avenue 
515 Forsythe Avenue 
560 Forsythe Avenue 
561 Forsythe Avenue 
587 Forsythe Avenue 
588 Forsythe Avenue 
594 Forsythe Avenue 
608 Forsythe 
625 Forsythe Avenue 
629 Forsythe Avenue 
662 Forsythe Avenue 
666 Forsythe Avenue 
446 Freeland Avenue 
464 Freeland Avenue 
493 Freeland Avenue 
510 Freeland Avenue 
513 Freeland Avenue 
532 Freeland Avenue 
533 Freeland Avenue 
550 Freeland Avenue 
574 Freeland Avenue 
622 Freeland Avenue 
652 Freeland Avenue 
656 Freeland 
664 Freeland Avenue 
1336 Freeland 
408 Garfield 
415 Garfield 
421 Garfield 
452 Garfield 
501 Garfield Avenue 
509 Garfield Avenue 
532 Garfield Avenue 
527 Ginger Lane 
559 Ginger Ridge 
560 Ginger Ridge 
956 Golf Court 
976 Golf Court 
505 Gordon Avenue 
559 Gordon Avenue 
610 Gordon Avenue 
611 Gordon Avenue 
647 Gordon Avenue 
651 Gordon Avenue 
1375 Gordon Avenue 
374 Greenbay Avenue 
386 Greenbay 
600 Greenbay 
710 Greenbay 
737 Greenbay 
744 Greenbay #1 Front 
757 Greenbay Avenue 
777 Greenbay 
1291 Greenbay Ave. 
1350 Greenbay Ave. 
26 Harding 
416 Harding 
1111 Harding Avenue 
558 Harrison Avenue 
816 Henry 
9 Highland Street 
34 Highland Street 
132 Highland 
648 Hirsch 
981 Hirsch 
1008 Hirsch Blvd. 
1040 Hirsch Blvd. #104 
1450 Hirsch 
275 Hoxie Avenue 
278 Hoxie Avenue 
281 Hoxie Avenue 
282 Hoxie Avenue 
342 Hoxie Avenue 
346 Hoxie Avenue 
347 Hoxie Avenue 
349 Hoxie Avenue 
353 Hoxie 
382 Hoxie Avenue 
387 Hoxie Avenue 
519 Hoxie 
520 Hoxie 
524 Hoxie Avenue 
525 Hoxie Avenue, Apt. 3B 
538 Hoxie Avenue 
492 Ingraham 
604 Ingraham Avenue 
609 Ingraham Avenue 
613 Ingraham Avenue 
375 Jeffery Avenue 
386 Jeffery Avenue 
387 Jeffery Avenue 
498 Jeffery Avenue 
520 Jeffrey Avenue 
639 Jeffery Ave. Apt. 15 
225 Jennifer Lane 
1514 Kenilworth Dr. 
1518 Kenilworth Dr. 
1521 Kenilworth Dr. 
1534 Kenilworth 
1535 Kenilworth Dr. 
1571 Kenilworth 
1581 Kenilworth 
1593 Kenilworth 
586 Lincoln 
768 Lincoln (3 spaces) 
1539 Lincoln Place 
289 Luella 
296 Luella Avenue 
305 Luella Avenue 
309 Luella 
324 Luella Ave. Apt. 1 
342 Luella Avenue 
345 Luella 
348 Luella Avenue 
399 Luella Avenue 
400 Luella Avenue 
434 Mackinaw Avenue 
513 Mackinaw Avenue 
529 Mackinaw Avenue 
533 Mackinaw Avenue 
592 Mackinaw 
618 Mackinaw Avenue 
646 Mackinaw 
1251 Mackinaw Ave. 
1257 Mackinaw Ave. 
1339 Mackinaw Ave. 
276 Madison 
282 Madison 
302 Madison Avenue 
309 Madison Avenue 
330 Madison Avenue 
347 Madison Avenue 
374 Madison 
387 Madison Avenue 
402 Madison Avenue 
430 Madison Avenue 
484 Madison Avenue 
525 Madison Avenue 
293 Manistee 
448 Manistee Avenue 
456 Manistee Avenue 
526 Manistee Avenue 
620 Manistee 
East Side of Manistee, just north of 154th Street (2) 
277 Marquette Ave. 
282 Marquette Ave. 
326 Marquette Ave. 
327 Marquette Ave. 
329 Marquette Ave. 
330 Marquette 
354 Marquette Ave. 
355 Marquette Ave. 
360 Marquette 
502 Marquette Ave. 
527 Marquette 
588 Marquette Ave. 
605 Marquette 
607 Marquette Ave. 
212 Mason 
313 Mason Street 
705 May Street 
738 May Street 
764 May Street 
769 May Street 
143 Memorial Drive 
305 Memorial Drive 
1311 Memorial Drive 
1701 Memorial Drive 
1705 Memorial Drive 
1715 Memorial Drive 
1767 Memorial Drive 
1823 Memorial 
270 Merrill 
294 Merrill Avenue 
342 Merrill Avenue 
364 Merrill Avenue 
515 Merrill Avenue 
1016 Michigan City Road 
552 Muskeegon Ave. 
588 Muskegon 
757 Newell 
379 Oglesby 
383 Oglesby Avenue 
390 Oglesby 
490 Oglesby 
504 Oglesby Avenue 
83 Paxton Avenue 
274 Paxton Avenue 
328 Paxton 
388 Paxton Avenue 
455 Paxton 
456 Paxton Avenue 
499 Paxton Avenue 
509 Paxton Avenue 
512 Paxton Avenue 
598 Paxton Avenue 
606 Paxton Avenue 
263 Prairie 
271 Prairie Avenue 
280 Prairie Avenue 
283 Prairie Avenue 
287 Prairie Avenue 
303 Prairie Avenue 
327 Prairie Avenue 
370 Prairie Avenue 
383 Prairie Avenue 
409 Prairie Avenue 
437 Prairie Ave. #1C 
445 Prairie Avenue, #1, rear 
494 Price 
495 Price Avenue 
500 Price Avenue 
539 Price 
578 Price 
585 Price Avenue 
614 Price 
662 Price Avenue 
134 Pulaski Road 
137 Pulaski Road, Apt. 1F 
139 Pulaski Road, Rear 
227 Pulaski Road 
229 Pulaski Road 
311 Pulaski Road 
325 Pulaski Road 
328 Pulaski Road 
334 Pulaski Road 
414 Pulaski Road 
420 Pulaski 
437 Pulaski Road 
536 Pulaski Road 
667 Pulaski Road 
1236 River Drive 
137 Ruth Street 
226 Ruth Street 
460 Saginaw 
605 Saginaw Avenue 
611 Saginaw 
615 Saginaw Avenue 
1420 Shirley Drive 
1422 Shirley Drive 
1428 Shirley Drive 
1466 Shirley Drive 
1516 Shirley Drive 
1588 Shirley Drive 
120 Sibley Boulevard 
419 Sibley Boulevard 
514 Sibley Boulevard 
634 Sibley Boulevard 
701 Sibley Boulevard 
800 State Line Road (on 156th Place side) 
852 State Line Road 
1052 State Line Road 
1462 State Line Road 
1570 State Line Road 
53 State Street 
515 State Street 
1449 State St., Apt. 2E 
1479 State Street 
1677 State Street 
1685 State Street 
1685 State St., Apt. 1D 
1900 State Street, #1 
1960 State Street 
1141 Stewart Avenue 
291 Stoney Island Avenue 
1926 Stonegate Drive 
505 Superior 
603 Superior 
655 Superior 
1319 Superior Avenue 
1375 Superior Avenue 
131 Waltham Street 
211 Waltham Street 
33 Warren St. 
104 Warren Street 
106 Warren 
304 Warren Street 
337 Warren Street 
441 Warren Street 
506 Warren Street 
10 Webb Street 
34 Webb Street 
225 Webb Street 
226 Webb Street 
421 Webb Street 
489 Wentworth Ave. 
532 Wentworth Ave. 
579 Wentworth 
670 Wentworth Ave. 
695 Wentworth Ave. 
760 Wentworth Ave. 
849 Wentworth Ave. 
887 Wentworth Ave. 
920 Wentworth Ave. 
1067 Wentworth Ave. 
1386 Wentworth Ave. 
1407 Wentworth Ave. 
1451 Wentworth Ave. 
1458 Wentworth Ave. 
1464 Wentworth Ave. 
1520 Wentworth Ave. 
1522 Wentworth Ave. 
414 Wilson Avenue 
418 Wilson 
446 Wilson Avenue 
274 Yates Avenue 
283 Yates Avenue, #1 
287 Yates 
289 Yates Avenue 
293 Yates Avenue, Apt. 1B 
294 Yates Avenue 
303 Yates Avenue 
309 Yates 
349 Yates 
394 Yates 
396 Yates Avenue 
396 Yates Avenue, Apt. 2A 
402 Yates 
406 Yates 
410 Yates Avenue 
416 Yates Avenue 
430 Yates Avenue, #1 
442 Yates Avenue 
448 Yates 
454 Yates 
521 Yates Avenue 
538 Yates Avenue 
655 Yates Avenue 
304 152nd Place 
329 152nd Place 
334 152nd Place 
216 153rd Place 
223 153rd Street 
224 153rd Place 
301 153rd Place 
329 153rd Place 
331 153rd Street 
210 154th Place 
227 154th Place 
237 154th Place 
310 154th Place 
406 154th Place 
438 154th Place 
502 154th Place 
513 154th Place 
533 154th Place 
539 154th Place 
14 155th Place 
16 155th Place 
107 155th Street 
135 155th Place 
202 155th Place 
234 155th Place 
304 155th Place 
328 155th Place 
419 155th Place 
425 155th Place 
430 155th Place, #1 
530 155th Place 
541 155th Place 
36 155th Street 
127 155th Street, #1 
127 155th Street, #2 
131 155th Street 
211 155th Street 
238 155th Street 
320 155th Street 
529 155th Street 
535 155th Street 
537 155th Street 
14 156th Place 
31 156th Place 
100 156th Place 
110 156th Place 
148 156th Place 
305 156th Place 
309 156th Place 
332 156th Place 
337 156th Place 
412 156th Place 
500 156th Place 
512 156th Place 
517 156th Place 
524 156th Place 
441 156th Street 
14 156th Street 
17 156th Street 
425 156th Street 
534 156th Street 
535 156th Street 
8 157th Street 
33 157th Street 
34 157th Street 
47 157th Street 
110 157th Street 
220 157th Street 
233 157th Street 
237 157th Street 
319 157th Street 
320 157th Street 
327 157th Street 
331 157th Street 
407 157th Street 
507 157th Street 
9 158th Place, Apt. 2A south 
136 163rd Street 
11 164th Street 
21 164th Street 
46 164th Place 
47 164th Place 
107 164th Street 
12 165th Street 
15 165th Street 
29 165th Street 
33 165th Street 
35 165th Place 
321 166th Street 
14 167th Street 
(Code 1970, § 18-525; Code 1980, § 17-138; Ord. No. 78-28, § 1, 6-22-1978; Ord. No. 79-6, § 1, 3-8-1979; Ord. No. 83-19, § 1, 9-8-1983; Ord. No. 85-36, § 1, 10-10-1985; Ord. No. 88-10, § 1, 6-10-1988; Ord. No. 89-36, § 1, 10-26-1989; Ord. No. 89-44, § 1, 11-21-1989; Ord. No. 89-46, § 1, 12-14-1989; Ord. No. 89-48, § 1, 12-28-1989; Ord. No. 90-8, § 1, 2-22-1990; Ord. No. 90-11, § 1, 3-8-1990; Ord. No. 90-15, § 1, 4-12-1990; Ord. No. 90-17, § 1, 4-26-1990; Ord. No. 90-20, § 1, 4-26-1990; Ord. No. 90-28, § 1, 6-14-1990; Ord. No. 90-29, § 1, 6-20-1990; Ord. No. 90-31, § 1, 7-12-1990; Ord. No. 90-37, § 1, 7-26-1990; Ord. No. 90-42, § 1, 9-27-1990; Ord. No. 90-44, § 1, 11-20-1990; Ord. No. 90-48, § 1, 12-13-1990; Ord. No. 91-1, § 1, 1-10-1991; Ord. No. 91-5, § 1, 2-28-1991; Ord. No. 91-9, § 1, 3-28-1991; Ord. No. 91-22, § 1, 6-13-1991; Ord. No. 91-32, § 1, 8-8-1991; Ord. No. 91-33, § 1, 8-8-1991; Ord. No. 91-34, § 1, 8-22-1991; Ord. No. 91-37, § 1, 9-26-1991; Ord. No. 91-38, § 1, 9-26-1991; Ord. No. 91-45, § 1, 10-24-1991; Ord. No. 91-55, § 1, 12-12-1991; Ord. No. 91-59, § 1, 12-23-1991; Ord. No. 92-1, § 1, 1-23-1992; Ord. No. 92-2, § 1, 1-23-1992; Ord. No. 92-10, § 1, 2-27-1991; Ord. No. 92-17, § 1, 3-31-1992; Ord. No. 92-19, § 1, 4-23-1992; Ord. No. 92-20, § 1, 5-14-1992; Ord. No. 92-22, § 1, 6-11-1992; Ord. No. 92-23, § 1, 6-11-1992; Ord. No. 92-29, § 1, 7-23-1992; Ord. No. 92-32, § 1, 8-13-1992; Ord. No. 92-33, § 1, 8-27-1992; Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, 9-10-1992; Ord. No. 92-42, §§ 1, 2, 10-8-1992; Ord. No. 92-54, § 1, 11-12-1992; Ord. No. 92-55, § 1, 11-12-1992; Ord. No. 92-57, § 1, 11-24-1992; Ord. No. 92-58, § 1, 12-10-1992; Ord. No. 93-2, § 1, 1-28-1993; Ord. No. 93-8, § 1, 3-25-1993; Ord. No. 93-9, § 1, 3-25-1993; Ord. No. 93-13, § 1, 5-13-1993; Ord. No. 93-15, § 1, 5-28-1993; Ord. No. 93-16, § 1, 5-28-1993; Ord. No. 93-22, § 1, 7-8-1993; Ord. No. 93-23, § 1, 7-29-1993; Ord. No. 93-25, § 1, 8-12-1993; Ord. No. 93-26, §§ 1, 2, 8-26-1993; Ord. No. 93-30, § 1, 9-23-1993; Ord. No. 93-36, § 1, 10-28-1993; Ord. No. 93-38, § 1, 11-11-1993; Ord. No. 93-39, § 1, 11-11-1993; Ord. No. 93-41, § 1, 12-9-1993; Ord. No. 94-2, § 1, 1-13-1994; Ord. No. 94-7, § 1, 3-10-1994; Ord. No. 94-10, § 1, 4-14-1994; Ord. No. 94-11, § 1, 4-14-1994; Ord. No. 94-14, §§ 1, 2, 5-12-1994; Ord. No. 94-15, § 1, 5-12-1994; Ord. No. 94-24, § 1, 5-26-1994; Ord. No. 94-27, § 1, 6-9-1994; Ord. No. 94-30, § 1, 6-23-1994; Ord. No. 94-31, § 1, 7-14-1994; Ord. No. 94-32, § 1, 7-14-1994; Ord. No. 94-40, § 1, 7-28-1994; Ord. No. 94-41, § 1, 7-28-1994; Ord. No. 94-46, § 1, 8-11-1994; Ord. No. 94-47, § 1, 8-11-1994; Ord. No. 94-53, § 1, 8-25-1994; Ord. No. 94-55, § 1, 9-22-1994; Ord. No. 94-57, § 1, 10-17-1994; Ord. No. 94-58, § 1, 10-17-1994; Ord. No. 94-59, § 1, 10-27-1994; Ord. No. 94-60, § 1, 10-27-1994; Ord. No. 94-61, § 1, 12-8-1994; Ord. No. 94-62, § 1, 12-8-1994; Ord. No. 94-63, § 1, 12-8-1994; Ord. No. 95-1, §§ 1, 2, 1-12-1995; Ord. No. 95-5, § 1, 1-26-1995; Ord. No. 95-6, § 1, 2-9-1995; Ord. No. 95-7, § 1, 2-23-1995; Ord. No. 95-8, § 1, 3-9-1995; Ord. No. 95-10, § 1, 4-12-1995; Ord. No. 95-12, § 1, 4-27-1995; Ord. No. 95-16, § 1, 5-11-1995; Ord. No. 95-17, § 1, 5-11-1995; Ord. No. 95-20, § 1, 5-25-1995; Ord. No. 95-22, § 1, 6-8-1995; Ord. No. 95-26, § 1, 6-22-1995; Ord. No. 95-27, § 1, 7-13-1995; Ord. No. 95-28, § 1, 7-13-1995; Ord. No. 95-31, § 1, 7-27-1995; Ord. No. 95-36, § 1, 8-10-1995; Ord. No. 95-40, § 1, 8-24-1995; Ord. No. 95-47, § 1, 9-28-1995; Ord. No. 95-48, § 1, 9-28-1995; Ord. No. 95-53, § 1, 10-12-1995; Ord. No. 95-57, § 1, 10-26-1995; Ord. No. 95-61, § 1, 11-9-1995; Ord. No. 95-62, § 1, 11-9-1995; Ord. No. 95-67, § 1, 12-14-1995; Ord. No. 95-68, § 1, 12-14-1995; Ord. No. 95-69, § 1, 12-14-1995; Ord. No. 95-72, § 1, 12-28-1995; Ord. No. 96-1, § 1, 1-11-1996; Ord. No. 96-12, § 1, 1-25-1996; Ord. No. 96-14, § 1, 2-8-1996; Ord. No. 96-15, § 1, 2-8-1996; Ord. No. 96-17, § 1, 3-14-1996; Ord. No. 96-19, § 1, 3-28-1996; Ord. No. 96-20, § 1, 4-11-1996; Ord. No. 96-24, § 1, 4-25-1996; Ord. No. 96-32, § 1, 6-13-1996; Ord. No. 96-33, § 1, 6-13-1996; Ord. No. 96-35, § 1, 6-27-1996; Ord. No. 96-38, § 1, 7-11-1996; Ord. No. 96-41, § 1, 7-25-1996; Ord. No. 96-51, § 1, 8-8-1996; Ord. No. 96-56, § 1, 8-22-1996; Ord. No. 96-58, § 1, 9-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-59, § 1, 9-26-1996; Ord. No. 96-60, § 1, 9-26-1996; Ord. No. 96-64, § 1, 10-24-1996; Ord. No. 96-65, § 1, 10-24-1996; Ord. No. 96-66, § 1, 11-14-1996; Ord. No. 96-67, § 1, 11-14-1996; Ord. No. 96-75, § 1, 12-12-1996; Ord. No. 96-79, § 1, 12-26-1996; Ord. No. 97-5, § 1, 1-23-1997; Ord. No. 97-6, § 1, 1-23-1997; Ord. No. 97-12, § 1, 2-27-1997; Ord. No. 97-17, § 1, 3-27-1997; Ord. No. 97-18, § 1, 3-27-1997; Ord. No. 97-19, § 1, 4-10-1997; Ord. No. 97-20, § 1, 4-10-1997; Ord. No. 97-23, § 1, 4-24-1997; Ord. No. 97-24, § 1, 4-24-1997; Ord. No. 97-29, § 1, 6-12-1997; Ord. No. 97-30, § 1, 6-12-1997; Ord. No. 97-35, § 1, 6-26-1997; Ord. No. 97-40, § 1, 7-10-1997; Ord. No. 97-42, § 1, 8-14-1997; Ord. No. 97-45, § 1, 9-2-1997; Ord. No. 97-46, § 1, 9-2-1997; Ord. No. 97-47, § 1, 9-11-1997; Ord. No. 97-48, § 1, 9-11-1997; Ord. No. 97-49, § 1, 9-25-1997; Ord. No. 97-53, § 1, 10-9-1997; Ord. No. 97-54, § 1, 10-9-1997; Ord. No. 97-58, § 1, 10-23-1997; Ord. No. 97-59, § 1, 10-23-1997; Ord. No. 97-65, § 1, 11-13-1997; Ord. No. 97-66, § 1, 11-13-1997; Ord. No. 97-68, § 1, 12-4-1997; Ord. No. 97-69, § 1, 12-4-1997; Ord. No. 98-1, § 1, 1-8-1998; Ord. No. 98-4, § 1, 2-12-1998; Ord. No. 98-9, § 1, 3-12-1998; Ord. No. 98-10, § 1, 3-12-1998; Ord. No. 98-11, § 1, 3-26-1998; Ord. No. 98-12, § 1, 3-26-1998; Ord. No. 98-13, § 1, 4-9-1998; Ord. No. 98-15, § 1, 4-23-1998; Ord. No. 98-24, § 1, 5-14-1998; Ord. No. 98-26, § 1, 5-28-1998; Ord. No. 98-32, § 1, 6-11-1998; Ord. No. 98-35, § 1, 6-25-1998; Ord. No. 98-36, § 1, 6-25-1998; Ord. No. 98-41, § 1, 7-9-1998; Ord. No. 98-42, § 1, 7-9-1998; Ord. No. 98-43, § 1, 7-23-1998; Ord. No. 98-44, § 1, 7-23-1998; Ord. No. 98-50, § 1, 8-20-1998; Ord. No. 98-51, § 1, 8-20-1998; Ord. No. 98-59, § 1, 9-10-1998; Ord. No. 98-60, § 1, 9-24-1998; Ord. No. 98-61, § 1, 10-8-1998; Ord. No. 98-65, § 1, 10-22-1998; Ord. No. 98-69, § 1, 11-12-1998; Ord. No. 98-70, § 1, 11-24-1998, § 1, 11-24-1998; Ord. No. 98-71, § 1, 11-24-1998; Ord. No. 98-74, § 1, 12-10-1998; Ord. No. 99-1, § 1, 1-14-1999; Ord. No. 99-7, § 1, 1-14-1999; Ord. No. 99-8, § 1, 1-28-1999; Ord. No. 99-10, § 1, 2-11-1999; Ord. No. 99-11, § 1, 2-11-1999; Ord. No. 99-17, § 1, 2-5-1999; Ord. No. 99-18, § 1, 2-25-1999; Ord. No. 99-22, § 1, 3-11-1999; Ord. No. 99-24, § 1, 4-8-1999; Ord. No. 99-25, § 1, 4-8-1999; Ord. No. 99-27, § 1, 5-27-1999; Ord. No. 99-28, § 1, 5-27-1999; Ord. No. 99-30, § 1, 6-10-1999; Ord. No. 99-31, § 1, 6-10-1999; Ord. No. 99-37, § 1, 6-24-1999; Ord. No. 99-40, § 1, 7-8-1999; Ord. No. 99-41, § 1, 7-8-1999; Ord. No. 99-46, § 1, 7-22-1999; Ord. No. 99-47, § 1, 7-22-1999; Ord. No. 99-49, § 1, 8-12-1999; Ord. No. 99-50, § 1, 8-12-1999; Ord. No. 99-52, § 1, 8-26-1999; Ord. No. 99-56, § 1, 9-23-1999; Ord. No. 99-57, § 1, 9-23-1999; Ord. No. 99-59, § 1, 10-14-1999; Ord. No. 99-61, § 1, 11-10-1999; Ord. No. 99-62, § 1, 11-10-1999; Ord. No. 99-64, § 1, 12-199-1999; Ord. No. 99-67, § 1, 12-9-1999; Ord. No. 99-68, § 1, 12-23-1999; Ord. No. 00-6, § 1, 1-27-2000; Ord. No. 00-7, § 1, 1-27-2000; Ord. No. 00-14, § 1, 2-24-2000; Ord. No. 00-15, § 1, 3-9-2000; Ord. No. 00-17, § 1, 3-23-2000; Ord. No. 00-18, § 1, 3-23-2000; Ord. No. 00-21, § 1, 4-13-2000; Ord. No. 00-22, § 1, 4-13-2000; Ord. No. 00-24, § 1, 4-27-2000; Ord. No. 00-25, § 1, 4-27-2000; Ord. No. 00-28, § 1, 5-12-2000; Ord. No. 00-30, § 1, 5-25-2000; Ord. No. 00-31, § 1, 5-25-2000; Ord. No. 00-36, § 1, 6-22-2000; Ord. No. 00-37, § 1, 6-22-2000; Ord. No. 00-38, § 1, 7-17-2000; Ord. No. 00-42, § 1, 7-27-2000; Ord. No. 00-51, § 1, 9-14-2000; Ord. No. 00-52, § 1, 9-14-2000; Ord. No. 00-53, § 9-28-2000; Ord. No. 00-54, § 1, 9-28-2000; Ord. No. 00-66, § 1, 10-26-2000; Ord. No. 00-67, § 1, 10-26-2000; Ord. No. 00-73, § 1, 11-9-2000; Ord. No. 00-74, § 1, 11-9-2000; Ord. No. 00-79, § 1, 11-20-2000; Ord. No. 00-80, § 1, 12-14-2000; Ord. No. 00-85, § 1, 12-28-2000; Ord. No. 00-86, § 1, 12-28-2000; Ord. No. 00-87, § 1, 1-11-2001; Ord. No. 01-90, § 1, 1-25-2001; Ord. No. 01-01, § 1, 2-8-2001; Ord. No. 01-02, § 1, 2-8-2001; Ord. No. 01-08, § 1, 2-22-2001; Ord. No. 01-09, § 1, 2-22-2001; Ord. No. 01-11, § 1, 3-8-2001; Ord. No. 01-12, § 1, 3-22-2001; Ord. No. 01-13, § 1, 4-12-2001; Ord. No. 01-14, § 1, 4-12-2001; Ord. No. 01-16, § 1, 4-26-2001; Ord. No. 01-18, § 1, 5-10-2001; Ord. No. 01-21, § 1, 5-24-2001; Ord. No. 01-24, § 1, 6-14-2001; Ord. No. 01-26, § 1, 7-5-2001; Ord. No. 01-27, § 1, 6-28-2001; Ord. No. 01-31, § 1, 7-12-2001; Ord. No. 01-32, § 1, 7-12-2001; Ord. No. 01-33, § 1, 7-26-2001; Ord. No. 01-34, § 1, 7-26-2001; Ord. No. 01-35, § 1, 7-26-2001; Ord. No. 01-39, § 1, 8-9-2001; Ord. No. 01-43, § 1, 8-23-2001; Ord. No. 01-44, § 1, 8-23-2001; Ord. No. 01-46, § 1, 9-12-2001; Ord. No. 01-47, § 1, 9-12-2001; Ord. No. 01-50, § 1, 9-27-2001; Ord. No. 01-51, § 1, 9-27-2001; Ord. No. 01-54, § 1, 10-25-2001; Ord. No. 01-55, § 1, 11-8-2001; Ord. No. 01-57, § 1, 12-13-2001; Ord. No. 01-58, § 1, 12-13-2001; Ord. No. 02-01, § 1, 1-24-2002; Ord. No. 02-02, 2-14-2002; Ord. No. 02-03, § 1, 2-14-2002; Ord. No. 02-06, § 1, 3-14-2002; Ord. No. 02-07, § 1, 3-28-2002; Ord. No. 02-09, § 1, 4-11-2002; Ord. No. 02-14, § 1, 4-25-2002; Ord. No. 02-22, § 1, 6-13-2002; Ord. No. 02-23, § 1, 6-13-2002; Ord. No. 02-26, § 1, 6-27-2002; Ord. No. 02-30, § 1, 7-25-2002; Ord. No. 02-31, § 1, 7-25, 2002; Ord. No. 02-39, § 1, 8-8-2002; Ord. No. 02-53, § 1, 10-24-2002; Ord. No. 02-54, § 1, 11-14-2002; Ord. No. 02-55, § 1, 11-14-2002; Ord. No. 02-59, § 1, 11-25-2002; Ord. No. 02-64, § 1, 12-30-2002; Ord. No. 03-02, § 1, 1-23-2003; Ord. No. 03-05, § 1, 3-3-2003; Ord. No. 03-06, § 1, 3-3-2003; Ord. No. 03-08, § 1, 3-13-2003; Ord. No. 03-10, § 1, 4-10-2003; Ord. No. 03-13, § 1, 4-24-2003; Ord. No. 03-17, § 1, 5-22-2003; Ord. No. 03-24, § 1, 6-12-2003; Ord. No. 03-26, § 1, 3-3-2003; Ord. No. 03-29, § 1, 3-3-2003; Ord. No. 03-31, § 1, 7-24-2003; Ord. No. 03-39, § 1, 8-14-2003; Ord. No. 03-40, § 1, 8-14-2003; Ord. No. 03-44, § 1, 9-10-2003; Ord. No. 03-45, § 1, 9-10-2003; Ord. No. 03-52, § 1, 9-25-2003; Ord. No. 03-53, § 1, 9-25-2003; Ord. No. 03-66, § 1, 11-13-2003; Ord. No. 03-68, § 1, 11-25-2003; Ord. No. 03-71, § 1, 12-11-2003; Ord. No. 03-78, § 1, 12-29-2003; Ord. No. 04-03, § 1, 2-12-2004; Ord. No. 04-05, § 1, 3-11-2004; Ord. No. 04-06, § 1, 3-11-2004; Ord. No. 04-10, § 1, 3-25-2004; Ord. No. 04-11, § 1, 3-25-2004; Ord. No. 04-13, § 1, 4-7-2004; Ord. No. 04-15, § 1, 4-22-2004; Ord. No. 04-20, § 1, 5-13-2004; Ord. No. 04-26, § 1, 5-27-2004; Ord. No. 04-27, § 1, 5-27-2004; Ord. No. 04-36, § 1, 6-10-2004; Ord. No. 04-43, § 1, 7-8-2004; Ord. No. 04-57, § 1, 8-26-2004; Ord. No. 04-47, § 1, 7-22-2004; Ord. No. 04-62, § 1, 9-9-2004; Ord. No. 04-65, § 1, 9-9-2004; Ord. No. 04-66, § 1, 9-23-2004; Ord. No. 04-67, § 1, 9-23-2004; Ord. No. 04-69, § 1, 10-14-2004; Ord. No. 04-70, § 1, 10-14-2004; Ord. No. 04-73, § 1, 10-28-2004; Ord. No. 04-74, § 1, 10-28-2004; Ord. No. 04-76, § 1, 11-11-2004; Ord. No. 04-81, § 1, 12-9-2004; Ord. No. 04-83, § 1, 12-20-2004; Ord. No. 04-84, § 1, 12-20-2004; Ord. No. 05-06, § 1, 1-13-2005; Ord. No. 05-07, § 1, 1-13-2005; Ord. No. 05-08, § 1, 1-27-2005; Ord. No. 05-10, § 1, 2-10-2005; Ord. No. 05-11, § 1, 2-10-2005; Ord. No. 05-13, § 1, 2-24-2005; Ord. No. 05-15, § 1, 4-14-2005; Ord. No. 05-20, § 1, 4-28-2005; Ord. No. 05-21, § 1, 4-28-2005; Ord. No. 05-26, § 1, 5-26-2005; Ord. No. 05-29, § 1, 5-26-2005; Ord. No. 05-40, § 1, 6-23-2005; Ord. No. 05-41, § 1, 7-14-2005; Ord. No. 05-45, § 1, 7-28-2005; Ord. No. 05-54, § 1, 8-25-2005; Ord. No. 05-55, § 1, 8-25-2005; Ord. No. 05-58, § 1, 9-8-2005; Ord. No. 05-59, § 1, 9-8-2005; Ord. No. 05-63, § 1, 9-19-2005; Ord. No. 05-64, § 1, 10-13-2005; Ord. No. 05-73, § 1, 10-27-2005; Ord. No. 05-76, § 1, 11-10-2005; Ord. No. 05-82, § 1, 11-21-2005; Ord. No. 05-85, § 1, 12-8-2005; Ord. No. 05-90, § 1, 12-19-2005; Ord. No. 05-91, § 1, 12-19-2005; Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-12-2006; Ord. No. 06-02, § 1, 1-12-2006; Ord. No. 06-06, § 1, 1-26-2006; Ord. No. 06-07, § 1, 1-26-2006; Ord. No. 06-11, § 1, 2-9-2006; Ord. No. 06-15, § 1, 3-9-2006; Ord. No. 06-17, § 1, 3-23-2006; Ord. No. 06-18, § 1, 4-12-2006; Ord. No. 06-19, § 1, 4-12-2006; Ord. No. 06-22, § 1, 4-27-2006; Ord. No. 06-26, § 1, 5-11-2006; Ord. No. 06-27, § 1, 5-11-2006; Ord. No. 06-29, § 1, 5-25-2006; Ord. No. 06-35, § 1, 6-8-2006; Ord. No. 06-52, § 1, 7-13-2006; Ord. No. 06-53, § 1, 7-13-2006; Ord. No. 06-63, § 1, 8-10-2006; Ord. No. 06-65, § 1, 8-10-2006; Ord. No. 06-66, § 1, 8-24-2006; Ord. No. 06-71, § 1, 9-14-2006; Ord. No. 06-74, § 1, 9-25-2006; Ord. No. 06-81, § 1, 10-26-2006; Ord. No. 06-82, § 1, 10-26-2006; Ord. No. 06-87, § 1, 11-9-2006; Ord. No. 06-92, § 1, 11-20-2006; Ord. No. 06-93, § 1, 11-20-2006; Ord. No. 06-96, § 1, 12-14-2006; Ord. No. 06-105, § 1, 12-28-2006; Ord. No. 07-1, § 1, 1-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-5, § 1, 1-25-2007; Ord. No. 07-10, § 1, 2-8-2007; Ord. No. 07-11; § 2-22-2007; Ord. No. 07-12, § 1, 2-22-2007; Ord. No. 07-16, § 1, 3-8-2007; Ord. No. 07-17, § 2-8-2007; Ord. No. 07-20, § 1, 3-22-2007; Ord. No. 07-22, § 1, 4-12-2007; Ord. No. 07-28, § 1, 4-26-2007; Ord. No. 07-29, § 1, 4-26-2007; Ord. No. 07-30, § 1, 4-26-2007; Ord. No. 07-31, § 1, 4-26-2007; Ord. No. 07-32, § 1, 4-26-2007; Ord. No. 07-33, § 1, 4-26-2007; Ord. No. 07-34, § 1, 4-26-2007; Ord. No. 07-35, § 1, 4-26-2007; Ord. No. 07-36, § 1, 4-26-2007; Ord. No. 07-43, § 1, 5-10-2007; Ord. No. 07-44, § 1, 5-10-2007; Ord. No. 07-60, § 1, 5-24-2007; Ord. No. 07-61, § 1, 5-24-2007; Ord. No. 07-66, § 1, 6-14-2007; Ord. No. 07-73, § 1, 6-28-20007; Ord. No. 07-81, § 1, 8-9-2007; Ord. No. 07-87, § 1, 8-30-2007; Ord. No. 07-88, § 1, 9-13-2007; Ord. No. 07-89, § 1, 9-13-2007; Ord. No. 07-102, § 1, 9-27-2007; Ord. No. 07-103, § 1, 9-27-2007; Ord. No. 07-107, § 1, 10-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-108, § 1, 10-11-2007; Ord. No. 07-115, § 1, 10-25-2007; Ord. No. 07-117, § 1, 11-8-2007; Ord. No. 07-120, § 1, 11-19-2007; Ord. No. 07-121, § 1, 11-19-2007; Ord. No. 07-122, § 1, 12-13-2007; Ord. No. 07-131, § 1, 12-13-2007; Ord. No. 07-138, § 1, 12-27-2007; Ord. No. 08-3, § 1, 1-24-2008; Ord. No. 08-7, § 1, 2-14-2008; Ord. No. 08-12, § 1, 2-28-2008; Ord. No. 08-14, § 1, 3-13-2008; Ord. No. 08-15, § 1, 3-13-2008; Ord. No. 08-18, § 1, 3-27-2008; Ord. No. 08-23(A), § 1, 4-10-2008; Ord. No. 08-30, § 1, 5-22-2008; Ord. No. 08-36, § 1, 6-12-2008; Ord. No. 08-44, § 1, 7-10-2008; Ord. No. 08-47, § 1, 7-10-2008; Ord. No. 08-48, § 1, 7-24-2008; Ord. No. 08-49, § 1, 7-24-2008; Ord. No. 08-58, § 1, 8-28-2008; Ord. No. 08-62, § 1, 9-11-2008; Ord. No. 08-64, § 1, 9-22-2008; Ord. No. 08-67, § 1, 10-9-2008; Ord. No. 08-73, § 1, 10-23-2008; Ord. No. 08-82, § 1, 11-24-2008; Ord. No. 08-91, § 1, 12-22-2008; Ord. No. 09-1, § 1, 1-8-2009; Ord. No. 09-3, § 1, 1-22-2009; Ord. No. 09-5, § 1, 2-26-2009; Ord. No. 09-9, § 1, 3-26-2009; Ord. No. 09-11, § 1, 4-8-2009; Ord. No. 09-16, § 1, 5-14-2009; Ord. No. 09-20, § 1, 5-28-2009; Ord. No. 09-22, § 1, 6-11-2009; Ord. No. 09-28, § 1, 6-25-2009; Ord. No. 09-30, § 1, 7-10-2009; Ord. No. 09-31, § 1, 7-23-2009; Ord. No. 09-32, § 1, 7-23-2009; Ord. No. 09-34, § 1, 8-13-2009; Ord. No. 09-35, § 1, 8-13-2009; Ord. No. 09-42, § 1, 8-27-2009; Ord. No. 09-43, § 1, 8-27-2009; Ord. No. 09-53, § 1, 9-23-2009; Ord. No. 09-54, § 1, 9-23-2009; Ord. No. 09-56, § 1, 10-8-2009; Ord. No. 09-58, § 1, 10-22-2009; Ord. No. 09-59, § 1, 11-12-2009; Ord. No. 09-62, § 1, 11-24-2009; Ord. No. 09-64, § 1, 12-10-2009; Ord. No. 09-65, § 1, 12-10-2009; Ord. No. 09-68, § 1, 12-21-2009; Ord. No. 09-69, § 1, 12-21-2009; Ord. No. 10-1, § 1, 1-14-2010; Ord. No. 10-2-2010, § 1, 1-14-2010; Ord. No. 10-6, § 1, 1-28-2010; Ord. No. 10-10, § 1, 2-11-2010; Ord. No. 10-15, § 1, 2-25-2010; Ord. No. 10-18, § 1, 3-11-2010; Ord. No. 10-19, § 1, 3-25-2010; Ord. No. 10-24, § 1, 4-8-2010; Ord. No. 10-25, § 1, 4-8-2010; Ord. No. 10-26, § 1, 4-22-2010; Ord. No. 10-27, § 1, 5-13-2010; Ord. No. 10-29, § 1, 5-27-2010; Ord. No. 10-33, § 1, 6-24-2010; Ord. No. 10-36, § 1, 7-8-2010; Ord. No. 10-37, § 1, 7-8-2010; Ord. No. 10-40, § 1, 8-12-2010; Ord. No. 10-42, § 1, 8-26-2010; Ord. No. 10-44, § 1, 9-9-2010; Ord. No. 10-46, § 1, 9-22-2010; Ord. No. 10-50, § 1, 10-14-2010; Ord. No. 10-54, § 1, 10-28-2010; Ord. No. 10-55, § 1, 10-28-2010; Ord. No. 10-57, § 1, 11-10-2010; Ord. No. 10-58, § 1, 11-10-2010; Ord. No. 10-61, § 1, 11-23-2010; Ord. No. 10-65, § 1, 12-9-2010; Ord. No. 10-70, § 1, 12-21-2010; Ord. No. 10-71, § 1, 12-21-2010; Ord. No. 11-1, § 1, 1-13-2011; Ord. No. 11-2, § 1, 1-27-2011; Ord. No. 11-5, § 1, 2-10-2011; Ord. No. 11-6, § 1, 2-24-2011; Ord. No. 11-11, § 1, 3-10-2011; Ord. No. 11-14, § 1, 3-24-2011; Ord. No. 11-17, § 1, 4-14-2011; Ord. No. 11-18, § 1, 4-28-2011; Ord. No. 11-20, § 1, 5-12-2011; Ord. No. 11-21, § 1, 5-26-2011; Ord. No. 11-23, § 1, 6-9-2011; Ord. No. 11-24, § 1, 6-23-2011; Ord. No. 11-25, § 1, 6-23-2011; Ord. No. 11-31, § 1, 7-14-2011; Ord. No. 11-37, § 1, 7-28-2011; Ord. No. 11-38, § 1, 7-28-2011; Ord. No. 11-50, § 1, 8-25-2011; Ord. No. 11-51, § 1, 8-25-2011; Ord. No. 11-52, § 1, 9-22-2011; Ord. No. 11-56, § 1, 10-13-2011; Ord. No. 11-58, § 1, 10-27-2011; Ord. No. 11-62, § 1, 11-10-2011; Ord. No. 11-67, § 1, 12-8-2011; Ord. No. 11-68, § 1, 12-8-2011; Ord. No. 11-70, § 1, 12-20-2011; Ord. No. 12-1, § 1, 1-26-2012; Ord. No. 12-2, § 1, 1-26-2012; Ord. No. 12-4, § 1, 2-9-2012; Ord. No. 12-7, § 1, 2-23-2011; Ord. No. 12-8, § 1, 2-23-2012; Ord. No. 12-10, § 1, 3-8-2012; Ord. No. 12-16, § 1, 4-26-2012; Ord. No. 12-17, § 1, 4-26-2012; Ord. No. 12-19, § 1, 5-10-2012; Ord. No. 12-21, § 1, 5-10-2012; Ord. No. 12-23, § 1, 5-24-2012; Ord. No. 12-27, § 1, 6-14-2012; Ord. No. 12-28, § 1, 6-28-2012; Ord. No. 12-29, § 1, 6-28-2012; Ord. No. 12-32, § 1, 7-26-2012; Ord. No. 12-34, § 1, 8-9-2012; Ord. No. 12-38, § 1, 8-23-2012; Ord. No. 12-39, § 1, 9-13-2012; Ord. No. 12-42, § 1, 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 13-8, § 1, 3-14-2012; Ord. No. 13-14, § 1, 4-25-2012; Ord. No. 13-15, § 1, 4-25-2012; Ord. No. 13-16, § 1, 5-23-2012; Ord. No. 12-45, § 1, 10-11-2012; Ord. No. 12-46, § 1, 10-11-2012; Ord. No. 12-50, § 1, 10-25-2012; Ord. No. 12-51, § 1, 10-25-2012; Ord. No. 12-54, § 1, 12-13-2012; Ord. No. 13-17, § 1, 6-13-2013; Ord. No. 13-18, § 1, 6-13-2013; Ord. No. 13-26, § 1, 6-27-2013; Ord. No. 13-27, § 1, 6-27-2013; Ord. No. 13-35, § 1, 7-25-2013; Ord. No. 13-36, § 1, 7-25-2013; Ord. No. 13-40, § 1, 8-8-2013; Ord. No. 13-41, § 1, 8-22-2013; Ord. No. 13-48, § 1, 9-26-2013; Ord. No. 13-54, § 1, 10-10-2013; Ord. No. 13-56, § 1, 10-24-2013; Ord. No. 13-60, § 1, 11-14-2013; Ord. No. 13-61, § 1, 11-14-2013; Ord. No. 13-63, § 1, 11-21-2013; Ord. No. 13-66, § 1, 12-30-2013; Ord. No. 14-1, § 1, 1-9-2014; Ord. No. 14-5, § 1, 2-13-2014; Ord. No. 14-7, § 1, 2-13-2014; Ord. No. 14-9, § 1, 2-27-2014; Ord. No. 14-10, § 1, 3-13-2014; Ord. No. 14-15, § 1, 3-27-2014; Ord. No. 14-16, § 1, 3-27-2014; Ord. No. 14-23, § 1, 4-24-2014; Ord. No. 14-24, § 1, 4-24-2014; Ord. No. 14-26, § 1, 5-22-2014; Ord. No. 14-27, § 1, 6-12-2014; Ord. No. 14-31, § 1, 6-26-2014; Ord. No. 14-34, § 1, 7-10-2014; Ord. No. 14-38, § 1, 8-14-2014; Ord. No. 14-39, § 1, 8-14-2014; Ord. No. 14-42, § 1, 8-28-2014; Ord. No. 14-43, § 1, 9-11-2014; Ord. No. 14-44, § 1, 9-29-2014; Ord. No. 14-46, § 1, 10-9-2014; Ord. No. 14-47, § 1, 10-23-2014; Ord. No. 14-51, § 1, 11-13-2014; Ord. No. 14-52, § 1, 11-13-2014; Ord. No. 14-57, § 1, 11-24-2014; Ord. No. 14-59, § 1, 12-22-2014; Ord. No. 15-7, § 1, 3-12-2015; Ord. No. 15-12, § 1, 4-23-2015; Ord. No. 15-13, § 1, 4-23-2015; Ord. No. 15-14, § 1, 5-14-2015; Ord. No. 15-18, § 1, 5-28-2015; Ord. No. 15-20, § 1, 6-11-2015; Ord. No. 15-21, § 1, 6-11-2015; Ord. No. 15-23, § 1, 6-25-2015; Ord. No. 15-24, § 1, 6-25-2015; Ord. No. 15-26, § 1, 7-9-2015; Ord. No. 15-29, § 1, 7-23-2015; Ord. No. 15-32, § 1, 8-13-2015; Ord. No. 15-33, § 1, 8-13-2015; Ord. No. 15-34, § 1, 8-27-2015; Ord. No. 15-35, § 1, 9-10-2015; Ord. No. 15-36, § 1, 9-10-2015; Ord. No. 15-41, § 1, 10-8-2015; Ord. No. 15-43, § 1, 10-22-2015; Ord. No. 15-44, § 1, 10-22-2015; Ord. No. 15-49, § 1, 11-23-2015; Ord. No. 15-50, § 1, 11-23-2015; Ord. No. 15-52, § 1, 12-10-2015; Ord. No. 15-54, § 1, 12-21-2015; Ord. No. 15-58, § 1, 1-14-2016; Ord. No. 16-1, § 1, 1-28-2016; Ord. No. 16-2, § 1, 1-28-2016; Ord. No. 16-3, § 1, 2-25-2016; Ord. No. 16-4, § 1, 3-16-2016; Ord. No. 16-5, § 1, 3-16-2016; Ord. No. 16-9, § 1, 4-14-2016; Ord. No. 16-10, § 1, 4-28-2016; Ord. No. 16-14, § 1, 5-12-2016; Ord. No. 16-16, § 1, 5-26-2016; Ord. No. 16-17, § 1, 5-26-2016; Ord. No. 16-18, § 1, 6-9-2016; Ord. No. 16-20, § 1, 6-23-2016; Ord. No. 16-22, § 1, 7-14-2016; Ord. No. 16-23, § 1, 7-28-2016; Ord. No. 16-24, § 1, 7-28-2016; Ord. No. 16-29, § 1, 9-8-2016; Ord. No. 16-32, § 1, 9-22-2016; Ord. No. 16-33, § 1, 10-27-2016; Ord. No. 16-34, § 1, 10-27-2016; Ord. No. 16-36, § 1, 11-10-2016; Ord. No. 16-37, § 1, 11-10-2016; Ord. No. 16-38, § 1, 12-8-2016; Ord. No. 16-39, § 1, 12-19-2016; Ord. No. 17-2, § 1, 1-12-2017; Ord. No. 17-6, § 1, 3-9-2017; Ord. No. 17-9, § 1, 3-23-2017; Ord. No. 17-10, § 1, 4-13-2017; Ord. No. 17-19, § 1, 6-8-2017; Ord. No. 17-20, § 1, 6-8-2017; Ord. No. 17-24, § 1, 6-22-2017; Ord. No. 17-26, § 1, 7-13-2017; Ord. No. 17-27, § 1, 7-13-2017; Ord. No. 17-29, § 1, 7-27-2017; Ord. No. 17-31, § 1, 8-10-2017; Ord. No. 17-33, § 1, 8-24-2017; Ord. No. 17-34, § 1, 9-14-2017; Ord. No. 17-36, § 1 9-28-2017; Ord. No. 17-38, § 1, 10-12-2017; Ord. No. 17-39, § 1, 10-26-2017; Ord. No. 17-40, § 1, 12-28-2017; Ord. No. 17-41, § 1, 12-28-2017; Ord. No. 17-46, § 1, 12-28-2017; Ord. No. 18-1, § 1, 1-25-2018; Ord. No. 18-17, § 1, 3-8-2018; Ord. No. 18-8, § 1, 3-22-2018; Ord. No. 18-9, § 1, 3-22-2018; Ord. No. 18-12, § 1, 4-12-2018; Ord. No. 18-16, § 1, 4-26-2018; Ord. No. 18-17, § 1, 4-26-2018; Ord. No. 18-21, § 1, 5-10-2018; Ord. No. 18-22, § 1, 5-10-2018; Ord. No. 18-26, § 1, 6-14-2018; Ord. No. 18-36, § 1, 7-12-2018; Ord. No. 18-37, § 1, 7-26-2018; Ord. No. 18-43, § 1, 8-9-2018; Ord. No. 18-49, § 1, 8-13-2018; Ord. No. 18-50, § 1, 8-13-2018; Ord. No. 18-52, § 1, 8-9-2018; Ord. No. 18-62, § 1, 10-11-2018; Ord. No. 18-63, § 1, 10-11-2018; Ord. No. 18-64, § 1, 10-11-2018; Ord. No. 18-65, § 1, 10-11-2018; Ord. No. 18-72, § 1, 12-13-2018; Ord. No. 18-73, § 1, 12-13-2018; Ord. No. 19-01, § 1, 1-10-2019; Ord. No. 19-04, § 1, 1-24-2019)  
Sec. 90-318. - Residential district; commercial and recreational vehicles. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purpose of this section, and the interpretation and application thereof, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein, unless the context in which they are used shall indicate otherwise. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the singular number include the plural number and words in the plural number include the singular number. Words or phrases not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Commercial vehicle means a vehicle which has a gross weight in excess of ten thousand (10,000) pounds, represented by "C" license plates or above, used primarily for commercial or business purposes, including vehicles for transporting more than seven (7) persons; semitrailers with tractors attached or tractors alone, bus or school bus; tow trucks; truck with snow plow attached; special hauling vehicles and tank vehicles. 
Recreational vehicle means any motor home, camper, boat, trailers including house, boat or camping trailers which are self-propelled or not self-propelled; recreational vehicle with a height of six (6) feet, eight (8) inches and/or length of eighteen (18) feet, or trailer licensed to transport recreational vehicle or equipment. 
(b)  Regulations. No person shall park or allow to remain standing a commercial or recreational vehicle upon any street or public right-of-way within a residential district or within three hundred (300) feet of the property line of a residence located within such district, except as follows: 
(1)  While expeditiously loading or unloading passengers, freight, materials or merchandise between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.; 
(2)  While effecting emergency repairs when a vehicle is so disabled as to render it unsafe to proceed further; 
(3)  Vehicles and equipment engaged in street construction, maintenance and repair or construction, maintenance or repair of public service utilities; and 
(4)  Vehicles serving as emergency vehicles. 
(c)  Exceptions. This section shall not apply to church, school, nursing and retirement home or government vehicles owned by such entities or institutions. 
(Code 1980, § 17-139; Ord. No. 88-8, § 1, 5-26-1988; Ord. No. 08-56, §;s 2, 3, 8-14-2008)  
Sec. 90-319. - Recreational vehicles; location limitations. 
Recreational vehicles may be kept and stored on premises in the city, including residential premises, provided that such recreational vehicles are not occupied for living quarters; and further provided that in areas zoned residential such recreational vehicles are owned or leased to and used by the owner or tenant of the premises; provided further that such recreational vehicles may not be stored in a location closer to the front line than the living area excluding garages of the principal building on said premises and shall be no closer to the side and rear lot lines than building restrictions applicable to the lot in question. 
(Code 1980, § 17-140; Ord. No. 88-8, § 1, 5-26-1988)  
Sec. 90-320. - Parking in yards in residential zone. 
No vehicle which has a gross weight in excess of ten thousand (10,000) pounds, represented by "C" license plates or above, used primarily for commercial or business purposes, including vehicles for transporting more than seven (7) persons; semitrailers with tractors attached or tractors alone, nor any airplane, boat or trailer shall be parked or stored in a location closer to the front lot line than the living area, excluding garages of the principal building on said premises, and shall be no closer to the side and rear lot lines than the building restrictions applicable to the lot lines than the building restrictions applicable to the lot in question or the side yard facing a street on a corner or reverse corner lot in a residential zone except: Motor vehicles as hereinabove defined may be parked on permanently constructed driveways within such front or side yards for reasonably expeditious loading or unloading of such vehicles. 
(Code 1980, § 17-141; Ord. No. 88-8, § 1, 5-26-1988)  
Sec. 90-321. - Repair of motor vehicles. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purpose of this section, and the interpretation and application thereof, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein, unless the context in which they are used shall indicate otherwise. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the singular number include the plural number and words in the plural number include the singular number. Words or phrases not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Repair or maintenance means body work, engine work, washing engines, lubricant changes and parts changes or installation but does not include washing and waxing the exterior or interior of a vehicle. 
Residential property means private residential property, including all property used, in whole or in part, for residential purposes, but excluding a residential garage for the accommodation of a vehicle. 
Right-of-way means public right-of-way including streets, alleys, parkways, sidewalks and property owned by the city. 
(b)  Regulations. 
(1)  Repair or maintenance of a vehicle is prohibited on the right-of-way, unless immediate repairs are necessary to make the vehicle operable but no later than twenty-four (24) hours after said vehicle has stopped working at that place. No vehicle shall be towed or driven to any right-of-way for the purpose of repair or maintenance. 
(2)  Repair or maintenance of a vehicle is prohibited on residential property, except on a vehicle owned by the occupant thereof and bearing valid state registration plates and a current city vehicle sticker evidencing that the vehicle is registered at that address. No person may repair or maintain a vehicle of others on their residential property whether for compensation or not. 
(Ord. No. 08-51, § 2, 7-24-2008)  
Sec. 90-322. - Curb parking prohibited. 
No person shall stand or park a vehicle in any of the following places: On a sidewalk, curb, parkway, catwalk, street lawn area, unpaved or unfinished surface. 
(Ord. No. 08-42, § 2, 7-10-2008)  
Secs. 90-323—90-340. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - METERED PARKING 
 
Sec. 90-341. - Definitions. 
The terms used in this article shall have the following meanings ascribed to them: 
Parking meter means a mechanical device intended to assist public authorities in enforcing the provisions of this article, limiting the time during which vehicles may be parked on any street or highway within a parking meter zone. 
Parking meter zone means a street or highway or portions thereof, on which parking meters are installed, operated and used pursuant to an ordinance passed by the city council. 
Vehicle means any conveyance of any character for the transportation of persons or property. 
(Code 1980, § 17-148; Ord. of 4-12-1951, § 2)  
Sec. 90-342. - When article applies. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply on Sundays and legal holidays. 
(Code 1980, § 17-149; Ord. of 4-12-1951, § 4)  
Sec. 90-343. - Meters and spaces. 
(a)  Parking meters shall be placed upon the sidewalk or curb immediately adjacent or next to each designated parking space in all parking meter zones and in such manner as to show or display by a signal that the parking space controlled by such meter is not legally occupied. Each parking meter shall indicate by a proper legend the established rate and the legal parking time and, when in operation, shall also indicate on or by its dial or pointer the duration of the period of legal parking and any illegal or overparking. 
(b)  All parking spaces shall be plainly marked by lines on the street. 
(Code 1980, § 17-150; Ord. of 4-12-1951, §§ 6, 7)  
Sec. 90-344. - Parking within lines required. 
Except as otherwise provided, any vehicle parked in any parking meter zone shall be entirely within the lines of the designated parking space and adjacent to the parking meter controlling such parking space. 
(Code 1980, § 17-151; Ord. of 4-12-1951, § 8)  
Sec. 90-345. - Coins. 
Except as otherwise provided, upon parking any vehicle in a parking meter zone, the operator of the parked vehicle shall deposit, or cause to be deposited immediately after parking, either a one-cent ($0.01) coin or two (2) one-cent ($0.01) coins or three (3) one-cent ($0.01) coins or four (4) one-cent ($0.01) coins or five (5) one-cent ($0.01) coins or a five-cent ($0.05) coin, and, in like manner, up to ten (10) one-cent ($0.01) coins or two (2) five-cent ($0.05) coins of the United States of America in the parking meter controlling such parking space. The deposit of each one-cent ($0.01) coin shall entitle the vehicle to occupy said space for a period not to exceed twelve (12) minutes immediately following such deposit and an additional twelve (12) minutes for each additional one-cent ($0.01) coin so deposited, not however, to exceed ten (10) such coins; the deposit of a five-cent ($0.05) coin shall entitle the vehicle to occupy said space for a period not to exceed one (1) hour immediately following such deposit, and the deposit of two (2) five-cent ($0.05) coins shall entitle the vehicle to occupy said space for a period not to exceed two (2) hours immediately following such deposit, with five (5) hours for a twenty-five-cent ($0.25) coin. 
(Code 1980, § 17-152; Ord. of 4-12-1951, § 9)  
Sec. 90-346. - Use of funds. 
The coins required by this article to be deposited are levied and assessed as fees to provide for the proper regulation and control of traffic upon the highways, including the cost of supervising and regulating the parking of vehicles in the parking meter zones herein created and the cost of the purchase, supervision, inspection, installation, operation, maintenance, control and use of the aforesaid parking meters. The coins so required to be deposited shall be collected and accounted for under the direction of the finance committee of council, and deposited in the city's general fund. 
(Code 1980, § 17-153; Ord. of 4-12-1951, § 10)  
Sec. 90-347. - Maximum parking. 
Except as otherwise provided, no person shall park any vehicle in a parking meter zone for a period of time longer than indicated by signs posted in said zones or on the meters located therein. 
(Code 1980, § 17-154)  
Sec. 90-348. - Overtime parking; violations generally. 
No owner or operator of any vehicle shall cause, allow, permit or suffer such vehicle to be parked overtime or beyond the period of the legal parking time established and set forth in this article, nor shall he cause, allow, permit or suffer such vehicle to be parked in any manner contrary to the manner prescribed by this article. 
(Code 1980, § 17-155; Ord. of 4-12-1951, § 11)  
Sec. 90-349. - Slugs. 
No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter, any slug device, foreign substance or substitute for a coin of the United States. 
(Code 1980, § 17-156; Ord. of 4-12-1951, § 12)  
Sec. 90-350. - Injuring meters. 
No person shall deface, injure, tamper with, or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter. 
(Code 1980, § 17-157; Ord. of 4-12-1951, § 13)  
Sec. 90-351. - Free parking. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed as prohibiting the city from providing for free parking space for unloading commercial vehicles, for bus stops, for taxicabs stands, or for other matters of a similar nature; provided further, that the mayor shall have authority to provide for, and issue free parking space privileges to members of the press, physicians and to city residents who reside in parking meter areas, upon the express condition, however, that such free parking privileges for residents shall be restricted to the block in which such resident resides, and otherwise shall be of no force and effect. 
(Code 1980, § 17-158; Ord. of 4-12-1951, § 14; Ord. of 12-10-1953, § 1)  
Sec. 90-352. - Violation ticket; notice of violations. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the police department, acting in accordance with instructions issued by the chief of police, to deposit with the desk sergeant, the stub of every violation ticket issued pursuant to this article. Such stub shall contain: 
(1)  The number of the parking meter adjacent to the vehicle which was parked in violation of this article. 
(2)  The state license number of such vehicle. 
(3)  The day and hour at which such vehicle was parked in violation of this article. 
(4)  Any other facts which the officer deems necessary to properly understand the circumstances of the violation. 
(b)  Every such police officer shall also place on such vehicle a notice to the owner thereof that such vehicle has been parked in violation of the provisions of this article and instructing such owner to report to the office of the police department, or such authority as the chief of police may designate, in regard to such violation. 
(Code 1980, § 17-159; Ord. of 4-12-1951, § 16; Ord. of 10-8-1953, § 1)  
Sec. 90-353. - Enforcing authority. 
The duties of enforcing the provisions of this article shall be upon the police department. 
(Code 1980, § 17-160; Ord. of 4-12-1951, § 15)  
Secs. 90-354—90-420. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - BICYCLES AND TOY VEHICLES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 90-421. - Passengers on bicycles and motorcycles. 
It shall be unlawful for more than one person to ride upon any bicycle propelled by human power upon any street, or for any person to ride upon any motorcycle other than upon a seat permanently attached to said vehicle to the right or rear of the operator. 
(Code 1980, § 17-104)  
Sec. 90-422. - Clinging to vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person on any street riding a bicycle, motorcycle or any toy vehicle to cling to or attach himself or his vehicle to any moving motor vehicle. 
(Code 1980, § 17-105)  
Sec. 90-423. - Toy vehicles on roadways. 
It shall be unlawful for any person upon skates, a coaster, sled or other toy vehicle to go upon any roadway other than at a crosswalk. 
(Code 1980, § 17-106)  
Sec. 90-424. - Skateboards. 
(a)  Skateboard shall mean a single platform mounted on wheels, which is propelled solely by human power and which has no mechanism or other device with which to steer or to control the movement or direction of the platform. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, upon a skateboard, to go upon, remain or travel upon any roadway or street within the city other than at a crosswalk in a reckless manner. 
(c)  Skateboarding shall be prohibited upon any sidewalk in any portion of the city designated as a commercial district. Skateboarding shall be permitted on bike paths and all other sidewalks within the city. Skateboarding may be prohibited in the parking lots of any schools, and commercial areas, provided that appropriate signs are posted within said areas. 
(d)  Skateboard operators shall be classified as pedestrians, but shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles and to all other pedestrians (nonskateboard) traffic upon the sidewalk, street or bike path. 
(e)  No more than one (1) person shall operate or ride on a skateboard at one time. 
(f)  Any person operating a skateboard in a residential area of the city in violation of this section shall be subject to the following penalties: 
(1)  Issuance of a warning ticket upon a first offense; 
(2)  A fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for a second offense; and 
(3)  A fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each and every offense thereafter. 
(g)  Any person operating a skateboard in a commercial area of the city in violation of this section shall be subject to the following penalties: 
(1)  A fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for a first offense and 
(2)  A fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each and every offense thereafter. 
(Code 1980, § 17-110; Ord. No. 90-26, § 1, 6-14-1990)  
Secs. 90-425—90-450. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - BICYCLES  
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 90-451. - Parental responsibility. 
The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1980, § 17-191)  
Sec. 90-452. - Applicability of traffic ordinances. 
Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be subject to the provisions of the traffic ordinances of the city applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except as to special regulations in this article and those provisions in the ordinances which by their nature can have no application. 
(Code 1980, § 17-192)  
Sec. 90-453. - Obedience to devices. 
Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official traffic-control signals, signs and devices applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(Code 1980, § 17-193)  
Sec. 90-454. - Riding abreast. 
When more than two (2) persons in a group are operating bicycles on a roadway they shall ride single file. 
(Code 1980, § 17-194)  
Sec. 90-455. - Clinging to vehicles. 
No person operating a bicycle shall cling or attach himself, or the bicycle, to any other moving vehicle. 
(Code 1980, § 17-195)  
Sec. 90-456. - Extra passenger. 
No person operating a bicycle shall carry another person on the handlebars of such bicycle. 
(Code 1980, § 17-196)  
Sec. 90-457. - Speed. 
No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing. 
(Code 1980, § 17-197)  
Sec. 90-458. - Duty to keep to right. 
Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to the right-hand side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction. 
(Code 1980, § 17-198)  
Sec. 90-459. - Emerging from alley, driveways and garages. 
The operator of a bicycle emerging from any driveway, garage or private sidewalk, shall stop the bicycle immediately prior to driving onto or across a public sidewalk, or onto or across a public sidewalk line projected across an alley, and shall exercise extreme care in making such movements. 
(Code 1980, § 17-199)  
Sec. 90-460. - Intoxication, drugs; physical inability. 
No person shall operate a bicycle while under the influence of liquor, or drugs, or while physically or mentally unfit to safely operate the same. 
(Code 1980, § 17-200)  
Sec. 90-461. - Operation on sidewalks. 
Bicycles may be operated on sidewalks in public parks and in residence districts, but in single file only. Under all circumstances, the rider shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians using the sidewalk, and due and proper care shall at all times be exercised by the rider for the pedestrians. When approaching a pedestrian on the sidewalk the speed of a bicycle shall be reduced to a speed which is no greater than necessary to continue the operation of the bicycle without the rider dismounting. Bicycles shall not be operated upon any sidewalk in the business portion of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 17-201)  
Sec. 90-462. - Parking. 
(a)  Bicycles, when parked in the business district, shall be parked in zones or places designated and marked for that purpose. It shall be unlawful to park any bicycle along buildings in such a manner as to interfere with traffic, or with persons getting into or out of motor vehicles. 
(b)  No person other than the owner or operator shall move, or in any manner interfere with, any bicycle properly parked, nor shall any person interfere or in any manner hinder any person from properly parking a bicycle, except members of the police department and fire department may move, or, in proper cases, prevent the parking of the bicycle, when in the judgment of the policeman or fireman, his action is necessary in order to properly safeguard persons or property. 
(Code 1980, § 17-202)  
Sec. 90-463. - Trick riding. 
No person shall, while operating a bicycle, indulge or engage in any kind of trick or unsafe riding. 
(Code 1980, § 17-203)  
Sec. 90-464. - Turns; proper signals. 
The operator of a bicycle on a roadway, when making a right turn shall follow the right-hand edge of the roadway, and the operator of a bicycle on a roadway when making a left turn shall approach the point of turning in the traffic lane nearest the center of the roadway. No operator of a bicycle shall start, slow down, stop or attempt to turn without first indicating such movement as provided by law. 
(Code 1980, § 17-204)  
Sec. 90-465. - Mechanical condition. 
No person shall operate a bicycle which is not in such mechanical condition so that it can be safely operated. 
(Code 1980, § 17-206)  
Secs. 90-466—90-490. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - License 
 
Sec. 90-491. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a bicycle upon any street, sidewalk or other public place in the city without having first registered such bicycle and secured a license therefor. 
(Code 1970, § 19.201; Code 1980, § 17-208)  
Sec. 90-492. - Application and issuance. 
(a)  An application for a bicycle license shall be made by the owner upon duplicate forms furnished by the city clerk. The owner shall give the information required on such forms. 
(b)  Such application shall be presented to the chief of police. The bicycle to be registered and licensed shall be brought to the police station at the time of presenting the application for the purpose of examination. 
(c)  The chief of police or some person authorized by him shall examine the bicycle and if he finds the mechanical condition thereof such that it can be safely operated, and that it is equipped with the lights and attachments as herein provided, and further finds that the statements made in the application are true, he shall mark the application and duplicate "approved," attach his signature, and return the same to the applicant. The applicant shall thereupon file the application with the city clerk and pay an annual license fee of fifty cents ($0.50). 
(d)  The city clerk shall, upon receiving such application and license fee, issue to the owner of the bicycle a registration card which shall contain the name and address of the owner and the description of the bicycle contained in the application. The applicant shall affix his signature to the registration card when issued in the presence of the city clerk, who shall, with said certificate, also issue to the owner a metal license plate which shall contain the words "Calumet City" and the number of the license, and indicate the year of issuance. The registration card and the license plate shall have the same number. The license plate shall be attached to the bicycle on the front thereof immediately below the steering bar or wheel. 
(e)  After the issuance of the registration card and plate, the city clerk shall endorse upon the application, and the duplicate, the date of issuance and the number thereof; the original application shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk and the duplicate thereof shall be delivered to the chief of police, and shall be kept on file in his office. 
(Code 1970, § 19.202; Code 1980, § 17-209)  
Sec. 90-493. - Term. 
The license so issued shall be effective for one (1) year. The license year shall be from January 1 to December 31. 
(Code 1970, § 19.203; Code 1980, § 17-210)  
Sec. 90-494. - Loss, sale or destruction of any bicycle. 
(a)  When any bicycle which has been registered and licensed, as herein provided, is sold, or is otherwise disposed of, or destroyed, the licensee shall immediately surrender to the chief of police the registration card and the license plate issued therefor, with the name and address of the new owner, if any, written on the face of the registration card; and the chief of police shall immediately make proper endorsements on his records, retain the card and plate, and issue a new card and plate to the new owner. 
(b)  The number of any license surrendered as provided in this section shall not be reissued. 
(Code 1970, § 19.204; Code 1980, § 17-211)  
Sec. 90-495. - Loss of license plate. 
The licensee shall report immediately to the chief of police the loss or destruction of the license plate of the licensee, and the circumstances surrounding the loss or destruction thereof. With the approval of the chief of police, the city clerk shall issue a duplicate license plate upon payment of a fee of twenty-five cents ($0.25). 
(Ord. No. 77-42, § 1, 9-22-1977; Code 1980, § 17-212)  
Secs. 90-496—90-540. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - VEHICLE CONDITION AND EQUIPMENT 
 
Sec. 90-541. - Glass and mirrors. 
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle which is so loaded or in such a condition that the operator does not have a clear vision of all parts of the roadway essential to the safe operation of the vehicle. 
(Code 1980, § 17-247) 
State Law reference— Glass, mirrors and windshields, 625 ILCS 5/12-501 et seq.  
Sec. 90-542. - Nonskid devices. 
It shall be unlawful to operate upon any street any motor vehicle equipped with any nonskid device so constructed that any rigid or nonflexible portion thereof comes into contact with the pavement, or roadway. 
(Code 1980, § 17-253)  
Sec. 90-543. - Driving unsafe vehicles prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or move or for the owner to cause or knowingly permit to be driven or moved on any highway any vehicle or combination of vehicles which is in such unsafe condition as to endanger any person or property, or which is not in conformance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1980, § 17-259)  
Sec. 90-544. - Unnecessary noise. 
It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle which makes unusually loud or unnecessary noise. 
(Code 1980, § 17-260)  
Secs. 90-545—90-580. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - VEHICLE LICENSE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Vehicle licenses, ILCS 5/8-11-4. 
 
Sec. 90-581. - Motor vehicle defined. 
As used in this article, the term "motor vehicle" shall mean every self-propelled device, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human power. 
(Code 1980, § 17-272; Ord. of 10-25-1973, § 1)  
Sec. 90-582. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person residing in the city, or for any firm, association or corporation having its principal office or place of business in the city, to use, or to cause or permit any of his, her, their or its agents or employees to use, any motor vehicle in the transportation of persons or property or the conveyance of loads upon the street, avenues, or alleys of the city unless such motor vehicle is licensed as provided in this article. 
(Code 1980, § 17-273; Ord. of 10-25-1973, § 1)  
Sec. 90-583. - Application. 
Any person desiring a license for any motor vehicle as described in this article shall file an application therefor with the city clerk upon a form provided by him, setting forth the name and address of the applicant, the description of the motor vehicle, and the state license number thereof, and such information as may be prescribed. Such license shall be issued upon the payment by the applicant of the required license fee hereinafter to the city clerk, and shall authorize the use of such motor vehicle within the city until the expiration of such license. 
(Code 1980, § 17-274; Ord. of 10-25-1973, § 1)  
Sec. 90-584. - Fee. 
(a)  The fee for each motor vehicle to be paid annually to the city clerk for the license required by this article shall be as follows: 
(1)  For all passenger motor vehicles, motor scooters, motor tricycles, motor bicycle vehicles, or motorcycles, the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(2)  For all senior citizens sixty-five (65) years of age or older on or before May 1, one (1) passenger vehicle per household, free of charge, provided, however, that said sticker is applied for and issued on or before May 31. Thereafter, the sum of fifteen dollars ($15.00) shall be charged as a late [fee]. For the second vehicle, the fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) shall be charged provided that the eligible senior citizen applies for and is issued said sticker on or before May 31. Thereafter the late fee of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) is charged. Any senior citizen purchasing a third sticker, or any subsequent stickers, shall be charged the regular fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) as found in section 90-584. Any stickers not purchased on or before May 31 shall be charged a late fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) in addition to the sticker fee. Proof of senior citizen status (sixty-five (65) years), as well as auto registration on which the complimentary sticker shall be utilized, may be required by the city clerk's office and the applicant shall provide such proof upon request. Said registration must be to a Calumet City address. 
(3)  For all motor trucks as follows: 
State 
Registration 
Classification 	Gross 
Vehicle 
Weight 
(Pounds) 	Annual 
Fee   
B 	8,000 or less 	$ 58.50 
D 	8,001 to 12,000 	$ 78.50 
F 	12,001 to 16,000 	$ 98.50 
H 	16,001 to 24,000 	$118.50 
J 	24,001 to 28,000 	$128.50 
K 	28,001 to 32,000 	$138.50 
L 	32,001 to 36,000 	$148.50 
N 	36,001 to 40,000 	$158.50 
P 	40,001 to 45,000 	$168.50 
Q 	45,001 to 50,000 	$178.50 
R 	50,001 to 54,500 	$188.50 
S 	54,501 to 59,500 	$198.50 
T 	59,501 to 64,000 	$208.50 
V 	64,001 to 73,280 	$218.50 
X 	73,281 to 77,000 	$228.50 
Z 	77,001 to 80,000 	$238.50 
 
(4)  For any transfer or duplicate of a vehicle license previously issued, the sum of three dollars ($3.00), provided that a portion of the old sticker indicating the number and old receipt is presented. 
(b)  Any person who is a disabled veteran and who is issued a "V" license plate registration for the State of Illinois for the current year and shall furnish the proper documentation to the city clerk of the issuance of said license plate, shall not pay a license fee for any passenger motor vehicle, motor scooter, motor tricycle, or motor bicycle, for which said "V" license plate has been issued; provided further that not more than one (1) such vehicle license may be issued to occupants of the same household. 
(c)  Any person who was in the Armed Forces of the United States of America and is a former prisoner of war and has been issued an AGO Form or DD-214 Form verifying their status as an ex-prisoner of war shall not pay a license fee for any passenger motor vehicle, motor scooter, motor tricycle, or motor bicycle vehicle; provided further that no more than one (1) such vehicle license may be issued to said person. 
(d)  An owner of an antique motor vehicle registered in the city shall not pay a license fee. Proof of ownership of an antique motor vehicle and proof that said vehicle has a state antique vehicle license plate must accompany the license fee application. The term "antique motor vehicle" shall mean any motor vehicle or other vehicle twenty-five (25) years of age or older that the owner has obtained an antique vehicle license plate for from the State of Illinois. 
(e)  Any person who was in the Armed Forces of the United States of America, was honorably discharged, and has been issued a DD-214 Form verifying their status as an honorably discharged veteran, shall be entitled to a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) discount to be subtracted from the license fee charged for any passenger vehicle, motor scooter, motor tricycle, or motor bicycle vehicle. The twenty-five dollar ($25.00) discount will be allowed for only one (1) such vehicle license to be issued to said person. 
(Code 1980, § 17-275; Ord. of 10-25-1973, § 1; Ord. of 12-12-1974, § 1, Ord. No. 78-37, 9-28-1978; Ord. No. 80-26, § 1, 9-25-1980; Ord. No. 82-4, § 1, 3-11-1982; Ord. No. 84-22, § 1, 6-28-1984; Ord. No. 87-24, § 1, 11-12-1987; Ord. No. 92-15, § 1, 3-12-1992; Ord. No. 98-14, §§ 1—3, 4-9-1998; Ord. No. 05-52, § 1, 7-28-2005; Ord. No. 06-03, § 1, 1-12-2006; Ord. No. 07-76, § 1, 7-12-2007; Ord. 12-6, § 2, 2-9-2012; Ord. No. 18-34, § 2, 7-12-2018)  
Sec. 90-585. - Time of payment; license year; proration of fee; schools using vehicle for certain educational purposes exempted. 
All licenses issued under this article shall be as follows: 
(1)  After April 30, 1992, the license period shall commence May 1 and end April 30. The license fee effective May 1, 1992, shall be due and payable in advance on or before May 31 of each fiscal year thereafter; provided that when such license is issued for less than six (6) months, such license fee shall be reduced fifty (50) percent if the vehicle was purchased on or after November 1 of the said year. 
(2)  All licenses issued hereunder shall be purchased on or before May 31 of said year, and if not paid by said date shall be subject to a late fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) in addition to the sticker fee, except as provided in section 90-584(a)(2). 
(3)  Provided, however, that any public, private or parochial schools for educational purposes, park districts or churches, shall be exempt from payment of a license fee for any motor vehicle, other than a passenger vehicle used for said school, park district or church purposes. 
(Code 1980, § 17-276; Ord. No. 78-38, § 1, 9-28-1978; Ord. No. 81-18, §§ 1, 2, 5-28-1981; Ord. No. 81-39, § 1, 11-24-1981; Ord. No. 92-14, § 1, 3-12-1992; Ord. No. 98-14, § 4, 4-9-1998)  
Sec. 90-586. - Refund of fee. 
No refund for any license fee paid pursuant to this article shall be made except under the following conditions: 
(a)  Evidence satisfactory to the city council that a duplicate purchase of a license was made for the same motor vehicle; 
(b)  A request is made for refund on or before sixty (60) days of the due date of said license. 
(Code 1980, § 17-277; Ord. of 8-22-1974, § 1; Ord. of 4-10-1975, § 1; Ord. No. 79-21, § 1, 5-24-1979; Ord. No. 81-39, § 2, 11-24-1981)  
Sec. 90-587. - Tag. 
(a)  Upon the issuance of a license as provided under this article, the city clerk shall deliver to the applicant a gummed tag or sticker upon which shall be shown the name of the class to which the motor vehicle belongs and the year for which the license is issued. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the applicant to affix such gummed tag or sticker upon the windshield of the motor vehicle in the lower right hand corner thereof, or if there is no windshield, then in a conspicuous place upon the motor vehicle, where it can readily be seen. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle which is required to be licensed by the provisions of this article, to be used upon the streets, avenues, or alleys of the city unless such tag or sticker is attached thereto, within forty-five (45) days of the due date. Any person having paid a valid license fee and received a gummed tag or sticker pursuant to this article, shall be entitled to a reissuance of such gummed tag or sticker upon satisfactory evidence being submitted to the city clerk and payment of a one-dollar ($1.00) reissuance fee. 
(Code 1980, § 17-278; Ord. of 8-22-1974, § 2; Ord. No. 81-39, § 3, 11-24-1981)  
Secs. 90-588—90-599. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - RESIDENTIAL PERMIT PARKING 
 
Sec. 90-600. - Designation of residential permit parking zone. 
(a)  The city council may on its own initiative, or upon presentation of a petition in support of a residential permit parking zone signed by residents representing no less than two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the dwelling units within a proposed zone, designate certain streets where residential permit parking is authorized. 
(b)  Upon the designation of a residential permit parking zone, residential permit parking shall be in effect every day during the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 08-23(B), § 2, 4-3-2008)  
Sec. 90-600.1. - Designation of residential permit parking school zone. 
(a)  The city council may on its own initiative, or upon presentation of a petition in support of a residential permit parking school zone signed by residents representing no less than two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the dwelling units within a proposed school zone, designate certain streets where residential permit parking is authorized. 
(b)  Upon the designation of a residential permit parking school zone, residential permit parking shall be in effect every day during the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. 
(c)  All regulations found throughout article IX shall also apply to residential permit parking school zones. References in this article to residential permit parking shall also apply to residential permit parking school zone. 
(Ord. No. 10-47, § 2, 9-22-2010)  
Sec. 90-601. - Residential permit parking sticker. 
(a)  The city clerk shall issue an annual "residential permit parking sticker" to every resident that resides in a residential permit parking zone whose vehicle displays a current city vehicle sticker and holds a valid state vehicle registration. 
(b)  Every residential permit parking sticker shall be affixed, in accordance with the instructions printed thereon and without the use of supplemental adhesives, at the lower right-hand corner of the inside of the glass portion of the windshield of a vehicle, directly above the city vehicle sticker. 
(c)  The residential permit parking sticker shall not guarantee or reserve any parking space, nor shall it exempt the holder from the observance of any traffic or parking regulation. 
(d)  The annual period for every residential permit parking sticker shall begin on May 1 and end on April 30 of the following year. 
(Ord. No. 08-23(B), § 2, 4-3-2008)  
Sec. 90-602. - Visitor permit parking pass. 
(a)  The city shall issue one (1) "visitor permit parking pass" to every dwelling unit within a residential permit parking zone that qualifies for a residential permit parking sticker. A visitor permit parking pass is limited to the time that the person driving the visiting vehicle is actually in the dwelling unit or on the property being visited. 
(b)  The visitor permit parking pass shall be placed on the rearview mirror of the vehicle so the face of the pass may be seen through the windshield of the vehicle. 
(c)  The visitor permit parking pass shall not guarantee or reserve any parking space, nor shall it exempt the holder from the observance of any traffic or parking regulation. 
(d)  The annual period for every visitor permit parking pass shall begin on May 1 and end on April 30 of the following year. 
(Ord. No. 08-23(B), § 2, 4-3-2008)  
Sec. 90-603. - One-day permit parking pass. 
(a)  A "one-day permit parking pass" may be issued to any resident within a residential permit parking zone for the use of nonresidents who are temporary visitors. A one-day permit parking pass may be purchased only in a group of ten (10) one-day permit parking passes. Any resident in a residential permit parking zone shall be limited to the purchase of one (1) group of ten (10) one-day permit parking passes per month. A one-day permit parking pass is limited to the time that a person driving the visiting vehicle is actually in the dwelling unit or on the property being visited. 
(b)  A one-day permit parking pass shall be placed on the rearview mirror of the vehicle so the face of the pass may be seen through the windshield of the vehicle. Before use of a one-day permit parking pass, it must be validated by printing the date and time of day legibly on its face in the space provided therein. 
(c)  A one-day permit parking pass shall not guarantee or reserve any parking space, nor shall it exempt the holder from the observance of any traffic or parking regulation. 
(d)  A one-day permit parking pass is defined as twenty-four (24) hours from the date and time indicated on the pass. An undated pass or a pass that fails to indicate a time of day will be invalid. 
(Ord. No. 08-23(B), § 2, 4-3-2008)  
Sec. 90-604. - Zone designations—Residential permit parking zones. 
(a)  The following areas are hereby designated as residential permit parking zones and appropriate signs shall be posted clearly indicating such zones: 
Luella Avenue from Dolton Road to Harbor Avenue: Zone 1 
Superior Avenue from Stewart Avenue to Sibley Boulevard: Zone 3 
Madison Avenue from State Street to Stewart Avenue: Zone 4 
Freeland Avenue from Garfield Avenue to Sibley Boulevard: Zone 5 
Williams Street to 160th Place (from Arthur to Balmoral Avenue: Zone 6 
159th Street on the north side of the street from 32 159th Street westbound to Legion Drive. 
All of Forestdale Park. 
Legion Drive on both sides of the street northbound from Michigan City Road to Detroit Street. 
Michigan City Road on the north side of the street from Legion Drive to Wentworth Avenue. 
(b)  A residential permit parking zone shall be clearly indicated on every residential permit parking sticker, visitor permit parking pass and one-day permit parking pass. 
(c)  Parking in a residential permit parking zone shall be limited to vehicles displaying a valid permit parking sticker or pass displayed in the manner described in section 90-601, 90-602 and 90-603 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 08-23(B), § 2, 4-3-2008; Ord. No. 08-53, § 2, 8-14-2008; Ord. No. 08-65, § 2, 9-22-2008; Ord. No. 10-47, § 3, 9-22-2010; Ord. No. 15-39, § 2, 9-10-2015)  
Sec. 90-604.1. - Zone designations—Residential permit parking school zone. 
(a)  The following areas are hereby designated as residential permit parking school zones and appropriate signs shall be posted clearly indicating such zones: 
Superior Avenue, Buffalo Avenue, Mackinaw Avenue and Greenbay Avenue from Pulaski Road to 153rd Street: Zone 1S 
Superior Avenue, Buffalo Avenue and Newell Avenue from 155th Street to 156th Street: Zone 2S 
(b)  A residential permit parking school zone shall be clearly indicated on every residential permit parking sticker, visitor permit parking pass and one-day permit parking pass. 
(c)  Parking in a residential permit parking school zone shall be limited to vehicles displaying a valid permit parking sticker or pass displayed in the manner described in sections 90-601, 90-602 and 90-603 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 10-47, § 4, 9-22-2010; Ord. No. 11-69, § 2, 12-8-2011)  
Sec. 90-605. - Signage. 
The city shall erect signs in every residential permit parking zone, which shall substantially read as follows: 
"Residential Permit Parking Only between the hours of 7:00 p.m.—6:00 a.m. Violators are subject to fine and towing fees." 
(Ord. No. 08-23(B), § 2, 4-3-2008)  
Sec. 90-606. - Fees. 
(a)  There is no fee for a residential permit parking sticker. 
(b)  There is no fee for a visitor permit parking pass. 
(c)  One-day permit parking passes shall be issued in groups of ten (10) for ten dollars ($10.00). 
(d)  If a residential permit parking zone is in effect at the dwelling unit of an owner with a disability who is using a restricted parking space created pursuant to section 90-317 of this Code, such owner shall be exempt from any fee set forth in paragraph (a) or (b) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 08-23(B), § 2, 4-3-2008)  
Sec. 90-607. - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to any service or delivery vehicle when used to provide services or to make deliveries to a dwelling unit within a residential parking permit zone, provided that the parking of such vehicle does not exceed the time the services or deliveries are being made. 
(Ord. No. 08-23(B), § 2, 4-3-2008)  
Sec. 90-608. - Replacement. 
(a)  Replacement of residential permit parking sticker will be issued without cost upon receipt of an identifiable portion of the removed sticker and a receipt for a current city vehicle sticker. 
(b)  Replacement of any residential permit parking sticker, visitor permit parking pass or one-day permit parking pass which is lost or destroyed will be made at a cost of ten dollars ($10.00). 
(Ord. No. 08-23(B), § 2, 4-3-2008)  
Sec. 90-609. - Unlawful use of permit parking sticker or pass. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to affix, cause to be affixed or otherwise display any residential permit parking sticker, visitor permit parking pass or one-day permit parking pass to any vehicle other than the vehicle to which the sticker or pass was intended to be affixed or displayed at the time of issuance by the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person other than the city to sell, offer for sale, acquire for the purpose of sale or produce any residential permit parking sticker, visitor permit parking pass or one-day permit parking pass. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to purchase any residential permit parking sticker, visitor permit parking pass or one-day permit parking pass from any person other than the city. 
(d)  Any misuse of a residential permit parking sticker, visitor permit parking pass or one-day permit parking pass shall render the same invalid and no sticker or pass shall be issued to the person or dwelling unit which originally held the same. 
(Ord. No. 08-23(B), § 2, 4-3-2008)  
Sec. 90-610. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. Each day such a violation continues shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. Every vehicle shall be subject to tow, at the owner's expense, by the city or any company retained or contracted by the city to perform towing services. 
(b)  Proceedings to enforce violations of this article may be initiated and conducted in accordance with and pursuant to the provisions of the Municipal Code of the city providing for administrative adjudication of code violations or by any other means provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 08-23(B), § 2, 4-3-2008)  
Secs. 90-611—90-619. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - OVERWEIGHT RESTRICTIONS 
 
Sec. 90-620. - Definitions of words and phrases. 
Definition of words and phrases shall mean the following words and phrases when used in this Code shall, for the purpose of this Code, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this article, except when the context otherwise requires and except where another definition set forth in another section of this Code and applicable to that section or a designated part thereof is applicable. 
Axle load shall mean the total load transmitted to the road by all wheels whose centers may be included between two (2) parallel transverse vertical planes forty (40) inches apart extending across the full width of the vehicle. 
City shall mean the City of Calumet City. 
Commercial vehicle shall mean any vehicle operated for the transportation of persons or property in the furtherance of any commercial or industrial enterprise, for-hire or not-for-hire, but not including a commuter van, a vehicle used in a ride-sharing arrangement when being used for that purpose, or a recreational vehicle not being used commercially. 
Construction vehicle shall mean any vehicle over ten thousand (10,000) pounds actual weight; registered gross weight or GVWR that is required to comply with ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 12-712 and 12-713 on identification required to be displayed. 
Gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) shall mean the value specified by the manufacturer or manufacturers as the maximum, loaded weight of a single vehicle. The GVWR, of a combination of vehicles (commonly referred to as the "gross combination weight rating" or GCWR) is the GVWR of the power unit plus the GVWR of the towed unit or units. In the absence of a value specified by the manufacturer, GCWR is determined by adding the GVWR of the power unit and the total weight of the towed unit and any load on the unit. 
Gross weight shall mean the weight of a vehicle whether operated singly or in combination without load plus the weight of the load thereon. 
Highway shall mean the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
Implement of husbandry shall mean every vehicle designed and adapted exclusively for agricultural, horticultural, or livestock raising operations, including farm wagons, wagon trailers or like vehicles used in connection therewith, or for lifting or carrying an implement of husbandry. 
Motor vehicle shall mean every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not operated upon rails, except for vehicles moved solely by human power and motorized wheelchairs. For this Act, motor vehicles are divided into two (2) divisions: 
First division: Those motor vehicles, which are designed for the carrying of not more than ten (10) persons. 
Second division: Those motor vehicles which are designed for carrying more than ten (10) persons, those motor vehicles designed or used for living quarters, those motor vehicles which are designed for pulling or carrying freight, cargo or implements of husbandry, and those motor vehicles of the first division remodeled for use and used as motor vehicles of the second division. 
Permit route shall mean the route authorized by the issuing authority with proper jurisdiction over the roadway(s) for which permission has been granted to move a vehicle or combination of vehicles that is in itself indivisible or carrying an indivisible load that exceeds normal dimensions or weight or a combination thereof. 
Semitrailer shall mean every vehicle without motive power, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle 
Tandem axles shall mean any two (2) or more single axles whose centers are more than forty (40) inches and not more than ninety-six (96) inches apart, measured to the nearest inch between extreme axles in the series, except as provided in Section 15-111 [625 ILCS 5/15-111] for special hauling vehicles. 
Trailer shall mean every vehicle without motive power in operation, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle. 
Truck tractor shall mean every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn. 
(Ord. No. 11-43, § 2, 7-28-2011)  
Sec 90-621. - Overweight and/or overdimension vehicles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to be in control of, to drive, to park, or move on, upon or across or for the owner to cause or knowingly permit to be parked, driven, or moved upon or across, any street or highway under the jurisdiction of the city, any vehicle or combination of vehicles exceeding the size and weight limitations stated in the ILCS ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-102 (width), ILCS ch. 625, Act, § 15-103 (height), ILCS ch. 625, Act 5, § 15407 (length), and ILCS ch. 625, Act 5, § 1.5-111 (weight). 
(b)  Size and weights limitations while operating on city streets shall not apply to fire apparatus or equipment for snow or ice removal operations owned or operated by or for any governmental body or to implements of husbandry temporarily operated or towed in a combination in the furtherance of a farm or agricultural endeavor and to any vehicle or combination of vehicles operating under the terms of a valid oversize and/or dimension permit issued by the city under the authority of § 70.058 hereof. 
(c)  Where lower size and weight limits or other restrictions are imposed by ordinance under authority of ILCS ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 15411, 15-316 and 15-317, and signs indicating such limitations or restrictions are posted, it shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle or combination of vehicles in excess of such size or weight limitations or in violation of such restrictions. 
(d)  Whenever any vehicle or combination of vehicles is operated in violation of this section, the owner and/or driver of such vehicle shall be deemed guilty of such violation and either or both the owner and. driver of such vehicle may be prosecuted for such violation. 
(Ord. No. 11-43, § 2, 7-28-2011)  
Sec 90-622. - Permits for overweight and/or overdimension vehicles. 
(a)  A permit shall be required for the movement of any vehicle or combination of vehicles with a nondivisible load on roadways and bridges within the jurisdiction of the city which exceeds the dimensions and weights permitted for the particular roadways to be traversed whether they be non-designated or designated roadways, 
(b)  The city with respect to any street or highway under its jurisdiction may upon application to the Calumet City Police Department on forms provided by the police department and good cause being shown therefore issue a special permit authorizing the applicant to operate or move a vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size or weight of vehicle or load exceeding the maximum specified in § 70.057. The applicant shall furnish the following information in the special permit application: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or lessee of the vehicle. 
(2)  Applicant's name. 
(3)  Type of permit request whether it be for a single trip, round trip, or multiple routine. 
(4)  The description and registration (or the Illinois Department of Transportation's (IDOT) registration number or classification) of the power unit. 
(5)  Description of the object or vehicle to be moved. 
(6)  The number of axles of the vehicle or combination of vehicles. 
(7)  The maximum axle weights of all single, tandem or series axles. 
(8)  Maximum gross weight of the vehicle. 
(9)  The maximum width, length and height of the vehicle and load. 
(10)  Requested routing over city streets to and from a specific location. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, the following definitions apply: 
(1)  A one-way or single trip movement shall mean one (1) move from the point of origin to the point of destination. Any additional stops between the point of origin and the point of destination are expressly prohibited. Single trip permits are effective for seven (7) consecutive days from the date of issuance unless otherwise directed by the police department. 
(2)  Round trip movement shall mean two (2) trips over the same route in opposite directions. Round trip permits are effective for fourteen (14) consecutive days from the date of issuance. 
(3)  Multiple moves shall mean those in such close proximity to each other in distance or in time that the police department would consider incorporating two (2) or more permit moves within one (1) permit application. Multiple move permits when granted by the police department shall be for a period time not to exceed ninety (90) days from the date of issuance. 
(d)  The owner or his or her agent shall submit an application fee based on the below chart for a single routing which will be valid for seven (7) calendar days, round trip routing valid for fourteen (14) calendar days and multiple routings valid for a base period of three (3) months. Permits maybe issued for a maximum of four (4) consecutive permit periods (three hundred sixty-five (365) days) with the permit fee calculated in the appropriate multiples of the base three-month multiple trip permit. Permits are valid only for the date periods specified on the permit and for the specific vehicle, load and routing as established by the chief of police, or designee. No substitution of vehicle, load or routing is permitted without expressed written permission by chief of police, or his or her designee and the permit must be earned in the vehicle to which the permit applies. 
Permit Size—Width (with load) 	Fee 
	Single Trip 	Round Trip 	Multiple 
Up to 100,000 pounds 	50 	75 	150 
100,001—120,000 	75 	100 	200 
120,001—150,000 	100 	125 	— 
Over 150,000 	100* 	125* 	— 
 
*Plus necessary and appropriate administrative, engineering and road damage fees. 
Permit Size—Height (with load) 	Fee 
	Single Trip 	Round Trip 	Multiple 
Up to 12' 	25 	40 	75 
12'1?—13'6? 	50 	75 	100 
Over 13'6? wide 	50* 	75* 	— 
 
*Plus necessary and appropriate administrative, engineering and road damage fees. 
Permit Size—Height (with load) 	Fee 
	Single Trip 	Round Trip 	Multiple 
13'6?—14'6? 	25 	40 	75 
Over 14'6? 	50* 	75* 	— 
 
*Plus necessary and appropriate administrative, engineering and road damage fees. 
Permit Size—Length (with load) 	Fee 
	Single Trip 	Round Trip 	Multiple 
Up to 100' 	25 	40 	75 
Over 100' 	50* 	75* 	— 
 
*Plus necessary and appropriate administrative, engineering and road damage fees. 
Note: If a vehicle requires a permit due to multiple weigh and/or dimension issues, the total fee will be based on the largest individual weight or dimension factor only 
(e)  The chief of police or designee is authorized to approve the application for approved routes. Upon approval and payment of all required fees, the police department shall issue a permit allowing passage of the oversize and/or overweight vehicles over city streets. The permit shall be specific and contain: 
(1)  Permit number. 
(2)  The dates the permit is valid. 
(3)  Whether the permit is for single, round or multiple trip routing. 
(4)  The description of object or vehicle to be moved. 
(5)  Authorized gross weight, axle weights, width, length and height. 
(6)  The authorized routing over city streets including the origin and termination point within the city. 
(7)  The fee paid. 
(8)  The date and signature of the chief of police or his or her designee. 
(9)  In addition, the permit will specify general conditions that the permittee must comply with that are consistent and reasonable for the protection of the general public and city streets. A copy of all permits issued will be provided to the chief of police or designee for informational purposes. 
(f)  It is the duty of the permittee to read and familiarize himself or herself with the permit provisions upon receipt. Undertaking of the permit move is deemed prima facie evidence of acceptance of the permit and that: 
(1)  The permittee is in compliance with all operation requirements; 
(2)  All dimension and weight limitations specified in the permit will not be exceeded; 
(3)  All operation, registration and license requirements have been complied with; 
(4)  All financial responsibilities, obligations and other legal requirements have been met; and 
(5)  The permittee assumes all responsibility for injury or damage to persons or to public or private property, including his or her own, or to the object being transported, caused directly or indirectly by the transportation or movement of vehicles and objects authorized under the permit. He or she agrees to hold the city harmless from all suits, claims, damages, or proceedings of any kind and to indemnify the city for any claim it may be required to pay arising from the movement. 
(g)  The permit shall be carried in the vehicle to which the permit applies at all times while operating on streets within the city and shall be exhibited upon demand to any law enforcement officer, police officer or authorized official of the city. 
(h)  Whenever any vehicle is operated in violation of the provisions of a city permit whether it be by size, weight or general provisions, and either or both the owner or driver of such vehicle shall be deemed guilty and either or both the owner or the driver of such vehicle may be prosecuted for such violation. 
(Ord. No. 11-43, § 2, 7-28-2011)  
Sec 90-623. - Vehicles prohibited on certain streets. 
(a)  As provided under the authority of LLCS ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-111 and 15-316, it shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle upon any street where the operation of that vehicle is prohibited by ordinance and where signs of such prohibition are posted. Vehicles operating under the authority of ILCS ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-111 or 15-316 while utilizing city streets under "reasonable access" rules will be considered in violation of this section if they are not utilizing the most direct route to points of loading and unloading. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to park a commercial motor vehicle on a residential street while said truck is running between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following day. 
(Ord. No. 11-43, § 2, 7-28-2011)  
Sec 90-624. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation who or which violates, disobeys, neglects, fails to comply with or resists enforcement of the provisions of this article will be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each calendar day a violation occurs. 
In addition to seeking a fine, as herein above provided, the city attorney may institute any proper action in the name of the City of Calumet City to enjoin the violation of any provision of this article. 
(Ord. No. 11-43, § 2, 7-28-2011)  
Chapter 94 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; electrical code, § 14-131 et seq.; community development, ch. 18; environment, ch. 26; floods, ch. 34; health and sanitation, ch. 38; mobile home parks, ch. 58; planning, ch. 66; solid waste, ch. 74; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78; municipal utility tax, § 82-431 et seq.; telecommunications, ch. 86. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 94-1. - Water and sewer facilities required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to erect any building for habitation on any lot or parcel of land unless an improved highway, road, street, or way meeting the requirements of the city council for public service facilities improved with water mains and sanitary sewers is provided to serve said lot or parcel of land. 
(b)  No building hereinafter constructed after August 1967 shall be used for habitation unless such building is on a lot or parcel of land adjoining an improved highway, road, street or way for public service facilities improved with water mains and sanitary sewers servicing said lot or parcel of land. 
(c)  No permit shall be issued for the construction of any building for habitation unless the plans and specifications therefor comply with the provisions of this section. Provided, however, that any building which when constructed shall not exceed seventy-two (72) square feet shall only be issued a permit for construction on a building site which consists of not less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, exclusive of any existing buildings or structures on said building site, and in accordance with applicable zoning regulations. 
(Code 1980, § 22-6; Ord. of 6-24-1967, § 1; Ord. No. 77-44, § 1, 11-10-1977)  
Sec. 94-2. - Incorporation of Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago Sewage and Waste Control Regulations. 
Any construction, operation or maintenance of a sanitary or stormwater infrastructure element must comply with the provisions set forth herein in this chapter and any ordinance relating to certain activities applicable to the construction, operation or maintenance of a sanitary or stormwater infrastructure element imposed by the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago, are hereby adopted, by reference, by and for the city, as if fully set forth in this chapter, including those regulations set forth in the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago Sewer Permit Ordinance, Manual of Procedures for the Administration of the Sewer Permit Ordinance and Sewage and Waste Control Ordinance, as from time to time supplemented and amended. 
(Ord. No. 06-83, § 2, 10-26-2006)  
Secs. 94-3—94-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SEWER AND WATER DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Departments, § 2-566 et seq. 
 
Sec. 94-31. - Department established. 
There is hereby established the department of sewers and water, an executive department of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 22-1)  
Sec. 94-32. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the sewer and water department shall be from February 1 to January 31; provided, however, that the operations of the department shall be audited for the twelve-month period, beginning May 1 and ending April 30 of each year. 
(Code 1980, § 22-1.1; Ord. of 7-24-1975, § 1)  
Sec. 94-33. - Water superintendent—Position established. 
There is hereby established the position of water superintendent, an executive office of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 22-2; Ord. of 7-26-1973, § 1)  
Sec. 94-34. - Same—Appointment. 
The water superintendent shall be appointed by the mayor by and with the advice and consent of the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 22-3; Ord. of 7-26-1973, § 1) 
State Law reference— Appointment of officers, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-30-5.  
Sec. 94-35. - Same—Duties. 
The water superintendent shall supervise the city water system and all appurtenances thereto. He shall supervise all connections with the city water system and enforce the provisions of this Code relating to air conditioners and shall read or cause to be read all the water meters connected to the city water system. He shall supervise the city sewer system and all appurtenances thereto and supervise all connections with the city sewer system. He shall maintain and repair all sewer lines which are a part of the city sewer system. 
(Code 1980, § 22-4; Ord. of 7-26-1973, § 1)  
Sec. 94-36. - Same—Employees. 
All employees in the sewer and water department shall perform their duties as directed by the water superintendent. 
(Code 1980, § 22-5; Ord. of 7-26-1973, § 1)  
Secs. 94-37—94-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - COLLECTION OF WATER AND SEWER BILLS 
 
Sec. 94-71. - Bills; penalty for late payment; persons liable. 
Bills for water and sewer services shall be rendered monthly and shall be delinquent after the due date stated on the bill. In the event of failure to pay the bill by the due date, a late fee of ten (10) percent of the amount of the bill shall be added to the bill five (5) calendar days after said due date. Accounts not paid by the due date stated on the bills shall be designated for disconnection. When designated for disconnection, a red tag notice of disconnection will be mailed to single-family residences. When designated for disconnection, a red tag notice will be mailed to and posted upon multi-family residences and commercial properties. If water is disconnected, a fifty dollar ($50.00) turn-on fee will be assessed for reconnection. The owner will be held liable to the city, regardless of any separate private agreements that the owner may maintain with a third-party liability. 
(Code 1980, § 22-77; Ord. of 11-29-1965, § 7; Ord. No. 78-36, § 1, 9-14-1978; Ord. No. 98-49, § 2, 8-6-1998; Ord. No. 07-84, § 1, 8-9-2007; Ord. No. 14-48, § 3, 10-23-2014; Ord. No. 14-68, § 2, 12-29-2014; Ord. No. 15-45, § 2, 12-29-2014; Ord. No. 17-12, § 2, 4-27-2017)  
Sec. 94-72. - Lien; notice of delinquency. 
(a)  Whenever a bill for water and sewer service remains unpaid sixty (60) days after it has been rendered the city comptroller shall file with the county recorder of deeds a statement of lien claim. This statement shall contain the legal description of the premises served, the amount of the unpaid bill, and a notice that city claims a lien for this amount as well as for all charges for water and sewer subsequent to the period covered by the bill. 
(b)  If the consumer of water and sewer services whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the premises, and the city comptroller has notice of this, notice shall be mailed to the owner of the premises, if his address be known to the city comptroller, whenever such bill remains unpaid for a period of sixty (60) days after it has been rendered. 
(c)  The failure of the city comptroller to record such lien claim or to mail such notice or the failure of the owner to receive such notice shall not affect the right to foreclose the lien for unpaid water and sewer bills. 
(Code 1980, § 22-78; Ord. No. 98-49, § 2, 8-6-1998; Ord. No. 18-48, § 3, 8-23-2018)  
Sec. 94-73. - Foreclosure of lien. 
Property subject to a lien for unpaid water and sewer charges shall be sold for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of the sale shall be applied to pay the charges, after deducting costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be by bill in equity in the name of the city. The city attorney is hereby authorized and directed to institute such proceedings in the name of the city in any court having jurisdiction over such matters, against any property for which the bill for water and sewer has remained unpaid sixty (60) days after it has been rendered. 
(Code 1980, § 22-79; Ord. No. 98-49, § 1, 8-6-1998)  
Sec. 94-74. - Nonpayment of water and sewer bills. 
(a)  Referral of certain delinquent bills to collection agency. The public utilities committee may periodically refer to the city council certain delinquent water and sewer bills with the recommendation that they be referred to a collection agency previously approved by the city council. 
(b)  Additional charge for bills referred to agency. Any delinquent water and sewer bill referred to a collection agency shall be assessed a charge of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) or ten (10) percent of the amount of the delinquent bill, whichever is greater. 
(c)  Service charge on returned checks. Any water and sewer user who tenders a check to the city in payment of a water and sewer bill, which check is returned to the city unpaid, shall be assessed a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) service charge. If satisfactory evidence is furnished to the water department that the nonpayment was due to bank error, then said service charge fee may be waived. 
(Code 1980, § 22-80; Ord. No. 81-37, § 1, 11-21-1981; Ord. No. 91-29, § 2, 7-25-1991; Ord. No. 98-49, § 2, 8-6-1998; Ord. No. 14-68, § 2, 12-29-2014; Ord. No. 15-45, § 2, 12-29-2014)  
Secs. 94-75—94-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 94-101. - Discharge of waste water into city storm sewers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to discharge sanitary and industrial waste water into any storm sewer in the city. 
(b)  Any person violating this section shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed for each and every day during which a violation continues or exists. 
(Code 1980, § 22-24; Ord. No. 84-42, §§ 1, 2, 12-13-1984)  
Secs. 94-102—94-120. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CONNECTIONS 
 
Sec. 94-121. - Use required. 
All construction begun after the effective date of this Code shall have connections with the city's sanitary sewerage system. 
(Code 1980, § 22-18)  
Sec. 94-122. - Pipe bedding. 
In connection with all sewer construction after February 11, 1971, pipe beddings shall be installed on all sewer construction, including building service sewers and house connections. 
(Code 1980, § 22-19; Ord. of 2-11-1971, § 1)  
Sec. 94-123. - Special requirements for combined sewers. 
In combined sewer areas, as designated on the Chicago Metropolitan Sanitary District maps, the following requirements shall apply: 
(1)  Separation. There shall be complete separation of sewers within the property lines. 
(2)  Detention. Detention shall be provided and/or permanent constrictions shall be built on the storm sewer system to control the flow into the existing combined system in accordance with regulations promulgated by the street and alley commissioner. 
(3)  Downspouts. All downspouts or roof drains shall discharge onto the ground or be connected to storm or combined sewer. No downspouts or roof drains shall be connected to the sanitary sewers. 
(4)  Footing drains. Footing drains shall be connected to sump pumps, and discharge shall be made into storm sewers, combined sewers or drainage ditches. No footing drains or drainage tile shall be connected to the sanitary sewer. 
(Code 1980, § 22-20; Ord. of 2-11-1971, § 2)  
Sec. 94-124. - Overhead sewer and sump pumps. 
(a)  All house sewers and sewers installed in any building constructed after January 1, 1965, shall be "overhead" sewers and shall be located and installed above the grade of existing adjoining main sewers; provided, however, that this restriction shall not apply to house sewers installed in buildings without basements, constructed above ground level in which all sewer installations are located above the grade of existing, adjoining main sewers. 
(b)  All buildings constructed after January 1, 1965, with basements shall be provided with a sump pump, or other device, for the removal of basement drainage. 
(Code 1980, § 22-21; Ord. of 11-12-1964, § 1)  
Sec. 94-125. - Compliance as prerequisite to permits. 
No sewer or construction permit shall be issued unless the terms and provisions of this article are complied with. 
(Code 1980, § 22-22; Ord. of 2-11-1971, § 3)  
Sec. 94-126. - Connections to property outside of city. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to tap into the sewer system of the city to service any property which is not located within the city. Any person, firm or corporation not within the corporate limits of the city may be granted permission by the city council to tap into the sewer system of the city upon annexation to the city. Any person, firm or corporation tapped into the sewer lines of the city to service property not within the corporate limits of the city shall either disconnect the sewer tie-in immediately or shall pay a tap-in fee and a service user fee as set by the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 22-23; Ord. No. 78-57, § 1, 12-14-1978)  
Secs. 94-127—94-160. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - WATER SYSTEM  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 94-161. - Liability of city. 
All connections and water applied for under this article and all the water used hereunder, shall be upon the expressed condition that the city shall not be liable, nor shall any claim be made against it for damages or injury caused by reason of the breaking of any main, branches, service pipes, apparatus or appurtenances connected with the system, or plant, any part or portion of said plant, or for any interruption of the supply by reason of the breakage of machinery, or by reason of stoppage, alterations, extensions or renewals. 
(Code 1980, § 22-42; Ord. of 11-29-1965, § 6)  
Sec. 94-162. - Rules and regulations. 
The following rules and regulations for the consumers of water and plumbers are hereby adopted and established: 
(1)  No water shall be furnished or supplied to any consumer for any purpose whatsoever, until such consumer shall make application therefor. Such application shall state the location of the premises to be served and the use to which the water will be put. 
(2)  No water consumer may supply water to other families or allow them to take it, except for use on the premises and for the purposes specified in the application, or after water is introduced into any building or upon any premises for alteration, repairs, extensions or attachments without a written permit therefor to be issued by the mayor and/or water superintendent. 
(3)  The city reserves the right to shut off water at any time in the mains for the purpose of repairing, cleaning, making connections with or extensions to same, or for the concentrating of water in any part of the city in case of fire; and for restricting the use of the water in case of deficiency in supply. No claim shall be made against the city by reason of the breaking of any service pipe or service cock, or damage arising from shutting off of water for repairing any part of the water system, or from failure of the water supply, or by increasing the water pressure at any time, or from concentration or restricted use of water as above. 
(Code 1980, § 22-43; Ord. of 11-29-1965, § 9)  
Sec. 94-163. - Application; turning on water; fee. 
(a)  No water service shall be turned on for use on or in any premises until an application therefor in writing has been made for that purpose and filed with the water superintendent stating the purpose for which the water is to be used. 
(b)  Each applicant for connection to the water system shall pay a service charge of fifty dollars ($50.00) for the cost of making each connection; in addition, he shall deposit with his application the following sum pertaining to the premises for which application is made: 
(1)  Residents and tenants, per account ..... $50.00 
(2)  Taverns, laundromats, car washes, restaurants, and industrial, per account ..... 100.00 
(3)  All other businesses, per account ..... 50.00 
Such deposit shall be held by the city as security for the payment of water used by the applicant and may be so applied when any default is made in the payment of a water bill; provided, however, that any single-family premises occupied by the owner thereof, shall not be required to pay a security deposit in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
Upon sale of property, the owner will be entitled to a refund of one-half (½) of the security deposit. The other one-half (½) of the security deposit will be applied to pay the administrative cost incurred by the city with respect to the sale. 
(Code 1980, § 22-34; Ord. of 11-29-1965, § 2; Ord. No. 77-2, § 1, 1-27-1977; Ord. No. 78-19, § 1, 6-8-1978; Ord. No. 11-47, § 2, 8-11-2011; Ord. No. 14-68, § 2, 12-29-2014; Ord. No. 15-45, § 2, 12-29-2014)  
Sec. 94-164. - Construction uses. 
Persons desiring to use city water for building or construction purposes shall make application therefor in writing and file the same in the office of the water superintendent on a form prescribed for that purpose. Upon a permit being granted (permits shall be issued in writing and signed by the mayor and/or water superintendent), the service pipe shall be carried at the expense of the applicant to the inside of the curb line, where a service cock and meter shall be placed, with pipe leading to the surface, and a faucet placed at the end thereof above said surface. When the building or construction work is completed, the faucet and meter shall be removed and the water shut off, unless permanent connection hereunder is made. Charges for the use and connections shall be prescribed by the city council as follows: 
(1)  Sewer tap-in fee ..... $100.00 
(2)  Water tap-in fee ..... 100.00 
(3)  Construction water use ..... 100.00 
(Code 1980, § 22-35; Ord. of 11-29-1965, § 8; Ord. No. 88-9, § 1, 6-10-1988; Ord. No. 91-29, § 1, 7-25-1991)  
Sec. 94-165. - Plumbing. 
No water shall be turned on for service in premises in which the plumbing does not comply with the provisions of this Code relating thereto; provided that water may be turned on for construction work in unfinished buildings, subject to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1980, § 22-36)  
Sec. 94-166. - Obstructing or tampering with water system. 
(a)  No person shall in any manner obstruct the access to any stopcock, hydrant or valve, or any public faucet or opening for taking water in any street, alley, public ground or place connected with or part of the water system, nor pile or place any lumber, brick or building material or other article within twelve (12) feet of the same, or so as to in any manner hinder, delay or obstruct the members of the fire department in reaching the same. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person in any manner to interfere with or obstruct the flow, retention, storage or authorized use of water in the water system, reservoir or plant, or any main hydrant, service pipe, shut-off box, public fountain, valve, engine or building connected with the water system, or plant, or to cause, suffer or permit any of aforementioned things to be done. Any person who shall perform any act in violation of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, in addition to the penalty for violations of this Code, be liable for the actual damage done or caused. 
(Code 1980, § 22-40; Ord. of 11-29-1965, § 4)  
Sec. 94-167. - Turning on by unauthorized person. 
No person not duly authorized shall turn the water on at any fire hydrant or service cock, or use water therefrom when so turned on, and the persons so using or wasting water in such unlawful manner shall be liable to pay for the same. 
(Code 1980, § 22-41; Ord. of 11-29-1965, § 5)  
Sec. 94-168. - Shutting off. 
For violation of any of the provisions of this article or for the nonpayment of water bills, the city reserves the right to turn off the water without notice and to forfeit any payments made, and after the water has been turned off from any service pipe on account of nonpayment of water bills, or violation of rules, the same will not be turned on until all delinquent bills and penalties are paid, together with expense of turning off and on such water, which shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) and no water will be furnished to any person who is indebted to the city on account of water consumed, material or repair. 
(Code 1980, § 22-44; Ord. of 11-29-1965, § 10; Ord. No. 11-48, § 2, 8-11-2011)  
Sec. 94-169. - New tenants/application for service twenty-four hours prior to possession date. 
All new tenants in rental residential and commercial buildings shall contact the water billing office to file an application for service at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to possession date, and only during regular working hours. 
(Code 1980, § 22-71; Ord. No. 87-14, § 1, 6-11-1987)  
Sec. 94-170. - Water shut-off authorization by individual on application for service. 
All requests for water shut-off in rental residential and commercial buildings shall only be authorized by the individual or individuals on the application for service. 
(Code 1980, § 22-72; Ord. No. 87-14, § 1, 6-11-1987)  
Sec. 94-171. - Established; due date. 
The rate for all water supplied by the city to users who reside within the corporate boundaries of the city, payable on the first day of each billing period, shall be seven dollars and eighty-one cents ($7.81) per every one thousand (1,000) gallons, or part thereof, of water used. The rate for sewer usage provided by the city to users who reside within the corporate boundaries of the city, payable on the first day of each billing period, shall be sixty-two cents ($0.62) per every one thousand (1,000) gallons, or part thereof, of water used. 
The rate for all water supplied to users who reside in an unincorporated area, payable on the first day of each billing period, shall be eight dollars and eighty-one cents ($8.81) per every one thousand (1,000) gallons, or part thereof, of water used. This rate will always be one dollar ($1.00) more per every one thousand (1,000) gallons, or part thereof, of water used, than the current rate in effect from time to time for users who reside within the corporate boundaries of the city. The rate for sewer usage provided by the city to users who reside in an unincorporated area, payable on the first day of each billing period, shall be sixty-two cents ($0.62) per every one thousand (1,000) gallons, or part thereof, of water used. 
Effective July 1, 2018, the rate for all water supplied by the city to users who reside within the corporate boundaries of the city will be increased one and nine-tenths (1.9) percent to seven dollars and ninety-six cents ($7.96) per every one thousand (1,000) gallons, or part thereof, of water used. The one and nine-tents (1.9) percent increase is the new percentage rate increase charged by the City of Chicago to Calumet City. If the City of Chicago increases rates charged for water it sells to the City of Calumet City, such charges increasing the rates shall be reflected immediately in the computation of water rates charged by Calumet City to all consumers. 
(Code 1980, § 22-76; Ord. of 11-29-1965, § 1; Ord. of 12-4-1970; Ord. of 1-10-1974, § 1; Ord. No. 78-20, § 1, 6-8-1978; Ord. No. 81-29, § 1, 8-27-1981; Ord. No. 85-18, § 1, 5-23-1985; Ord. No. 89-20, § 1, 6-8-1989; Ord. No. 92-8, § 1, 2-27-1992; Ord. No. 92-8, § 1, 8-26-1993; Ord. No. 98-49, § 1, 8-6-1998; Ord. No. 03-76, § 1, 12-22-2003; Ord. No. 06-88, § 1(22-76), 11-9-2006; Ord. No. 06-104, § 1(22-76), 12-20-2006; Ord. No. 14-48, § 2, 10-23-2014; Ord. No. 14-68, § 2, 12-29-2014; Ord. No. 15-45, § 2, 12-29-2014; Ord. No. 16-19, § 2, 6-9-2016; Ord. No. 18-24, § 2, 6-6-2018)  
Secs. 94-172—94-190. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CONNECTIONS  
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 94-191. - Service connection. 
(a)  No connections with a water main shall be made without a permit being issued and twenty-four (24) hours' notice being given to the water superintendent. All such connections shall be made by or under the supervision of the water superintendent. 
(b)  Before connection is made with the water distribution system the premises to be served must be equipped with a meter and buffalo box properly installed on the service pipe. When the meter is located within a building, lead service pipe shall be installed from the buffalo box to the meter and shall be at least four (4) feet underground. No installation shall be covered until it has been inspected by the water superintendent and found to be satisfactory. 
(Code 1980, § 22-37)  
Sec. 94-192. - Separate connections. 
No owner or plumber shall be permitted to conduct water pipes into any two (2) distinct premises, stopcocks shall be placed on the outside of such premises along the sidewalk opposite the same, nor shall any pipe be allowed to cross lots or buildings to adjoining premises. 
(Code 1980, § 22-38; Ord. of 11-29-1965, § 11)  
Secs. 94-193—94-210. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Service Pipes 
 
Sec. 94-211. - Installation. 
All service pipes from the mains to the premises served shall be installed by, and at the cost of, the owner of the property to be served or the applicant for the service. Such installation shall be under the supervision of the water superintendent. 
(Code 1980, § 22-51)  
Sec. 94-212. - Installation standards. 
No service pipe shall be installed unless it conforms to the specifications of the plumbing code and amendments thereto which are kept on file in the office of the plumbing inspector. 
(Code 1980, § 22-52)  
Sec. 94-213. - Repairs. 
All repairs for service pipes and plumbing systems of buildings shall be made by and at the expense of the owners of the premises served. The city may in case of an emergency, repair any service pipes and if this is done the cost of such repair work shall be repaid to the city by the owner of the premises served. 
(Code 1980, § 22-53)  
Sec. 94-214. - Excavations. 
Excavations for installing service pipes or repairing the same shall be made in compliance with the provisions of this Code relating to excavations in streets; provided, that it shall be unlawful to place any service pipe in the same excavation with, or directly over, any drain pipe or sewer pipe. 
(Code 1980, § 22-54)  
Sec. 94-215. - Shut-off boxes. 
Shut-off boxes or service boxes shall be placed on every service pipe, and shall be located between the curb line and the sidewalk line where this is practicable. Such boxes shall be so located that they are easily accessible and shall be protected from frost. 
(Code 1980, § 22-55)  
Secs. 94-216—94-240. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - METERS 
 
Sec. 94-241. - Required. 
All premises using the city water supply must be equipped with an adequate water meter furnished by the city but paid for by the consumer at rates established by the water superintendent and confirmed by the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 22-64; Ord. No. 77-2, § 2, 1-27-1977; Ord. No. 77-41, § 1, 9-27-1977)  
Sec. 94-242. - Installation. 
Water meters shall be installed in a location that will be easy of access. 
(Code 1980, § 22-65)  
Sec. 94-243. - Reading. 
The water superintendent shall read or cause to be read every water meter used in the city at such times as necessary that the bills may be sent out at the proper time. 
(Code 1980, § 22-66)  
Sec. 94-244. - Testing. 
All municipal water meters shall be taken out and tested upon the complaint of the consumer. If upon the test the meter is not within three (3) percent of accurate, it shall be repaired or replaced. 
(Code 1980, § 22-67; Ord. No. 77-2, § 3, 1-27-1977)  
Sec. 94-245. - New residents/new meters with outside clocks. 
All new residential and commercial buildings constructed after January 1, 1983, shall be equipped with a new water meter with an outside remote clock, wherever feasible. The meter shall be furnished by the city, but paid for by the consumer at rates established by the water superintendent and confirmed by the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 22-68; Ord. No. 87-14, § 1, 6-11-1987)  
Sec. 94-246. - Annual reading of inside meter with outside clocks. 
The water superintendent shall read or cause to be read every inside water meter used in conjunction with an outside remote clock at least once a year. 
(Code 1980, § 22-69; Ord. No. 87-14, § 1, 6-11-1987)  
Sec. 94-247. - Required final reading twenty-four hours prior to moving. 
All tenants in residential and commercial buildings shall request a final reading, at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to moving, and only during regular working hours. 
(Code 1980, § 22-70; Ord. No. 87-14, § 1, 6-11-1987)  
Secs. 94-248—94-270. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - WATER CONSERVATION 
 
Sec. 94-271. - Limitation on sprinkling. 
(a)  Specific hours. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to use water for the sprinkling or irrigation of lawns or gardens except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
(b)  Address-date system. Properties with the last digit of the street address being an odd number may only water on odd-numbered calendar dates, and properties with the last digit of the street address being an even number may only water on even-numbered calendar dates during the restricted hours set herein. 
(c)  Additional restrictions as necessary. Whenever it is deemed essential for the public health and safety that the consumption of water from the municipal water system be further restricted, the water superintendent or the mayor may impose such temporary restrictions as deemed necessary on water use, including but not limited to a partial or total ban on lawn and plant watering, car washing, swimming pool filling and other uses of hoses to dispense water. 
(d)  Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this section shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Code 1980, § 22-39; Ord. of 11-29-1965, § 12; Ord. No. 77-21, § 1, 6-7-1977; Ord. No. 90-9, § 1, 3-8-1990)  
Sec. 94-272. - Potable water not to be used to flush sewers. 
The use of potable water for flushing of sanitary sewers is prohibited. 
(Code 1980, § 22-39.1; Ord. No. 77-41, § 1, 9-27-1977)  
Sec. 94-273. - Plumbing fixtures. 
Any installation of a plumbing fixture shall be as follows: 
(1)  In all new construction and in all repair and/or replacement of fixtures or trim, only fixtures and trim not exceeding the following flow rates and/or water usage shall be installed. These rates are based on a pressure at the fixture of forty (40) to fifty (50) pounds per square inch: 
	Gallons 
per Flush/ 
per Minute 
Water closets, tank type ..... 	3.5 
Water closets, flushometer type ..... 	3.0 
Urinals, tank type ..... 	3.0 
Urinals, flushometer type ..... 	3.0 
Shower heads ..... 	3.0 
Lavatory, sink faucets ..... 	3.0 
 
(2)  In all new construction and replacement of fixtures, faucets and lavatories located in restrooms intended for public use shall be of metering or self-closing type. 
(Code 1980, § 22-39.2; Ord. No. 77-41, § 1, 9-27-1977)  
Sec. 94-274. - Car washes. 
In construction and replacement of fixtures, car wash installations shall be equipped with a water recycling system. 
(Code 1980, § 22-39.3; Ord. No. 77-41, § 1, 9-27-1977)  
Secs. 94-275—94-290. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL 
 
Sec. 94-291. - Compliance with existing laws. 
A connection with a public water supply system shall comply with the existing laws and rules and the provisions of the Code of the City of Calumet City. 
(Code 1980, § 22-82; Ord. No. 86-32, § 1, 11-13-1986)  
Sec. 94-292. - Cross-connections prohibited. 
Cross-connection of the public water supply system and any other water supply system or source including, but not limited to, the following are prohibited: 
(1)  Between a public water supply system and a secondary water supply. 
(2)  By submerged inlet. 
(3)  Between a lawn sprinkling system and the public water supply system. 
(4)  Between a public water supply and piping which may contain sanitary waste or a chemical contaminant. 
(5)  Between a public water supply system and piping immersed in a tank or vessel which may contain a contaminant. 
(Code 1980, § 22-83; Ord. No. 86-32, § 1, 11-13-1986)  
Sec. 94-293. - Local cross-connection control program. 
(a)  The City of Calumet City shall develop a comprehensive control program for the elimination and prevention of all cross-connections, and removal of all existing cross-connections and prevention of all future cross-connections. 
(b)  All plumbing installed within the City of Calumet City, Cook County, Illinois, shall be installed in accordance with Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890. If, in accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code or in the judgment of the superintendent of water, an approved backflow prevention device is necessary for the safety of the public water supply system, the water customer shall, at his own expense, install such an approved device at a location and in a manner in accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code, Illinois Environmental Protection Agency and all applicable local regulations, and shall have inspections and tests made of such approved devices upon installation and as required by the Illinois Plumbing Code, Illinois Environmental Protection Agency and local regulations. 
(c)  No person, firm or corporation shall establish or permit to be established or maintained or permit to be maintained any connection whereby a private, auxiliary or emergency water supply other than the regular public water supply of the city may enter the supply or distribution system of said municipality, unless such private, auxiliary or emergency water supply and the method of connection and use of such supply shall have been approved by the superintendent of water and the state environmental protection agency. 
(d)  The water department of the city or any representative thereof shall have the authority to inspect any premises to determine the presence of an existing cross-connection and to order the elimination of such cross-connection. 
(e)  The superintendent of water is authorized and directed to discontinue, after reasonable notice to the occupant thereof, the water service to any property wherein any connection in violation of the provisions of this section is known to exist, and to take such other precautionary measures as he may deem necessary to eliminate any danger of the contamination of the public water supply distribution mains. Water service to such property shall not be restored until conditions have been eliminated or corrected in compliance with the provisions of this section, and until a reconnection fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) is paid to the city. Immediate disconnection with verbal notice can be effected when the superintendent to water is assured that imminent danger of harmful contamination of the public water supply system exists. Such action shall be followed by written notification of the cause of disconnection. Immediate disconnection without notice to any party can be effected to prevent actual or anticipated contamination or pollution of the public water supply, provided that, in the reasonable opinion of the superintendent of water or the state environmental protection agency, such action is required to prevent actual or potential contamination or pollution of the public water supply, neither the city or the superintendent of water, or its agents or assigns shall be liable to any customer for any injury, damages or lost revenues which may result from termination of said customer's water supply in accordance with the terms of this division, whether or not said termination of said customer's water supply is in accordance with the terms of this section, whether or not said termination was with or without notice. 
(f)  The customer responsible for backsiphoned or back pressured material or contamination through backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply system occurs through an illegal cross-connection or an improperly installed, maintained or repaired device, or a device which has been bypassed must bear the cost of clean-up of the potable water supply system. 
(Code 1980, § 22-84; Ord. No. 86-32, § 1, 11-13-1986; Ord. No. 91-10, § 1, 4-25-1991)  
Sec. 94-294. - Corrections and protective devices. 
Any user of city water shall obtain written approval from the water department of any proposed corrective action or protective device before using or installing it. The total time allowed for completion of the necessary corrections shall be contingent upon the degree of hazard involved and include the time required to obtain and install equipment. If the cross-connection has not been removed within the time as hereinafter specified, the city shall physically separate the city water supply from the on-site piping system in such manner that the two (2) systems cannot be connected by any unauthorized person. 
(Code 1980, § 22-85; Ord. No. 86-32, § 1, 11-13-1986)  
Sec. 94-295. - Piping identification. 
When a secondary water source is used in addition to the Calumet City water supply, exposed City water and secondary water piping shall be identified by distinguishing colors or tags and so maintained that each pipe may be traced readily in its entirety, it will be necessary to protect the City water supply at the service connection in the manner acceptable to the water department. 
(Code 1980, § 22-86; Ord. No. 86-32, § 1, 11-13-1986)  
Sec. 94-296. - Private water storage tanks. 
A private water storage tank supplied from the City water supply system shall be deemed a secondary water supply unless it is designed and approved for potable water usage. 
(Code 1980, § 22-87; Ord. No. 86-32, § 1, 11-13-1986)  
Sec. 94-297. - Elimination of existing cross-connections. 
Within one year from the effective date of this division, all existing cross-connections to the City water supply systems shall be eliminated. The expenses of such elimination shall be that of the owner of the property on which such cross-connection exists. 
(Code 1980, § 22-88; Ord. No. 86-32, § 1, 11-13-1986)  
Sec. 94-298. - Inspection. 
The water department of the city or any representative thereof shall have the authority to inspect any premises to determine the presence of an existing cross-connection and to order the elimination of such cross-connection. 
(Code 1980, § 22-89; Ord. No. 86-32, § 1, 11-13-1986)  
Sec. 94-299. - Discontinuance of water service. 
The water department is hereby authorized to discontinue water service after a reasonable notice to any person owning any property where a cross-connection in violation of this Code exists. The water department may take such other precautionary measures as necessary to eliminate any danger of the contamination of the city water supply system. Water service to such property shall not be restored until such cross-connection has been eliminated. 
(Code 1980, § 22-90; Ord. No. 86-32, § 1, 11-13-1986)  
Sec. 94-300. - Groundwater as a potable water supply prohibited. 
The use or attempt to use as a potable water supply groundwater from within the corporate limits of the City of Calumet City by the installation or drilling of wells or by any other method is hereby prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 05-74, 10-27-2005)  
Sec. 94-301. - Definitions. 
Person is any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, limited liability company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, political subdivision, or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. 
Potable water is any water used for human or domestic consumption, including but not limited to, water used for drinking, bathing, swimming, washing dishes, or preparing foods. 
(Ord. No. 05-74, 10-27-2005)  
Secs. 94-302—94-320. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - AIR CONDITIONING AND REFRIGERATION DEVICES  
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 94-321. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise expressly stated, whenever used in this division, the following words shall have the meaning given to them by this section: 
Air conditioning system means any unit or combination of units used for the cooling or dehumidification, or both, of space for human occupancy, supplied with water through any single customer water pipe connected to the public water system. An air conditioning system using water separately submetered to a tenant of a building shall be considered a separate system. 
Summer season means the period from May 1 to September 30 in the same calendar year. 
Tons of capacity means the total number of tons of refrigeration installed on one (1) air conditioning system. For the purpose of this division, one (1) compressor horsepower shall be considered equivalent to one (1) ton of refrigeration. 
Water regulating device means a regulating valve or other device, the purpose of which is to limit the maximum use of water to a predetermined rate. 
(Code 1980, § 22-91)  
Sec. 94-322. - Compliance required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to install or operate an air conditioning system without complying with the rules established in this division or which system is not equipped as required by the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1980, § 22-92)  
Sec. 94-323. - Enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the superintendent of water to enforce the provisions of this article, and for such purpose, he shall be permitted to inspect any air conditioning system at any reasonable hour. He shall have authority to require the installation of a water meter to be furnished by the city at the expense of the owner to measure the amount of water used by any air conditioning system. 
(Code 1980, § 22-97)  
Sec. 94-324. - Conservation devices. 
Air conditioning and refrigeration machinery and equipment shall be prohibited from using water from the city waterworks system unless the same shall be properly equipped with water conservation devices which reduce water consumption to not more than ten (10) percent of its daily water capacity for makeup purposes. 
(Code 1980, § 22-96)  
Sec. 94-325. - Water regulating device. 
Air conditioning and refrigeration machinery and equipment shall not use water from the city waterworks system unless the same shall be properly equipped with water conservation devices which reduce water consumption to not more than ten (10) percent of its daily water capacity for makeup purposes. 
(Code 1980, § 22-100; Ord. of 11-29-1965, § 3)  
Secs. 94-326—94-350. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Permit 
 
Sec. 94-351. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to install an air conditioning system without an electrical permit. 
(Code 1980, § 22-93; Ord. No. 92-45, §§ 1, 2, 11-12-1992)  
Sec. 94-352. - Permit application; approval of plans. 
Applications for the permit required by this article shall be made to the city clerk and shall include plans and specifications of the proposed installation. No such permit shall be issued until the plans and specifications have been examined and approved by the building commissioner as being in compliance with this article. 
(Code 1980, § 22-94)  
Sec. 94-353. - Closed system air conditioning unit. 
Permit approval in any new construction or any new remodeling shall be only for the installation of a closed system air conditioning unit. 
(Code 1980, § 22-101; Ord. No. 83-24, § 1, 10-13-1983)  
Sec. 94-354. - Permit fee. 
No person shall be issued a permit pursuant to the provisions of this article unless he pays to the city a permit fee of five dollars ($5.00) per ton capacity of the system to be installed. 
(Code 1980, § 22-95; Ord. No. 92-46, § 1, 11-12-1992)  
Secs. 94-355—94-370. - Reserved.  
Subdivision III. - Water Charges 
 
Sec. 94-371. - Water charges. 
The charge for water used for an air conditioning system shall be the regular rates for water furnished through meters, excepting that during the summer season, there shall be paid, in addition, a demand charge of twenty dollars ($20.00) per ton of capacity per season for each system having a total capacity of five (5) tons or more unless the use of water from the city mains for such systems shall be limited to a maximum of two-tenths (0.2) gallons per minute per ton of capacity. 
(Code 1980, § 22-98)  
Sec. 94-372. - Time of payment. 
The demand charges prescribed in this article shall be due and payable by May 1 of each year. 
(Code 1980, § 22-99)  
Chapter 98 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 98-1—98-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 98-31. - Definitions. 
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this article, they shall have the meaning herein ascribed to them, unless the content makes such meaning repugnant thereto: 
Chief: The chief of police. 
Public passenger vehicle means a motor vehicle, as defined in the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.), which is used for the transportation of passengers for hire excepting motor vehicles used as part of and in connection with the operation of a bus line operating on a fixed route or as a public utility. 
Taxicab means a public passenger vehicle having seating capacity for not more than five (5) adult passengers exclusive of the front seat. 
Taximeter means a mechanical device which records and indicates a charge of fare measured by distance traveled, waiting time and extra passengers. 
(Code 1980, § 27-1; Ord. of 12-23-1970, § 1)  
Sec. 98-32. - Vehicle safety and maintenance tests. 
Every taxicab licensed under the provisions of this article shall undergo regular safety and maintenance tests. The taxicab licensee shall furnish the city clerk, at least every six (6) months, a report of the safety and maintenance performed on each taxicab licensed hereunder. 
(Code 1980, § 27-15; Ord. of 12-23-1970, § 22; Ord. No. 89-33, § 1, 10-26-1989)  
Sec. 98-33. - Name on vehicle. 
Every taxicab vehicle shall bear on the outside thereof, in a conspicuous place, the name of the owner thereof in letters not less than two (2) inches in height, which letters shall be of a color in contrast to the color of the car and shall be proportionate and legible. 
(Code 1980, § 27-16; Ord. of 12-23-1970, § 12)  
Sec. 98-34. - Stands. 
Public taxicab stands shall be provided for the use of licensed taxicabs and the city council is hereby authorized to designate such stands. Such stands shall be designated alongside the curb of any public street or alley in the city as may be deemed proper. Any taxicab stand so established by the city council shall be for the use of all licensed taxicabs. 
(Code 1980, § 27-17; Ord. of 12-23-1970, § 11)  
Secs. 98-35—98-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - BUSINESS LICENSES 
 
Sec. 98-61. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of a taxicab to operate the same, or permit the same to be operated, or for any person to drive a public passenger vehicle on the public ways without a license. 
(Code 1980, § 27-2; Ord. of 12-23-1970, § 2)  
Sec. 98-62. - License prerequisites—Vehicle inspection. 
No public passenger vehicle shall be licensed until it has been inspected under the direction of the chief and found to be in safe condition for the transportation of passengers, clean of appearance and well painted. 
(Code 1980, § 27-3; Ord. of 12-23-1970, § 3)  
Sec. 98-63. - Same—Public hearing and finding of necessity. 
(a)  No taxicab license shall be issued, except in renewal of a license previously issued for such vehicle, or upon transfer to permit replacement of a vehicle for that license, unless the chief, after a public hearing determines that public convenience and necessity require additional public passenger vehicle service of the character offered, and the chief so recommends to the mayor and the city council. In determining whether public convenience and necessity require the licensing of any public passenger vehicle, the chief shall take into consideration: 
(1)  The demand for such. 
(2)  The effect on traffic congestion. 
(3)  Whether the safe use of the streets for vehicular and pedestrian traffic will be impaired. 
(4)  The financial responsibility of the applicant and the amount of reserves to be established for the payment of personal injury, death and property damage claims. 
(5)  The color scheme and character of equipment. 
(6)  Any other facts which the chief may deem relevant. 
(b)  Nothing contained herein shall prevent the chief of the department from recommending to the city clerk that existing licenses be transferred to any other current licenseholder. In the event licenses are recalled, forfeited or voluntarily released by an existing taxicab licenseholder, the city clerk, with the consent of the mayor and the city council, may transfer such license to any other existing taxicab licenseholder who requests the license(s) and who demonstrates financial responsibility and ability to dedicate an amount of reserves for the payment of personal injury, death or property damage claims and any other requirements deemed necessary by the chief of police to be relevant to the transfer of such licenses. 
(Code 1980, § 27-4; Ord. of 12-23-1970, § 4; Ord. No. 95-25, § 1, 6-22-1995)  
Sec. 98-64. - License application; fee. 
Any person desiring a taxicab license for which a public hearing is required by the provisions of this article shall file an application for the public hearing with the city clerk and pay to the clerk a fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). In addition thereto, the applicant requesting such a hearing shall also furnish the clerk with such information as the clerk may require under the terms of this section. Applications for a license to conduct such business shall be made by the owner and operator upon forms furnished by the clerk. Such applications shall be addressed to the city council and shall contain the full name and address of the owner and operator, the officers of a corporation or members of a partnership, information as to financial responsibility and names of sureties signing bonds of applicant. In the event the chief of police shall recommend to the city council that the public convenience and necessity require additional taxicabs, then the applicant for a license shall file with the clerk prior to the issuance of the license a complete description of the vehicle for which the license is desired, including kind and make of vehicle, motor and serial number, seating capacity, state license number, car number, color of vehicle, horsepower and such other data as the city council may prescribe. 
(Code 1980, § 27-5; Ord. of 12-23-1970, § 5; Ord. No. 05-87, § 2, 12-8-2005)  
Sec. 98-65. - Insurance. 
(a)  All applicants shall, before a taxicab license is issued, furnish the city clerk with a certificate of insurance issued by an insurance company which has issued public liability and property damage policies covering each vehicle of the applicant, in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for personal injuries per person, two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) for personal injuries per occurrence and fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for property damage. Such certificate shall describe the policy so issued, the amount thereof, and the period covered thereby, and shall state that all requirements of law have been satisfied. 
(b)  In the event that any licensee shall receive notice of any cancellation, forfeiture or withdrawal of any such policy of insurance, he shall forthwith cease business operations and immediately notify the clerk of the cancellation, forfeiture or withdrawal, and he shall not resume business operations until and unless he shall furnish the clerk with a new certificate of insurance. 
(Code 1980, § 27-6; Ord. of 12-23-1970, § 6)  
Sec. 98-66. - Bond. 
No taxicab license as required in this article shall be issued to any person unless the applicant has secured any bond required by state law. 
(Code 1980, § 27-7; Ord. of 12-23-1970, § 7)  
Sec. 98-67. - Maximum number of licenses. 
The city clerk shall not issue licenses for more than twenty (20) taxicabs unless this number be changed by action of the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 27-8; Ord. of 12-23-1970, § 24)  
Sec. 98-68. - License issuance restrictions. 
No taxicab license shall be issued to or held by any person who is not a person of good character or who has been convicted of a felony; nor shall such license be issued to or held by any corporation or partnership if any office thereof would be ineligible for a license by the terms and conditions of this article. 
(Code 1980, § 27-9; Ord. of 12-23-1970, § 8)  
Sec. 98-69. - License fee; amount; information submitted when paid. 
(a)  Each person who shall operate a taxicab business shall pay an annual license fee of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00), plus an additional license fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per annum for each taxicab operated in excess of one (1). 
(b)  The licensee shall notify the clerk of the motor number and said license number of each cab operated and shall submit suitable proof of ownership thereof. 
(Code 1980, § 27-10; Ord. of 12-23-1970, § 9; Ord. No. 05-87, § 2, 12-8-2005)  
Sec. 98-70. - Clerk's register. 
It shall be the duty of the city clerk to keep a register of the names of persons to whom a taxicab license is granted, or transferred, the date when issued or transferred, the number of the license and the description of the vehicle licensed. 
(Code 1980, § 27-11; Ord. of 12-23-1970, § 10)  
Sec. 98-71. - License revocation. 
Any taxicab licensee or driver violating the provisions of this article subject to a revocation of his license by the mayor, in addition to other penalties provided for in this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 27-18; Ord. of 12-23-1970, § 23)  
Secs. 98-72—98-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - DRIVERS 
 
Sec. 98-91. - License. 
(a)  Required. No person shall drive a taxicab without a license. 
(b)  Fee. Every taxicab driver shall pay an annual fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) for the license required by the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1980, §§ 27-50, 27-51; Ord. of 12-23-1970, § 23; Ord. No. 05-87, § 2, 12-8-2005)  
Sec. 98-92. - Fingerprinting and certificate prerequisite to employment; qualifications of applicant. 
(a)  Before any taxicab licensee hereunder may employ any person as a cab driver, said person shall be fingerprinted by the police department and shall receive from the chief of police a certificate entitling said person to employment. 
(b)  No taxicab driver's certificate shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of a felony or of any other crime involving moral turpitude or to a person who is not of good repute. 
(Code 1980, §§ 27-48, 27-49; Ord. of 12-23-1970, § 23)  
Sec. 98-93. - Chauffeur's cap. 
All taxicab drivers shall wear a chauffeur's cap while on duty and inside the cab. 
(Code 1980, § 27-52; Ord. of 12-23-1970, § 23)  
Secs. 98-94—98-120. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - RATES AND CHARGES  
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 98-121. - Rates established. 
Operators of taxicabs shall charge passengers the following rates: 
For first 1/10 mile or fraction thereof ..... $1.50 
For each additional 1/10 mile ..... 0.15 
For each additional minute of waiting time ..... 0.25 
(Code 1980, § 27-12; Ord. of 12-23-1970, § 19; Ord. of 6-13-1974, § 1; Ord. No. 79-12, § 1, 5-10-1979; Ord. No. 87-19, § 1, 9-10-1987; Ord. No. 96-39, § 1, 7-11-1996)  
Sec. 98-122. - Fare registered; charging. 
The driver of every taxicab, at the termination of his services, shall throw the flag to the nonrecording position on the taximeter and call the passenger's attention to the fare registered. The taximeter shall not be changed until after the fare is paid or a charge ticket therefor made out and delivered to the person hiring such taxicab. 
(Code 1980, § 27-13; Ord. of 12-23-1970, § 20)  
Sec. 98-123. - Receipts. 
Upon the request of any passenger, the driver of a taxicab shall give such person a receipt for the amount of the fare demanded and paid. 
(Code 1980, § 27-14; Ord. of 12-23-1970, § 21)  
Secs. 98-124—98-140. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Taximeters 
 
Sec. 98-141. - Required. 
All taxicabs shall be equipped with taximeters which shall be connected with and operated from the front wheel or the transmission of the taxicabs to which they are attached. 
(Code 1980, § 27-31; Ord. of 12-23-1970, § 13)  
Sec. 98-142. - Flag. 
All taximeters shall be equipped with a flag at least three (3) inches by two (2) inches in size, either painted red or bearing thereon in letters at least one (1) inch in height the word "Vacant" or the words "For Hire." The flag post of such flag shall be kept up or towards a vertical position when the taxicab is for hire, and the flag post shall be kept down or towards a horizontal position when such taxicab is engaged. 
(Code 1980, § 27-32; Ord. of 12-23-1970, § 14)  
Sec. 98-143. - Dial. 
Taximeters shall have a dial which shall register the tariff in accordance with the established rates of fare. The taximeter shall be so placed that the dial thereof is in plain view of the passenger while riding in such taxicab or upon alighting. Taxicabs shall be equipped with a light which during the period between sunset and sunrise shall be so reflected upon the dial of the taximeter as to enable the passenger to read the figures indicated thereon. 
(Code 1980, § 27-33; Ord. of 12-23-1970, § 15)  
Sec. 98-144. - Sealing. 
(a)  No person owning, controlling or operating any taxicab shall offer or let the same for hire unless the taximeter attached thereto has been sealed by the chief. 
(b)  The chief shall seal all taximeters found to be accurate and correct and keep a record of the number of each taximeter and the date of inspection thereof. 
(Code 1980, § 27-34; Ord. of 12-23-1970, § 17)  
Sec. 98-145. - Tampering. 
No person shall tamper with, break or mutilate any taximeter or the seal thereof. 
(Code 1980, § 27-35; Ord. of 12-23-1970, § 18)  
Sec. 98-146. - Testing. 
The chief may test any taximeter to determine the accuracy of the recording mechanism with respect to distance traveled either by running the taxicab to which it is attached over a course a standard mile in length or by a mechanical test. To determine whether a taximeter correctly registers waiting time, such taximeter shall be tested by comparing with the standard time the time recorded as shown by the fare computed on the dial thereof. When any test shows that a taximeter correctly records the charge or fare measured by distance traveled, waiting time and extra passengers, it shall be sealed, and a written certificate of the test shall be issued to the owner. 
(Code 1980, § 27-36; Ord. of 12-23-1970, § 16)  
APPENDIX A - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
An Ordinance Providing for Maps, Plats and Subdivisions in the City of Calumet City; the Use of Same, and Prescribing Penalties 
Be it Ordained by the City Council of the City of Calumet City, Cook County, Illinois, as follows: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Appendix A sets out the subdivision ordinance, enacted on May 12, 1960, as the same was originally enacted by the city, and as the same has been amended by the city since such date. Due to the statutory requirements relative to the enactment and amendment of such an ordinance, incorporation thereof into a Code of Ordinances is not deemed advisable, hence its inclusion as an appendix hereto for the benefit of the user of this Code. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; community development, ch. 18; environment, ch. 26; floods, ch. 34; mobile home parks, ch. 58; planning, ch. 66; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78. 
State Law reference— Plats, 765 ILCS 205/0.01 et seq.; approval of maps and plats, 65 ILCS 5/11-15-1. 
 
Sec. 1. - What a subdivision includes. 
A subdivision of land shall include any change or rearrangement in the boundary or division lines of any lot, parcel or parcels of real estate, or any public thoroughfare; also any division of any existing parcel or tract of real estate into two (2) or more parcels or tracts of real estate. 
(Code 1980, App. A, § 1)  
Sec. 2. - Tentative plat to be submitted to the city council of Calumet City. 
Any owner of land within the corporate limits of the City of Calumet City desiring to divide the same into smaller parcels or into building lots for the purpose of sale, assessment or both, and wishing to dedicate streets, alleys or other lands for public use, shall first submit to the city council a tentative plat in duplicate blueprints; such tentative plat shall meet the following requirements: 
Scale: Each tentative plat shall be drawn to a scale of not smaller than one hundred (100) feet to one (1) inch. 
Area: The tentative plat shall show the complete area to be divided with general areas adjoining, the boundaries of the property to be divided, section and half section lines, existing permanent buildings; watercourses and other existing features pertinent to the proper subdivisions. 
Municipal boundaries: All corporate boundary lines within or adjacent to the proposed subdivision shall be designated. 
Street: The widths of roads, streets (with their names), and alleys; dimensions of lots and blocks, and building lines shall be shown. The full width of streets bounding the proposed subdivision (with their names) and the widths and names of intersecting streets in the property immediately adjacent shall be shown. All streets shall be carried to the boundaries of the proposed subdivision. 
Names: The name of the proposed subdivision with the name of the owner, the developer, sponsor or trustee shall be shown. 
(Code 1980, App. A, § 2)  
Sec. 3. - City council shall refer tentative plat to the city engineer. 
The city council by motion shall refer the tentative plat to the city engineer, who shall examine the plat and the proposed improvements and prepare estimates of the costs of the street grading and such other public improvements as may be required by this or other city ordinances then in force. The city engineer shall report back to the city council with a written report of his finding in which he shall either approve or disapprove of the tentative plat and the proposed improvements. The city engineer shall also cause to be marked upon the tentative plat the date, his approval or disapproval, his name and title. One copy of the approved plat shall be returned to the subdivider and the other copy shall be returned to the city council. 
(Code 1980, App. A, § 3)  
Sec. 4. - Final plat to be submitted to the city council. 
After the tentative plat has been approved and returned to the subdivider, the subdivider shall submit to the city council a final plat for record as described in Section 5 together with the following supporting documents: 
(a)  A grading plat and profile approved by the city engineer showing the existing center line elevations of all streets and alleys in the proposed subdivision and the center line elevations of proposed pavements, elevations shall be referred to some permanent bench mark. Profiles shall be drawn to a horizontal scale of fifty (50) feet to the inch and vertical scale of five (5) feet to the inch. 
(b)  A statement signed by the subdivider setting forth the public improvements he proposes to make in the subdivision together with plans and specifications approved by the city engineer clearly describing the same which shall contain an agreement by the subdivider to make the said improvements at his own expense (subject to the approval of the final plat by the city council) within the time limit fixed by the city council. 
(c)  A statement of approval signed by the city engineer certifying that the improvements described in the subdivider's statement meet the minimum requirements of this ordinance, or exceed them as the case may be, and an estimate of the cost of such improvements including cost of engineering and inspection. 
(d)  A duly completed and executed corporate completion bond with sureties satisfactory to the city shall be posted with the city by the subdivider, in an amount equal to the city engineer's estimate of such public improvements, certified by the city attorney as good, valid and enforceable by the city, securing the satisfactory completion of all public improvements in strict accordance with the description, plans and specifications submitted by the subdivider and approved of by the city council and the city engineer. 
(e)  Evidence satisfactory to the city council, showing that all taxes and special assessments due on the property involved or to be subdivided have been paid. 
(Code 1980, App. A, § 4)  
Sec. 5. - The final plat. 
The final plat submitted to the city council shall be in strict accordance with the approved tentative plat and shall be drawn on tracing cloth to a scale of not smaller than one hundred (100) feet to one (1) inch. One blueprint of the said final plat shall accompany the same. The final plat shall meet the following requirements: 
Name: The name of the proposed subdivision shall be shown. 
Date: The date of preparation and a proper north sign shall be shown. 
Survey: A correct survey of the property proposed to be platted, shall be shown. 
Legal description: A legal description of the property shall be given which includes reference to the section, township and range. Government section lines and corners, half section lines, the location and dimension of all streets (with their names), alleys and all other lands to be dedicated to the public use; and the lines and dimension of all abutting roads and streets (with their names) and alleys shall also be shown. 
Street names: All streets shall be named in conformity with the street naming plan of the City of Calumet City or with adjoining streets. In the case of diverging streets the name shall be repeated. Extension of existing streets shall carry the name of the existing street. 
Lot lines: All lot lines shall be shown, lots and blocks numbered or lettered, building lines and easements shall be shown and determined by measurements. 
Dimensions: All necessary dimensions, both linear and angular shall be shown. Linear dimensions shall be shown in feet and decimals of a foot and all deflecting angles, radii, areas and central angles of all corners along the property lines of each street shall be shown. 
Monuments: The description and location of all survey monuments erected in the subdivision shall be shown. Such monuments shall be either iron pipe not less than one (1) inch in diameter and thirty (30) inches long, of stone or concrete not less than four (4) inches in diameter and twenty-four (24) inches long. Permanent monuments shall be erected at all street corners, at all points where street lines intersect and exterior boundaries of the subdivision and at angle points and points of curve in each street. 
Street connections: Provisions shall be made for the direct connections with the existing streets in adjoining subdivisions. 
Dedication of lands for public use: The plat shall have lettered upon it a statement of dedication properly conveying all lands dedicated for such public uses as streets, public schools, parks, playgrounds or any other public use or uses, and there shall be attached to the plat a certificate of title certifying the ownership of all such lands to be so dedicated by the said plat. 
Certificates: All proper certificates, seals and signatures as required by law shall be shown. 
Street widths: Section line streets shall be not less than one hundred (100) feet wide, half section line streets not less than eighty (80) feet wide and secondary and residential streets not less than sixty-six (66) feet wide. 
Alleys: Where alleys are shown and provided they shall be not less than twenty (20) feet wide. 
Easements: Where no alleys are platted easements not less than ten (10) feet wide shall be provided across the rear of all lots for any and all public utilities. The easements shall be so laid out that a proper continuity may be had for such utilities from block to block. 
Setback lines: Setback lines shall be shown not less than twenty-five (25) feet from the street lines, in the residential district, as required in the Zoning Regulations of the city. If however a greater setback is required by other ordinances of the city, such greater setback requirements shall be shown. 
Block sizes: No blocks shall be more than twelve hundred (1,200) feet long nor less than two hundred fifty (250) feet wide. 
Streets along railroads: Streets platted along railroad rights-of-way shall be so laid out that the nearest street line of such street shall be not less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet from the nearest line of such railroad right-of-way. The intervening area shall be dedicated for park purposes wherever practicable, as determined by the city council. 
Lot widths: The minimum width of lots shall be fifty (50) feet throughout the entire length of the lot, and on all lots except corner lots; said corner lots shall be sixty (60) feet throughout the entire length of the lot and in cases where no alleys are provided, no building shall be built on said lots unless there is sufficient room for a side drive. 
Lot depths: The minimum depth of lots shall be one hundred twenty-five (125) feet. No lots with double frontage "Through Lots" shall be platted. 
Lot areas: The lot areas in the various residential, single family, two (2) family and three (3) to six (6) family, office, residential and business districts shall conform to the requirements of the Zoning Regulations of the City of Calumet City. Every single family detached dwelling hereafter erected shall be located on a lot having an area of not less than six thousand (6,000) square feet, with a width at the established building line of not less than fifty (50) feet. 
Large lots: Owners wishing to subdivide into tracts which are larger than normal lots shall plat the same of such shape and dimensions that the future streets of the district involved may be laid out along the lot lines. 
Dwelling standards: 
(1)  Every single family detached dwelling of one story hereafter erected in any R-1 district shall contain an area of not less than one thousand three hundred fifty (1,350) square feet of habitable space measured from exterior wall to exterior wall as described in the adopted BOCA Codes of Calumet City. 
(2)  Every single family detached dwelling of more than one story hereafter erected in any R-1 district shall contain an area of not less than one thousand six hundred fifty (1,650) square feet of habitable space measured from exterior wall to exterior wall as described in the adopted BOCA Codes of Calumet City. 
(Code 1980, App. A, § 5; Ord. No. 93-10, §§ 1—3, 4-8-1993)  
Sec. 6. - Improvement of roadways. 
The subdivider shall at his own expense improve all streets with a dustproof surfaced roadway in conformity with specifications laid down or approved from time to time by the mayor and the city council. 
(Code 1980, App. A, § 6)  
Sec. 7. - Additional improvements required for subdivisions. 
The subdivider of any proposed subdivision within the corporate limits of Calumet City shall also provide throughout, the entire subdivision, at his own expense, the following public improvements, in conformity with specifications laid down or approved from time to time by the mayor and city council: 
Sidewalks: Sidewalks must be provided throughout the entire subdivision. 
Street name signs: Street name signs of such a type approved by the city council shall be provided and installed at all street intersections. 
Water mains: The water system of the City of Calumet City shall be extended throughout the entire subdivision in such manner that every lot in such subdivision may be serviced by means of a house connection within its own frontage. 
Fire hydrants: Fire hydrants shall be installed throughout the entire subdivision at intervals of not exceeding four hundred (400) feet. All fire hydrants shall have a five (5) inch barrel and shall be provided with two (2) two and one-half (2½) inch hose connections and one (1) steamer connection. Each fire hydrant shall be provided with an auxiliary valve. 
Sanitary sewer: A complete system of sanitary sewers shall be constructed throughout the entire subdivision in such manner as to render the same accessible to every lot within its own frontage. 
Street lights: Street lights shall be installed to provide one at every corner, unless one already exists on a corner, and at least one at intervals not to exceed three hundred (300) feet, the type and design to be approved by the city council. 
(Code 1980, App. A, § 7)  
Sec. 8. - Public improvements to be approved by the city engineer. 
All plans, specifications and contracts for public improvements required by this ordinance, such as street paving, sidewalks, alleys, gutter, street signs, water system and sewer systems shall be submitted to the city engineer and approved by him if they conform to this ordinance and the specifications adopted pursuant hereto. No construction work shall be commenced until such plans, specifications and contracts are so approved by the city engineer. 
(Code 1980, App. A, § 8)  
Sec. 9. - Inspection at subdivider's expense. 
All public improvements to be made under the provisions of this ordinance shall be inspected during the course of construction by a competent inspector appointed by the city council. The salary and other costs in connection with this inspection shall be paid by the subdivider. 
(Code 1980, App. A, § 9)  
Sec. 10. - Variations. 
The city council may approve variations from the requirements of this ordinance in specific cases which do not affect the general plan or spirit of the ordinance, providing that such variations are recommended by the plan commission. 
(Code 1980, App. A, § 10)  
Sec. 11. - Final approval by the city council and approval fee. 
When the city council is satisfied with the final plat and with all improvements, conditions and documents, pertaining to the subdivision platted thereon, the city council shall by resolution approve the said plat and authorize and direct the mayor of the City of Calumet City to affix the city stamp of approval and to sign the plat for and in the name of the City of Calumet City. Said approval shall be attested by the city clerk and sealed with the corporate seal of the City of Calumet City. No improvement provided for by the ordinance shall be made until the final plat has been approved by the mayor and city council as herein provided. The subdivider shall pay an approval fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each subdivision approved by the city council. 
(Code 1980, App. A, § 11)  
Sec. 12. - Violation penalty. 
(a)  Any person, firm or corporation who constructs any public improvement or portion thereof in violation of the provisions of this ordinance shall be, upon conviction, fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Code 1980, App. A, § 12)  
Sec. 13. - When effective. 
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and publication according to law. 
(Code 1980, App. A, § 13) 
Passed this 12th day of May 1960. 
_____
City Clerk 
Approved this 12th day of May 1960. 
_____
Mayor 
Attest: 
_____
City Clerk  
APPENDIX B - ZONING[1] 
An Ordinance to Classify, Regulate and Restrict the Location of Trades and Industries and the Location of Buildings Designed for the Specified Industrial, Commercial, Residential and Other Uses and to Regulate and Limit the Height and Bulk of Buildings Hereafter Erected; to Regulate and Determine the Area of Yards, Courts and Other Open Spaces Within and Surrounding Such Buildings and to Establish the Boundaries of Districts for the Said Purposes and Prescribing Penalties for the Violation of its Provisions, and for Creating a Board of Appeals. 
Now, Therefore, Be and It Is Hereby Ordained by the City Council of Calumet City, Illinois: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Appendix B sets out the zoning ordinance, enacted on Jan. 13, 1983, by Ord. No. 83-1, as the same was originally enacted by the city. Amendments will be cited in a history note following the affected section. The editor has incorporated a uniform printing style for purposes of maintaining Code format; however, no substantive changes have been made. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; community development, ch. 18; environment, ch. 26; floods, ch. 34; transitional living residences, § 42-1; sexually oriented entertainment businesses, § 54-1941 et seq.; mobile home parks, ch. 58; planning, ch. 66; signs, ch. 70; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78; telecommunications, ch. 86; ordinances related to zoning, app. C. 
 
Sec. I. - Title. 
This ordinance shall be known, referred to and recited as "The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Calumet City." 
(Code 1980, App. B, § I)  
Sec. II. - Intent and purpose. 
The prime tool of planning is land use control, most commonly referred to as zoning. The purposes of zoning are many, but foremost among these purposes are: 
To promote and protect the public health, safety, morals, comfort and general welfare of the people; 
To divide the City of Calumet City into zones or districts restricting and regulating therein the location, erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration and use of buildings, structures, and land for residence, business manufacturing and other specified uses; 
To provide adequate light, air, privacy and conveniences of access to property; 
To protect the character and the stability of the residential, business, and manufacturing areas within the City of Calumet City and to promote the orderly and beneficial development of such areas; 
To regulate the intensity of use of lot areas, and to determine the area of open spaces surrounding buildings, necessary to provide adequate light and air, and to protect the public health; 
To establish building lines and the location of buildings designed for residential, business and manufacturing, or other uses within such areas; 
To fix reasonable standards to which buildings or structures shall conform therein; 
To prohibit uses, buildings or structures incompatible with the character of development or intended uses within specified zoning districts; 
To prevent additions to or alteration or remodeling of existing buildings or structures in such a way as to avoid the restrictions and limitations imposed hereunder; 
To limit congestion in the public streets and protect the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare by providing for the off-street parking of motor vehicles and the loading and unloading of commercial vehicles; 
To protect against fire, explosion, noxious fumes and other hazards in the interest of the public health, safety, comfort and general welfare; 
To prevent the overcrowding of land and undue concentration of structures, so far as is possible and appropriate in each district, by regulating the use and bulk of buildings in relation to the land surrounding them; 
To conserve the taxable value of land and buildings throughout the City of Calumet City; 
To provide for the elimination of nonconforming uses of land, buildings and structures which are adversely affecting the character and value of desirable development in each district. 
And to define and limit the powers and duties of the administrative officers and bodies as provided herein. 
(Code 1980, App. B, § II)  
Sec. III. - Rules and definitions. 
In the construction of this ordinance, the rules and definitions contained in this section shall be observed and applies, except when the context herein clearly indicated otherwise. 
3.1 Rules. 
The present tense includes the future the present. 
The singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular. 
The word building includes the word structure. 
The word shall is mandatory, and the word may is permissive. 
3.2 Definitions. 
Abutting: To have a common property line or district line. 
Accessory: A use, building, structure, or part of a building or structure which: 
(1)  Is subordinate to and serves the principal building or structure or principal use; 
(2)  Is subordinate in area, extent, or purpose to the principal building or structure or principal use served; 
(3)  Contributes to the comfort, convenience, or necessity of occupants of the principal building or principal use; and 
(4)  Is located on the same lot as the principal building or structure or principal use served, with the exception of such accessory off-street parking facilities as are permitted to locate elsewhere than on the same lot as the building or use served. 
Adjacent: To lie near or close to; in the neighborhood or vicinity of. 
Adjoining: Touching or contiguous, as distinguished from lying near or adjacent. 
Agriculture: The use for the pursuit of agriculture of a parcel of land twenty (20) acres or more in area under unified ownership or control and when within the perimeter of such a parcel there is no intervening street or land in other ownership or control. The pursuit of agriculture includes farming, dairying, pasturage, agriculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, and animal and poultry husbandry and accessory uses customarily incidental to normal agricultural activities, but not including the commercial specialization of any of the above uses. 
Airport: Any area of land which is used, or intended, for the landing and takeoff of aircraft, and any appurtenant areas which are used or intended for use as airport buildings or other airport structures or rights-of-way, together with all airport buildings and structures located thereon. 
Alley: Any right-of-way, with a width of not less than twelve (12) feet or more than twenty-four (24) feet, which affords secondary means of vehicular access to abutting properties. A street shall not be considered an alley. 
Alteration: Any change in size, shape, occupancy, or use of a building or structure. 
Animal hospital: A building or portion thereof designed or used for the care, observation, or treatment of domestic animals. 
Automobile laundry: A building or portion thereof containing facilities for washing more than two (2) motor vehicles, using production-line methods. 
Automobile service station: A place where gasoline, stored only in underground tanks, kerosene, lubricating oil or grease, for operation of automobiles, are offered for sale directly to the public, on the premises, and including minor accessories and the servicing of automobiles; but not including major automobile repairs; and including washing of automobiles where no chain conveyor, blower or steam cleaning device is employed. When the dispensing, sale or offering for sale of motor fuels or oil is incidental to the conduct of a public garage, the premises shall be classified as a public garage. Automobile service stations shall not include sale or storage of automobiles or trailers (new or used). 
Automobile wrecking yard: See "junk yard." 
Awning: A roof-like mechanism, retractable in operation, which project from the wall of a building. 
Basement: A story having part, but not more than one-half (½) of its floor to clear ceiling height below grade. When a basement is used for storage, or garages for use of occupants of the building, or other facilities common for the operation and maintenance of the entire building, it shall not be counted as a story. 
Block: A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and public parks, other permanent open areas, or other lines of demarcation. A block may be located in part beyond the boundary lines of the corporate limits of the City of Calumet City. 
Building: Any structure designed or built for the support, enclosure, shelter, or protection of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind, and which is permanently affixed to the land. When any portion thereof is completely separated from every other portion by a party wall, then such portion shall be deemed to be a separate building. 
[ Building commissioner: The zoning administrator.] 
Building, completely enclosed: A building separated on all sides from the adjoining open spaces by a permanent roof and by exterior walls, pierced only by windows and normal entrance and exit doors, or when adjoining another building or buildings on one (1) or two (2) sides, a roof and such exterior wall adjoining open space and party wall adjoining the other building. 
Building, detached: A building surrounded by open space. 
Building, height of: The vertical distance from curb level to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or the mean height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip or gambrel roofs. Chimneys, towers, spires, elevator penthouses, cooling towers, and similar customary accessory structures and equipment, other than signs, shall not be included in calculating building height. 
Building, principal: A nonaccessory building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot. 
Building, temporary: Any building not designed to be permanently located at the place where it is or where it is intended to be, temporarily placed or affixed. 
Bulk: The term used to indicate the size and setback of buildings or structures, and the location of same with respect to one another, and includes the following: (a) size and height of buildings; (b) location of exterior walls at all levels in relation to lot lines, streets, or to other buildings; (c) floor area ratio; (d) all open space allocated to buildings; and (e) amount of lot area and lot width provided per dwelling unit. 
Business: An occupation, employment, or enterprise, which occupies time, attention, labor, and materials, or wherein merchandise is exhibited or sold, or where services are offered. 
Capacity in persons: The maximum number of persons that can avail themselves of the services or goods of an establishment or use at any one (1) time, with reasonable comfort and safety. 
Carport: A roofed automobile shelter, with one (1) or more open sides. 
Cellar: A story having more than one-half (½) of its floor to clear ceiling height below grade. A cellar is not included in computing the number of stories for the purpose of height measurement. 
Clinic, medical or dental: A medical center or medical clinic is an establishment where three or more licensed physicians, surgeons or dentists engage in the practice of medicine or dentistry, operating on a group or individual basis with pooled facilities, such as coordinated laboratory, X-ray and allied departments, and the diagnosis and treatment of humans, which need not, but may include a drug prescription counter (not a drug store) for the dispensing of drugs and pharmaceutical products to the patients of said physicians, surgeons and dentists. 
Closed cup flash point: The lowest temperature at which a combustible liquid under the most favorable condition will give off a flammable vapor which will burn momentarily. 
Club or lodge, private: A nonprofit association of persons who are bona fide members and where facilities are restricted to members and their guests. Food and alcoholic beverages may be served on its premises provided they are secondary and incidental to the principal use. 
Community residence: A single dwelling unit occupied on a relatively permanent basis in a family-life environment by a group of unrelated persons with disabilities, plus paid professional support staff provided by a sponsoring agency, either living with the residents on a twenty-four (24) hour basis, or present whenever residents with disabilities are present at the dwelling, and [which] complies with the zoning regulations for the district in which the site is located. 
Conforming building or structure: Any building or structure which: (a) complies with all the regulations of this ordinance or of any amendment thereto governing bulk of the district in which said building or structure is located; or (b) is designed or intended for a permitted use or conditional permitted use, as herein allowed in the district in which it is located. 
Contiguous: In actual contact. 
Court: An open unoccupied space other than a yard on the same lot with a building or group of buildings and which is bounded on two (2) or more sides by such building or buildings. 
Curb level: The established level of the curb pavement edging, along the front lot line, at a point directly in front of the center line of the building wall facing the front lot line, or if a curb pavement edging does not exist, the established level, at such point, along the center line of the roadway pavement, except in cases of exceptional differences in grade elevations between lot corners or within the area of a lot, as determined by the zoning administrator, the established curb level may be the average elevation of the finished ground grades at the building foundation walls even though such average elevation is higher than such established level of the curb pavement edging, or center line or roadway pavement. 
Disability: A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one (1) or more of the person's major life activities, impairs his ability to live independently, or a record of having such an impairment or being regarded as having such an impairment, but such term does not include current use of, nor addiction to, a controlled substance. 
Drive-in establishment: An establishment or part thereof in which are provided facilities where serving or consuming commodities or both are intended to occur in patron's automobiles parked on the premises, or where commodities are purchased by customers waiting in automobiles for consumption off the premises. 
Dwellings: A building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively for residential purposes, including single-family, two-family and multiple-family dwellings, but not including mobile homes or other trailers and lodging rooms in hotels, motels or lodging houses. 
Dwelling, attached: A dwelling joined to two (2) other dwellings by party walls, or vertical cavity walls, and above ground physically unifying horizontal structural elements. 
Dwelling, detached: A dwelling which is surrounded on all sides by open space on the same lot. 
Dwellings, multiple-family: A dwelling containing four (4) or more dwelling units. 
Dwellings, single-family: A dwelling containing one (1) dwelling unit only. 
Dwelling, semidetached: A dwelling joined to one (1) other dwelling by a party wall, or vertical cavity wall, and above ground physically unifying horizontal structural elements. 
Dwelling, two-family: A dwelling containing two (2) dwelling units only. 
Dwelling, three-family: A dwelling containing three (3) dwelling units only, one (1) above the other. 
Dwelling unit: One (1) or more rooms which are arranged, designed, or used as living quarters for a family, or for a community residence as a single house-keeping unit. A dwelling unit includes bathroom and kitchen facilities in addition to sleeping and living areas. 
Efficiency unit: A dwelling unit consisting of one (1) principal room, exclusive of bathroom, kitchen, hallway, closets, or dining alcove directly off the principal room. 
Electric distribution center: A terminal at which electric energy is received from the transmission system and is delivered to the distribution system only. 
Electric substation: A terminal at which electric energy is received from the transmission system and is delivered to other elements of the transmission system and, generally, to the local distribution system. 
Engineer, city: The official of the City of Calumet City, Illinois duly appointed and designated as the city engineer. 
Establishment, business: A building, structure, or land used in whole or in part as a place of business, the ownership or management of which is separate and distinct from the ownership or management of any other place of business located on the same or other lot. 
Fallout shelter: An accessory building and use which incorporates the fundamentals for fallout protection (shielding mass, ventilation, and space to live) and which is constructed of such materials, in such a manner, as to afford to the occupants substantial protection from radioactive fallout. 
Family: One (1) person or two (2) or more persons each related to the other by blood, marriage, or legal adoption, or a group of not more than five (5) persons not all so related, together with his or their domestic servants, maintaining a common household in a dwelling unit, but not including sororities, fraternities or similar organizations. 
Fence: A structure, or tree or shrub hedge which is a barrier and used as a boundary or means of protection or confinement. 
Fence, open: A fence including gates which has, for each one (1) foot wide segment extending over the entire length and height of the fence, fifty (50) percent of the surface area in open spaces which afford direct views through the fence. 
Fence, solid: A fence, including gates, which conceals from view from adjoining properties, streets, or alleys activities conducted behind it. 
Flood-crest elevation: The elevation equal to the flood-crest level of record designated by the city engineer or other governmental officials or body having jurisdiction as applicable to the property for which a zoning certificate is being requested. 
Floodplain area: That continuous area adjacent to a stream or stream bed, or any storm water retention area and its tributaries, whose elevation is equal to or lower than the flood-crest elevation including also land less than ten (10) acres in area having an elevation higher than flood-crest elevation and which is surrounded by land in a floodplain area, or land, less than five (5) acres in area, having an elevation equal to or higher than flood-crest elevation and bordered on three (3) sides by lane in a floodplain area. 
Floor area, for determining floor area ratio: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors including also the basement floor of a building, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls, or from the center line of walls separating two buildings. The floor area shall also include the horizontal areas on each floor devoted to: (a) elevator shafts and stairwells; (b) mechanical equipment, except if located on the roof, when either open or enclosed, i.e. bulkhead, water tanks, and cooling towers; (c) habitable attic space as permitted by the building code of the City of Calumet City, Illinois; (d) interior balconies and mezzanines; (e) enclosed porches; and (f) accessory uses. The floor area of structures used for bulk storage of materials, i.e. grain elevators, petroleum tanks shall also be included in the floor area and such floor area shall be determined on the basis of the height of such structures with one (1) floor for each ten (10) feet of structure height and if such structure measures less than ten (10) feet but not less than five (5) feet over such floor height intervals, it shall be construed to have an additional floor. 
The horizontal area in each floor of a building devoted to off-street parking and off-street loading facilities and the horizontal area of a cellar floor shall not be included in the floor area. 
Floor area, for determining off-street parking and off-street loading requirements: Floor area when prescribed as the basis of measurement for off-street parking spaces and off-street loading spaces for a use shall be the sum of the gross horizontal area of the several floors of the building, excluding the horizontal areas of basement and cellar floors that are devoted exclusively to uses accessory to the operation of the entire building. All horizontal dimensions shall be taken from the exterior of the walls. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, when determining the floor area for off-street parking spaces and off-street loading spaces for enclosed retail shopping malls, there shall also be excluded from the determination of floor area the horizontal areas of (a) all enclosed common areas devoted to the general public, such as (without limitation) pedestrian malls (including service and exit corridors, balconies, mezzanines, and enclosed porches); mall restrooms; and mall elevator shafts, stairwells and escalator areas, and (b) all other enclosed horizontal areas not devoted to retail sales (or uses accessory thereto), such as (without limitation) equipment and mechanical areas; heating, ventilating and air conditioning shafts and ducts; enclosed loading docks; and store elevator shafts, stairwells, and escalator areas. 
Floor area ratio: The numerical value obtained by dividing the floor area within a building or buildings on a lot by the area of such lot. The floor ratio requirements as designated for each district when multiplied by the lot area in square feet shall determine the maximum permissible floor area for the building or buildings on the lot. 
Free burning: The rate of combustion described by a material which burns actively and easily supports combustion. 
Frequency: Signifies the number of oscillations per second in a sound wave and is an index of the pitch of the resulting sound. 
Garage, private: An accessory building designed and used for the storage of motor vehicles owned and used by the occupants of the principal building to which it is accessory and in which no occupation or business for profit is carried on. Only one (1) of the motor vehicles may be a commercial vehicle which does not exceed two (2) tons capacity. A travel trailer or a boat that, in each case, is owned and used by the occupant of such principal building may be stored in a private garage. 
Garage, public: A building or portion thereof other than a private or storage garage, designed or used for equipping, servicing, or repairing motor vehicles. Hiring, selling, or storing of motor vehicles may be included. 
Garage, storage: A building or portion thereof, designed or used exclusively for storage of motor vehicles, and in which motor fuels and oils are not sold, except as herein regulated, and motor vehicles are not equipped, repaired, hired or sold. 
Gross density: Ratio between total number of dwelling units on a lot and total area in acres. 
Guest, permanent: A person who occupies or has the right to occupy a lodging house, hotel, apartment hotel, or motel accommodation as his domicile and place of permanent residence. 
Home occupation: A gainful occupation or profession conducted entirely within a dwelling unit by a member of the family residing in the dwelling unit. No article shall be sold or offered for sale on the premises except such as is produced by the occupation on the premises and no mechanical or electrical equipment shall be installed or maintained other than such as is incidental to domestic use. 
Hotel or motel: A building in which lodging rooms are provided and offered to the public for compensation and which is open to transient guests, in contradistinction to a lodging house, or a rooming house, and where customary hotel services such as maid, telephone, and secretarial, bellboy, and desk services and the use and upkeep of furniture, and furnishings and laundry of linens are provided. Facilities may include restaurants, cocktail lounges, and meeting rooms. Not more than fifty (50) percent of the accommodations in a hotel may be in dwelling units occupied or intended for occupancy by permanent guests. 
Hotel, apartment: A hotel in which more than fifty (50) percent but not more than eighty (80) percent of the accommodations are in dwelling units occupied or intended for occupancy by permanent guests. 
Intense burning: The rate of combustion described by a material that burns with a high degree of activity and is consumed rapidly. 
Institution: A building occupied by a nonprofit corporation wholly for public or semipublic use. 
Junkyard: An open area of land and any accessory buildings or structures thereon which are used primarily for buying, selling, exchanging, storing, baling, packing, disassembling, or handling waste or scrap materials, including vehicles, machinery, and equipment not in operable condition or parts thereof, and other metals, paper, rugs, rubber tires and bottles. 
Kennel: Any premises or portion thereof on which more than three (3) dogs, cats, or other household domestic animals over one (1) year of age are kept, or on which more than two (2) such animals are maintained, boarded, bred, or cared for, in return for remunerations, or are kept for the purpose of sale, except any premise five (5) acres or more in area used for a single-family detached dwelling, agricultural, institutional, or recreational use where more than three (3) such domestic animals owned by the occupant of the principal use are kept, bred, and offered for sale shall not be considered a kennel. 
Laboratory: See "research laboratory." 
Launderette: A business that provides coin-operated self-service type washing, drying, dry-cleaning, and ironing facilities, providing that: (a) not more than four (4) persons, including owners, are employed on the premises; and (b) no pick-up or delivery service is maintained. 
Livestock: Riding horses, ponies, donkeys, sheep, goats, and cattle. 
Loading berth: A space within the principal building or on the same lot as the principal building providing for the standing or unloading of trucks and with access to a street or alley. 
Lot: A parcel of land legally described as a distinct portion or piece of land of record. 
Lot area: The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side and rear lot lines of the lot. 
Lot, corner: A lot of which at least two (2) adjacent sides abut for their full lengths upon streets, provided that the interior angle at the intersection of such two sides is less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. A lot abutting upon a curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot if the tangents to the curve at its points of beginning within the lot or at the points of intersection of the side lot lines with the street line intersect at an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. The point of intersection of the street lot lines is the corner. In the case of a corner lot with a curved street line, the corner is that point on the street lot line nearest to the point of intersection of the tangents above described. 
Lot, interior: A lot that is not a corner lot. 
Lot line adjoining a street: A side lot line of a corner lot which abuts a street, a rear lot line of a through lot, or a front lot line of any lot. 
Lot line, front: The boundary of a lot which abuts a street. On a corner lot, the lot line having the shortest length abutting a street shall be the front lot line. 
Lot line, interior: A lot line which does not abut a street right-of-way line. 
Lot line, rear: That boundary of a lot which is most distant from and is, or is most nearly, parallel to the front lot line and in the case of an irregular, triangular, or goreshaped lot, a line ten (10) feet in length, within the lot, which is parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front lot line. 
Lot line, side: Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line. 
Lot lines: The property lines bounding the lot. 
Lot, reversed corner: A corner lot, the side lot line adjoining a street of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the first lot to its rear. 
Lot, through: A lot having a pair of opposite lot lines along two (2) more or less parallel streets, and which is not a corner lot. Both street lines shall be deemed front lot lines for the purpose of conforming with yard, other open area, and accessory building, structure, and use regulations of this ordinance. 
Lot width: The minimum horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot measured at the narrowest width within the buildable area. 
Lots of record: A single lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the recorder of deeds of Cook County, Illinois; or a single parcel of land, the deed of which has been recorded in the office of the recorder of deeds of Cook County, Illinois. 
Manufacturing establishment: An establishment, the principal use of which is manufacturing, fabricating, processing, assembly, repairing, storing, cleaning, servicing, or testing of materials, goods, or products. 
Marquee or canopy: A roof-like structure of a permanent nature which projects from the wall of a building. 
Micron: A unit of length, equal to one-thousandth part of one millimeter (.001 millimeter). 
Mobile home: A trailer designed and constructed for dwelling purposes. 
Moderate burning: Implies a rate of combustion described by material which supports combustion and is consumed slowly as it burns. 
Motor freight terminal: A building or area in which freight brought by motor truck or railroad is assembled or stored for routing in intra-state or interstate shipment by motor truck. 
Nameplate: A sign indicating the name and address of a building, or the name of an occupant thereof, and the practice of a permitted occupation therein. 
No-access strip: A strip of land along the rear lot line, adjoining a thoroughfare right-of-way, of a through lot, and which is designated on a recorded subdivision plat or property deed as land over which motor vehicular travel shall not be permitted. 
Nonconforming building or structure: Any building or structure lawfully established which: (a) does not comply with all the regulations of this ordinance or of any amendment hereto governing bulk of the district in which such building or structure is located; or (b) is designed or intended for a nonconforming use. 
Nonconforming use: Any building or structure and the use thereof or the use of land that does not conform with the regulations of this ordinance or any amendment hereto governing use in the district in which it is located but conformed with all of the codes, ordinances, and other legal requirements applicable at the time such building, or structure was erected, enlarged, or altered, and the use thereof or the use of land was established. 
Noxious matter or material: A material which is capable of causing injury to living organisms by chemical reaction or is capable of causing detrimental effect on the physical or economic well-being of individuals. 
Nursery, child-care, or nursery school: A building containing facilities for the part-time care of five (5) or more children of pre-elementary school are and may include in addition the dwelling unit of the family residing therein. 
Nursing home: A building containing facilities for the care and home of aged, chronically ill, infirm, or incurable persons, or a place of rest for those persons suffering bodily disorders, in which three (3) or more persons not members of the family residing on the premises are received, and provided with food, shelter, and care, but not including hospitals, clinics, or similar institutions devoted primarily to the diagnosis and treatment of disease or injury, maternity cases, or mental illness. 
Octave band: A method of dividing the range of sound frequencies into octaves in order to classify sound according to pitch. 
Odor: The minimum concentration of odorous matter in the air that can be detected as an odor. 
Off-street parking area or lot: Land which is improved and used or structure which is designed and used exclusively for the storage of passenger motor vehicles, either for accessory off-street parking spaces or commercial off-street parking spaces when permitted herein by district regulations. 
Open sales lot: Land used or occupied for the purpose of buying, selling, or renting merchandise stored or displayed out-of-doors prior to sale. Such merchandise includes automobiles, trucks, motor scooters, motorcycles, boats, or similar commodities. 
Parking space: An area, enclosed in a building or unenclosed, reserved for the parking of one (1) motor vehicle and which is accessible to and from a street or alley. 
Particular matter: Finely divided solid or liquid matter, other than water, which is released into the atmosphere. 
Party wall: An interior wall of adjoining buildings-extending from its footing below grade to the underside of the roof, which divides and is in common use by such adjoining buildings. 
Performance standard: A criteria established to control smoke and particulate matter, noise, odor, toxic, or noxious matter, vibration, fire and explosion hazards, glare of heat, or radiation hazards generated by or inherent in uses of land or buildings. 
Plan commission: The plan commission of the City of Calumet City, Illinois. 
Planned unit development: A parcel or tract of land having an area as herein required in district regulations, initially under unified ownership or control, and which is or is intended to be the site for two (2) or more principal buildings for one (1) or more principal uses, or one (1) principal building for two (2) or more principal uses and within which allowable exceptions in the district regulations are specified. 
Pyrophoric dust: A dust in a finely divided state that is spontaneously combustible in air. 
Radiation hazards: The deleterious and harmful effects of all ionizing radiation, which shall include all radiation capable of producing ions in their passage through matter. Such radiations shall include, but are not limited to, electromagnetic radiations such as X-rays, and gamma rays and particulate radiations such as electrons or beta particles, protons, neutrons, and alpha particles. 
Research laboratory: A building or group of buildings, in which are located facilities for scientific research, investigation, testing, or experimentation, but not facilities for the manufacture or sale of products, except as incidental to the main purpose of the laboratory. 
Reservoir parking spaces: Those off-street parking spaces allocated for temporary standing of automobiles awaiting entrances to a particular establishment. 
Ringelmann chart: The chart described in the U.S. Bureau of Mines information Circular 6888, on which are illustrated graduated shades of gray for use in estimating the light-obscuring capacity of smoke-smoke density. 
Ringelmann Number: The number of the area on the Ringelmann Chart that coincides most nearly with the visual density of emission or the light-obscuring capacity of smoke. 
Roadway: That portion of a street which is used or intended to be used for the travel of motor vehicles. 
Setback: The minimum horizontal distance between a street line and the nearest wall of a building, or side of a structure facing such street line, or edge of the area of operation of a principal use when no building or structure is involved. 
Setback, established: When forty (40) percent or more of the lots fronting on one (1) side of a street within a block are improved, the existing setbacks of such improved lots shall be the established setbacks and the setbacks for the remainder of the lots along such street frontage shall be related, as herein regulated, to the established setbacks, except on any lot fronting a thoroughfare as designated on the official map, the established setbacks shall be the yard line of a yard adjoining a street which is set back not less than the required depth as herein regulated, from the established center line of such thoroughfare. 
Sign: A name, identification, description, illustration, display or device which is affixed to, painted or represented upon a building, structure, or land and which directs attention to a product, place, activity, person, institution, or business. For purpose of definition, a sign structure may be single face or double face. However, a sign shall not include any display of any court, public or official notice, nor shall it include the flag, emblem, insignia of a nation, political unit, school, religious or charitable institution or organization. A sign shall also include a permanent sign located within an enclosed building in such a manner as to be viewed or intended or view primarily from the exterior of the building. 
Sign, advertising: A structure including a billboard on which is portrayed information which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, or entertainment, or other activity not necessarily related to uses permitted on the premises upon which the sign structure is located. 
Sign, business: A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, entertainment, or other activity conducted upon the premises upon which such sign is located. 
Sign, flashing: An illuminated sign on which the artificial light is not maintained constant or stationary in intensity or color at all times when such sign is in use. For the purpose of this ordinance, a revolving sign, or any advertising device which attracts attention by moving parts, operated by mechanical equipment or movement is caused by natural sources, whether or not illuminated with artificial lighting, shall be considered a flashing sign. 
Sign, ground: A sign which is supported by one (1) or more uprights or braces in or upon the ground. 
Sign, projecting: A sign which is affixed to any building wall or structure and extends beyond the building wall or parts thereof or structure. 
Sign, roof: A sign erected, constructed, and maintained above the roof of any building. 
Sign, wall: A sign which is affixed to an exterior wall of any building, when such sign shall project not more than twelve (12) inches from the building wall or parts thereof. 
Single-ownership: A lot in single-ownership is one where the owner does not own adjoining vacant property. 
Smoke: The visible discharge from a chimney, stack, vent, exhaust, or combustion process which is made up of particulate matter. 
Smoke unit: The number obtained when the smoke density in the Ringelmann Number is multiplied by the time of emission in minutes. For the purpose of this calculation: (a) a Ringelmann density reading shall be made at least one (1) a minute during the period of observation; (b) each reading is then multiplied by the time in minutes during which it is observed; and (c) the various products are then added together to give the total number of smoke units observed during the entire observation period. 
Sound level: The intensity of sound of an operation or use as measured in decibels. 
Sound level meter: An instrument standardized by the American Standards Association for measurement of the intensity of sound. 
Story: That portion of a building, other than a cellar, included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there be no floor above it, the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. The floor of a story may have split levels provided that there are not more than four (4) feet differences in elevation between the different levels of the floor. A basement shall be counted as a story and a mezzanine floor shall be counted as a story when it covers over one-third ( 1/3 ) the area of the floor next below it, or if the vertical distance from the floor next below it to the floor next above it is twenty-four (24) feet or more. 
Street: A public or private right-of-way or easement which is designated as a permanent right-of-way or easement for common use as the primary means of vehicular access to properties abutting on it. 
Street frontage: All of the property fronting on one (1) side of a street between two (2) intersecting streets, or in the case of a dead-end street, all of the property along one (1) side of the street between an intersecting street and the end of such dead-end street. 
Street line: The street right-of-way line abutting a property line of a lot. 
Structure: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires more or less permanent location on the ground or attached to something having a permanent location on the ground, including, but without limiting, the generality of the foregoing, signs, back stops for tennis courts, and pergolas. 
Structural alteration: Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders, or any substantial change in the roof or in the exterior walls, excepting such repair or replacement as may be required for the safety of the building. 
Three-components measuring system: Instruments which measure simultaneously earthborne vibrations in horizontal and vertical planes. 
Toxic matter or material: Those materials which are capable of causing injury to living organisms by chemical means. 
Trailer: Any vehicle or portable structure constructed so as to permit occupancy thereof for lodging or dwelling purposes or for the use as an accessory building or structure in the conduct of business, trade, or occupation, and which may be used as a conveyance on streets, and highways, by its own or other motive power. 
Use: The purpose or activity for which the land, and buildings and structures thereon, is designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained, and shall include any manner of performance of such activity with respect to the performance of such activity with respect to the performance standards of this ordinance. 
Use, accessory: See "accessory." 
Use, lawful: The use of any building, structure, or land that conforms with all of the regulations of this ordinance or any amendment hereto and which conforms with all of the codes, ordinances, and other legal requirements, as existing at the time of the enactment of this ordinance or any amendment thereto, for the structure or land that is being examined. 
Use, permitted: Any use which is or may be lawfully established in a particular district or districts, provided it conforms with all requirements, regulations, and when applicable, performance standards of this ordinance for the district in which such use is located. 
Use, principal: The dominant use of land or buildings as distinguished from a subordinate or accessory use. 
Use, special permitted: A use that has operational, physical, and other characteristics that may be different from those of the predominant permitted uses in a district, but which is a use that compliments or is otherwise compatible with intended overall development with a district. Compliance with special standards not necessarily applicable to other permitted or special permitted uses in the district shall be required for a special permitted use, as herein regulated in this ordinance. 
Vehicle, motor: Any passenger vehicle, truck, truck-trailer, or semitrailer propelled or drawn by mechanical power. 
Vending machine: A machine for dispensing merchandise or services designed to be operated by the customer. 
Vibration: The periodic displacement, measured in inches, of earth designated frequency, cycles per second. 
Yard: An open area on a lot which is unobstructed from its lowest level to the sky, except as otherwise provided in this ordinance. 
Yard adjoining a street, side: A yard which is bounded by the front yard line, side yard adjoining a street line, rear yard line and side lot line adjoining a street. 
Yard, front: A yard which is bounded by the side lot lines, front lot lines, and the front yard line or the established setback line. 
Yard, interior side: A side yard which adjoins another lot or an alley separating such side yard from another lot. 
Yard line: A line in a lot that is parallel to the lot line along which the applicable yard extends and which is not nearer to such lot line at any point than the required depth or width of the applicable yard. A building, structure, or other obstruction shall not encroach into the area between the yard line and such adjacent lot line, except for such permitted obstructions in yards as are set forth in this ordinance. 
Yard, rear: A yard which is bounded by side lot lines, rear lot lines, and the rear yard line. 
Yard, side: A yard which is bounded by the rear yard line, front yard line, side yard line and side lot line. 
Yard, transitional means a yard designed with certain screening improvements to serve as a buffer between potentially incompatible land-uses. 
Zoning administrator: The building commissioner shall be the zoning administrator. 
Zoning board of appeals: The zoning board of appeals of the City of Calumet City. 
Zoning districts: The districts into which the City of Calumet City, Illinois, has been divided as set forth on the zoning district map, for the purposes of zoning regulations and requirements. 
Zoning lot: A single tract of land located within a single block which (at the time of filing for a building permit) is designated by its owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed or built upon as a unit, under single ownership or control. Therefore, a "zoning lot" may or may not coincide with a lot of record. 
(Code 1980, App. B, § III; Ord. No. 91-7, §§ 1, 2, 3-14-1991; Ord. No. 93-4, § 1b., 2-25-1993; Ord. No. 96-30, § 1(Exh. A), 5-23-1996)  
Sec. IV. - General provisions. 
4.1 Interpretation. 
Minimum requirements. The provisions herein shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals, and welfare. 
Relationship with other laws. Where the conditions imposed by any provision herein upon the use of land or buildings or upon the bulk of buildings are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other provision herein or any other law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive or which impose higher standards or requirements shall govern. 
Effect on existing agreements. The ordinance is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant, or any other private agreement provided that where the regulations of the ordinance are more restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements than such easement, covenants, or other private agreements, the requirements herein shall govern. 
4.2 Scope of regulations. 
Changes in structures or use. Except as may otherwise be provided in Section V, all buildings erected hereafter, all uses of land or buildings established hereafter, all structural alterations or relocation of existing buildings occurring hereafter, and all enlargements of or additions to existing uses occurring hereafter shall be subject to all regulations herein which are applicable to the zoning districts in which such buildings, uses or land shall be located. 
Nonconforming buildings, structures and uses. Any lawful building, structure or use existing at the time of the enactment of the zoning ordinance may be continued, even though such building, structure or use does not conform to the provisions herein for the district in which it is located, and whenever a district shall be changed hereafter, the then existing lawful use may be continued, subject to the provisions of Section XIV, nonconforming buildings, structures and uses. 
Building permits. Where a building permit for a building or structure has been issued in accordance with law prior to the effective date of the ordinance, and provided that construction is begun within ninety (90) days of such effective date and diligently prosecuted to completion, said building or structure may be completed in accordance with the approved plans on the basis of which the building permit was issued, and further may upon completion be occupied under a certificate of occupancy by the use for which originally designated, subject thereafter to the provisions of Section XIV, nonconforming buildings, structures and uses. 
Signs. It shall be unlawful to place any outdoor advertising sign or display within a residential district classified as R-1 one-family residence district, R-2 two-family and three-family residence district and R-3 multiple family residence district as defined in Section VII of this ordinance except as permitted by sections 23-36 through 23-39 of this Code and section 15-584 of this Code. 
4.3 Use and bulk regulations. 
Use. No building, structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or part thereof, or other structure, shall be erected, raised, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged or altered except in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located. 
Bulk. All new buildings and structures shall conform to the building regulations established herein for the district in which each building shall be located, except that parapet walls, chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, stacks and necessary mechanical appurtenances shall be permitted to exceed the maximum height provisions when erected in accordance with all other ordinances of the City of Calumet City. 
4.4 Lot coverage. 
Maintenance of yards, courts and other open spaces. The maintenance of yards, courts and other open spaces and minimum lot area legally required for a building shall be a continuing obligation of the owner of such building is in existence. Furthermore, no legally required yards, courts or other open space or minimum lot area allocated to any building shall, by virtue of change of ownership or for any other reason, be used to satisfy yard, court, other open space or minimum lot area requirements for any other building. 
Division of zoning lots. No improved zoning lot shall hereafter be divided into two (2) or more zoning lots unless all improved zoning lots resulting from each such division shall conform with all the applicable bulk regulations of the zoning district in which the property is located. 
Location of required open space. All yards, courts and other open spaces allocated to a building or dwelling group shall be located on the same zoning lot as such building or dwelling group. 
Required yards for existing buildings. No yards now or hereafter provided for a building existing on the effective date of the zoning ordinance shall subsequently be reduced below, or further reduced below if already less than, the minimum yard requirements of the ordinance for equivalent new construction. 
Permitted accessory buildings, structures and uses. The following accessory buildings, structures, and uses are permitted and may be obstructions in yards and courts as follows: 
_____
Note: 
F  Denotes permitted obstruction in front yards and side yards adjoining streets 
S  Denotes permitted obstruction in interior side yards 
R  Denotes permitted obstruction in rear yards 
C  Denotes permitted obstruction in open courts 
(a) 	Awnings or canopies, which may project not more than three (3) feet into a required yard or court. 	F 	S 	R 	C 
(b) 	Arbors or trellises, and where trellises are attached to the principal building they may also project into front yards, side yards, and courts. 			R 	C 
(c) 	Air conditioning equipment shelters. 			R 	C 
(d) 	Architectural entrance structures on a lot not less than two (2) acres in area or at entrance roadways into subdivisions containing one hundred (100) or more lots. 	F 	S 	R 	
(e) 	Balconies. 			R 	C 
(f) 	Bay windows, projecting not more than three (3) feet into a yard. 	F 		R 	
(g) 	Chimneys, attached, projecting not more than twenty-four (24) inches into a yard or court. 	F 	S 	R 	C 
(h) 	Eaves and gutters on principal buildings or attached accessory buildings, projecting not more than four (4) feet into a front and rear yard not more than twenty-four (24) inches into a side yard or court. 	F 	S 	R 	C 
(i) 	Fallout shelters, attached or detached, when conforming also with other codes and ordinances of the city. 			R 	
(j) 	Fences, open, not more than six (6) feet in height, except in business and manufacturing districts, and those enclosing the property of schools, and other public and quasi-public uses. 	F 	S 	R 	
(k) 	Fences, solid, not more than seven (7) feet in height in business districts, not more than eight (8) feet in manufacturing districts, and residence districts, solid fences not more than six (6) feet in height. 		S 	R 	
(l) 	Fire escapes, open or enclosed, or fire towers may project into a required front yard or side yard adjoining a street not more than five (5) feet and into a required interior side yard or court not more than three and one half (3½) feet. 	F 	S 	R 	C 
(m) 	Flagpoles. 	F 	S 	R 	C 
(n) 	Garages or carports, attached or detached. 			R 	
(o) 	Growing of farm and garden crops in the open. 			R 	
(p) 	Lawn furniture, such as benches, sun dials, bird baths, and similar architectural features. 	F 	S 	R 	C 
(q) 	Open off-street loading spaces. 		S 	R 	C 
(r) 	Open off-street parking spaces which shall be located not less than three (3) feet from a lot line, or not less than ten (10) feet from a building wall in courts, or greater distance if required herein for a specific use, and in the manufacturing districts and all business districts, except a B-1 district, open off-street parking spaces may be in a required front yard or side yard adjoining a street as hereinafter regulated. 				
(s) 	Ornamental light standards. 	F 	S 	R 	C 
(t) 	Playground and laundry-drying equipment. 			R 	C 
(u) 	Playhouses and open-sided summer houses. 			R 	
(v) 	Sheds and storage buildings for garden equipment and household items as accessory to dwellings and buildings and structures customarily incidental to the pursuit of agriculture. 			R 	
(w) 	Signs and nameplates as herein regulated. 	F 	S 	R 	C 
(x) 	Sills, belt courses, cornices, and ornamental features of the principal building, projecting not more than eighteen (18) inches into a yard or court. 	F 	S 	R 	C 
(y) 	Steps, open, necessary for access to and from the dwelling or an accessory building, steps as access to the lot from the street, and in gardens or terraces, provided there are no more than eight (8) steps for access to and from a principal or accessory building. 	F 	S 	R 	C 
(z) 	Swimming pools, private, when conforming also with other codes or ordinances of the city. 			R 	
(aa) 	Terraces, patios, and outdoor fireplaces. 			R 	
(bb) 	Tennis courts, private. 			R 	
(cc) 	Trees, shrubs, and flowers. 	F 	S 	R 	C 
(dd) 	Other accessory buildings, structures, and uses as herein permitted in district regulations as accessory to a specific permitted use. 				
(ee) 	On corner lots within that part of a yard, court, or other open area located within a radius of twenty-five (25) feet from the point of intersection of the two (2) street right-of-way lines forming the lot corner, no buildings, structures, or shrubs as herein permitted as obstructions in front or side yards adjoining a street shall be erected, altered, or planted which have a height more than thirty (30) inches above the ground grade in this area, and trees planted in such areas shall be maintained in a manner that trees shall not have branches lower than eight (8) feet above the ground grade elevation in this area. 				
 
_____
Vision clearance, corner lots. No building or structure hereafter erected and no planting or other obstruction to the vision of drivers of motor vehicles shall be located: 
(1)  In any residential districts, exceeding a height of three (3) feet above the street grade within twelve (12) feet of the intersecting right-of-way lines bordering corner lots; and 
(2)  In any business or manufacturing district, within eight (8) feet of the intersecting right-of-way lines bordering a corner lot, provided that this regulation shall not apply to that part of a building above the first floor. 
4.5 Lot area and dimension. 
Contiguous parcels. When two (2) or more parcels of land, each of which lacks adequate area and dimension to qualify for a permitted use under the requirements of the use district in which they are located, are contiguous and are held in one (1) ownership, they shall be used as one (1) zoning lot for such use. 
Lots of parcels of land of record. Any single lot or parcel of land, held in one (1) ownership, which was of record at the time of adoption of the ordinance, that does not meet the requirements for minimum lot width and area, may be utilized for a permitted use, provided that yards, courts or useable open space are not less than seventy-five (75) percent of the minimum required dimensions and areas. 
4.6 Access to public street. 
Except as otherwise provided for herein for planned developments, every principal building or structure shall be constructed or erected upon a lot or parcel of land which abuts upon a public street unless a permanent easement of access to a public street was of record prior to the adoption of the ordinance. 
4.7 Number of buildings on a zoning lot. 
Except in the case of a planned development, not more than one (1) principal detached residential building shall be located on a residential zoning lot, nor shall a principal detached residential building be located on the same zoning lot with any other principal building. 
4.8 Rezoning of public and semipublic areas. 
An area indicated on the zoning map as a public park, recreation area, public school site, cemetery, or other similar open space, shall not be used for any other purpose than that designated; and when the use of the area is discontinued, it shall automatically be zoned to the most restricted adjoining district until appropriate zoning is authorized by the city council within three (3) months after the date of application filed for rezoning. 
4.9 Accessory buildings. 
Location. When a side yard is required, no part of an accessory building shall be located closer than three (3) feet to the side lot line along such side yard. When a rear yard is required, no part of an accessory building shall be located closer than three (3) feet to the rear lot line or to those portions of the side lot lines abutting such required rear yard, except where there is an accessory building with doors opening on to an alley such building shall not be located closer than five (5) feet to the rear lot line. In a residential district, no detached accessory building shall be closer than ten (10) feet to the principal building. 
Time of construction. No accessory building or structure shall be constructed on any lot prior to the start of construction of the principal building to which it is accessory. 
Height of accessory buildings in required rear yards. No accessory building or portion thereof located in a required rear yard shall exceed thirteen (13) feet in height. 
On reversed corner lots. On a reversed corner lot in a residential district and with fifteen (15) feet of an adjacent property to the rear in a residential district, no accessory building or portion thereof located in a required rear yard shall be closer to the side lot line abutting the street than a distance equal to sixty (60) percent of the least depth which would be required hereunder for the front yard on such adjacent property to the rear. Further, in the above instance, no such accessory building shall be located within five (5) feet of any part of a rear lot line which coincides with a side lot line or portion thereof of property in a residential district. 
4.10 Performance standards. 
The performance standards for the M-1 manufacturing district shall also apply to all residential, business and office research districts. 
4.11 Existing special uses. 
Where a use is classified as a special use and exists as a permitted use at the date of the adoption of the ordinance, it shall be considered a legal use, without further action of the city council, the zoning administrator or the board of appeals. 
4.12 Uses not specifically permitted in districts. 
When a use is not specifically listed in the sections devoted to permitted uses, it shall be assumed that such uses are hereby expressly prohibited unless by application and authorization as provided for under Special Uses, it is determined that said use is similar to and not more objectionable than uses listed. Such uses may then be permitted. 
4.13 Satellite receiving antenna. 
An accessory structure whose purpose is to receive communication or other signals from orbiting satellites or other extraterrestrial sources, and which consist of three (3) main components: the antenna itself (often called a dish); a lot-noise amplifier (LNA) and a receiver. The antenna and the LNA are located outdoors and are connected by coaxial cable to the receiver, which is placed indoors. The height of the antenna shall be measured vertically from the highest point of the signal-receiving apparatus, when positioned for operation, to the bottom of the base which supports the antenna. 
4.14 Satellite receiving antenna construction. 
(a)  Before proceeding with the construction, alteration or repair of a satellite receiving antenna in the city, a permit for the same shall be first obtained by the owner or his agent from the City of Calumet City. 
(b)  All satellite receiving antennas shall comply with BOCA and FCC requirements. 
(c)  The construction and installation of all satellite receiving antennas shall conform to applicable city building code and electrical code regulations and requirements. 
(d)  Electro-magnetic interference. Each satellite receiving antenna shall be filtered and/or shielded so as to prevent the emission of radio-frequency energy that would cause any harmful interference with the radio and/or television broadcasting or reception on adjacent properties. In the event that harmful interference is caused subsequent to the granting of a building permit, the owner of the dish antenna shall promptly take steps to eliminate the harmful interference in accordance with all applicable regulations. 
(e)  Each satellite receiving antenna shall serve only the building located upon the zoning lot on which said satellite receiving antenna is constructed pursuant to this section. 
(f)  Satellite receiving antennas shall be constructed of noncombustible and corrosive-resistant material. 
(g)  Satellite receiving antennas shall be constructed and erected in a secure and a wind-resistant manner. The antenna shall be wind-resistant enough to withstand eighty-five (85) mile per hour winds normally and seventy (70) mile per hour winds when combined with ice, without sustaining damage. 
(h)  The satellite receiving antenna must be adequately grounded for protection against a direct strike of lightning. 
(i)  Roof-mounted satellites shall have a certification from a structural engineer regarding the location stating that the structure is capable of handling the antenna and that said antenna does not provide any additional stress which the structure cannot bear. 
4.15 Residential Districts. 
A satellite receiving antenna may be located in any residential district provided that the same: 
(a)  Shall be neutral in color and bear no advertising emblem or information other than the name of the manufacturer in letters not to exceed two (2) inches in height; 
(b)  Shall be compatible with the appearance and character of the neighborhood; 
(c)  Shall be limited to one (1) per lot; 
(d)  Shall not exceed eight (8) feet in diameter; 
(e)  Shall not be roof-mounted; 
(f)  Shall be located only in a rear yard a minimum of ten (10) feet from any lot line; 
(g)  Maximum height of device not to exceed ten (10) feet; 
(h)  Permit fee and inspection required; 
(i)  Drawings submitted to building commissioner for approval before installation; 
(j)  Letter of consent from owner of property. 
4.16 Business districts. 
A satellite receiving antenna may be located in any business district provided that the same: 
(a)  Shall be neutral in color and bear no advertising emblem or information other than the name of the manufacturer in letters not to exceed two (2) inches in height; 
(b)  Shall be compatible with the appearance of the neighborhood; 
(c)  Shall be limited to one (1) per lot or per building, whichever is less; 
(d)  Shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in diameter; 
(e)  If roof-mounted, shall be to a maximum height of thirty (30) feet. Additional requirements shall apply to roof-mounted satellite receiving antennas; 
(f)  If not located directly on the ground, shall not be constructed any closer to the ground than ten (10) feet and shall not be visible between ground level and ten (10) feet above ground level from any street adjoining the lot; 
(g)  Ground-mounted; not to be located between a building and front lot line. The full impact of satellite receiving antennas shall be reduced by screening. If the subject parcel adjoins a residential district, all antennas shall be placed a minimum of ten (10) feet away from any lot line and effectively screened by a fence, wall or dense screening hedge to a maximum height of six (6) feet. Said fence, wall or hedge shall be located on or near the lot line bounding the residential district and shall otherwise comply with the applicable zoning requirements governing its location, shall be located only in a rear yard a minimum of ten (10) feet from any lot line; 
(h)  Permit fee and inspection required; 
(i)  Drawings submitted to building commissioner for approval before installation; 
(j)  Letter of consent from owner of property. 
4.17 Industrial and office research districts. 
A satellite receiving antenna may be located in any industrial district provided that the same: 
(a)  Shall be neutral in color and bear no advertising emblem or information other than the name of the manufacturer in letters not to exceed two (2) inches in height; 
(b)  Shall be compatible with the appearance of the neighborhood; 
(c)  Shall be limited to one (1) per lot or per building, whichever is less; 
(d)  Shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in diameter; 
(e)  If roof-mounted, shall be to a maximum height of thirty (30) feet. Additional requirements shall apply to roof-mounted satellite receiving antennas; 
(f)  Shall not be visible between ground level and ten (10) feet above ground level from any street adjoining the lot; 
(g)  Ground-mounted; not to be located between a building and a front lot line. The full impact of satellite receiving antennas shall be reduced by screening. If the subject parcel adjoins a residential district, all antennas shall be placed a minimum of ten (10) feet from any lot line and effectively screened by a fence, wall, or dense screening hedge to a maximum height of six (6) feet. Said fence, wall or hedge shall be located on or near the lot line bounding the residential district and shall otherwise comply with the applicable zoning requirements governing its location, shall be located in a rear yard a minimum of ten (10) feet from any lot line; 
(h)  Permit fee and inspection required; 
(i)  Drawings submitted to building commissioner for approval before installation; 
(j)  Letter of consent from owner of property. 
4.18 Application. 
Any person desiring to erect a satellite receiving antenna shall apply in writing to the city clerk's office upon a form furnished by said office. A permit fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be paid. 
(Code 1980, App. B, § IV; Ord. No. 84-15, § 1, 4-26-1984; Ord. No. 85-32, § 1, 9-26-1985; Ord. No. 89-5, § 1, 1-26-1989; Ord. No. 96-30, § 1(Exh. A), 5-23-1996; Ord. No. 99-33, § 1, 6-10-1999)  
Sec. V. - Nonconforming buildings and uses. 
5.1 Continuance of use. 
Any lawfully established use of a building or land, on the effective date of the ordinance or of amendments thereto, that does not conform to the use of regulations for the district in which it is located, shall be deemed to be a legal nonconforming use and may be continued, except as otherwise provided herein. 
Any legal, nonconforming building or structure may be continued in use provided there is no physical change other than necessary maintenance and repair, as otherwise permitted herein. 
Any building for which a permit has been lawfully granted prior to the effective date of the ordinance, or of amendments thereto, may be completed in accordance with the approved plans; provided construction is started within ninety (90) days and diligently prosecuted to completion. Such building shall thereafter be deemed a lawfully established building. 
5.2 Discontinuance of use. 
Whenever any part of a building, structure or land occupied by a nonconforming use is changed to or replaced by a use conforming to the provisions of the ordinance, such premises shall not thereafter be used or occupied by a nonconforming use, even though the building may have been originally designed and constructed for the prior nonconforming use. 
Whenever a nonconforming use of a building or structure or part thereof has been discontinued for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months, or whenever there is evident a clear intent on the part of the owner to abandon a nonconforming use, such use shall not after being discontinued or abandoned, be reestablished, and the use of the premises thereafter shall be in conformity with the regulations of the district. 
Where no enclosed building is involved, discontinuance of a nonconforming use for a period of twelve (12) months shall constitute abandonment and shall not thereafter be used in a nonconforming manner. 
A nonconforming use not authorized by the provisions of the zoning ordinance in effect at the time the amendatory ordinance becomes effective, shall be discontinued and not reestablished except when the provisions of the amendatory ordinance find the use to be conforming to the district in which it is then located. 
5.3 Change of nonconforming use. 
The nonconforming use of any building, structure or portion thereof, which is designed or intended for a use not permitted in the district in which it is located, may be changed to another nonconforming use thereof but only if such other use is permitted by a special use permit as authorized in the administration section. 
A nonconforming structure that was erected, converted or structurally altered in violation of the provisions of the ordinance which this ordinance amends shall not be validated by the adoption of this ordinance, and such violations or any violations of this ordinance may be ordered removed or corrected by the proper officials at any time. 
5.4 Repairs and alterations. 
Normal maintenance of a building or other structure containing a nonconforming use is permitted, including necessary nonstructural repairs and incidental alterations which do not extend or intensify the nonconforming use. 
No structural alteration shall be made in a building or other structure containing a nonconforming use, except in the following situations: 
(a)  When the alteration is required by law. 
(b)  When the alteration will actually result in eliminating the nonconforming use. 
(c)  When a building in a residential district containing residential nonconforming uses may be altered in any way to improve livability, provided no structural alteration shall be made which would increase the number of dwelling units or the bulk of the building. 
5.5 Damage and destruction. 
If a building or other structure containing a nonconforming use is damaged or destroyed by any means to the extent of fifty (50) percent or more of its replacement value at that time, the building or other structure can be rebuilt or used thereafter only for a conforming use and in compliance with the provisions of the district in which it is located. In the event the damage or destruction is less than fifty (50) percent of its replacement value, based upon prevailing costs, the building may then be restored to its original condition and the occupancy or use of such building may be continued which existed at the time of such partial destruction. 
In either event, restoration or repair of the building or other structure must be started within a period of six (6) months from the date of damage or destruction, and diligently prosecuted to completion. 
5.6 Additions and enlargements. 
A nonconforming building may be enlarged or extended only if the entire building is hereafter devoted to a conforming use, and is made to conform to all the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
No building partially occupied by a nonconforming use shall be altered in such a way as to permit the enlargement or expansion of the space occupied by such nonconforming use. 
No nonconforming use may be enlarged or extended in such a way as to occupy any required useable open space, or any land beyond the boundaries of the zoning lot as it existing on the effective date of the ordinance, or to displace any conforming use in the same building or on the same parcel. 
A building or structure which in nonconforming with respect to yards, floor area ratio, or any other element of bulk regulated herein shall not be altered or expanded in any manner which would increase the degree or extent of its nonconformity with respect to the bulk regulations for the district in which it is located. 
5.7 Exempted buildings, structures and uses. 
Wherever a lawfully existing building or other structure otherwise conforms to the use regulations herein but is nonconforming only in the particular manner hereinafter specified, the building and use thereof shall be exempt from the requirements of sections 5.4 and 5.5. 
In any residential district where a dwelling is nonconforming only as to the number of dwelling units it contains, provided no such building shall be altered in any way so as to increase the number of dwelling units therein. 
In any residential district, where a use permitted in the B-1 district occupies ground floor space within a multiple-family dwelling located on a corner lot. 
In any business or manufacturing district, where the use is less distant from a residential district than that specified in the regulations for the district in which it is located. 
In any district, where an established building, structure or use is nonconforming with respect to the standards prescribed herein for any of the following: 
(a)  Floor area ratio; 
(b)  Yards, front, side, rear, or transitional; 
(c)  Off-street parking or loading; 
(d)  Building height; 
(e)  Gross floor area. 
5.8 Conversion to special use. 
Any nonconforming use may be made a special use by the granting of a special permit, as authorized in the administrative section. 
(Code 1980, App. B, § V; Ord. No. 94-23, § 1, 5-26-1994)  
Sec. VI. - Zoning districts and zoning district map. 
6.1 Classes of districts. 
In order to classify, regulate and restrict the location of trades, industries and the location of buildings designed for specified uses, to regulate and limit the height and bulk of buildings hereafter erected or structurally altered, to regulate and limit the intensity of the use of the lot areas, and to regulate and determine the areas of yards, courts and other open spaces within and surrounding such buildings, the City of Calumet City, Illinois, is hereby divided into ten (10) classes of districts: 
R-1 One-family residence district 
R-2 Two-family and three-family residence district 
R-3 Multiple-family residence district 
B Commercial business district 
B-2 Service business commercial district 
B-3 Community commercial business district 
M-1 Light industrial district 
M-2 Heavy industrial district 
OR Office research district 
Public land use 
and the location and boundaries of which are shown on the map and notations thereon titled "The Zoning Map of Calumet City," which said map is on file in the office of the building commission of Calumet City, and together with all notations, references, and other information shown thereon, are a part of this ordinance and have the same force and effect as if said map and all the notations, references and other information thereon were all fully set forth and described herein. 
Except as hereinafter provided: 
(1)  No building shall hereafter be erected or altered, nor shall any building or premises be used for any purpose other than is permitted in the district in which such building or premises is located. 
(2)  No building shall be erected or altered to exceed in height the limit herein established for the district in which such building is located. 
(3)  No building shall be erected or altered except in conformity with the area regulations of the district in which the building is located. 
(4)  The minimum yards and other open space, including lot area required by the ordinance for each and every building existing at the time of passage of this ordinance, or for any building hereafter erected shall not be encroached upon or considered as yard or open space requirements for any other building. 
6.2 District boundaries. 
When uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
District boundary lines are either the center lines of railroads, highways, streets, alleys or easements, or the boundary lines of sections, quartersections, divisions of sections, tracts or lots, or such lines extended otherwise indicated. 
In areas not subdivided into lots and blocks, wherever a district is indicated as a strip adjacent to and paralleling a street or highway, the depth of such strips shall be in accordance with the dimensions shown on the map from section, quarter-section, or division lines, or center lines of streets, highways or railroad rights-of-way unless otherwise indicated. 
Where a lot held in one (1) ownership and of record on the effective date of the ordinance is divided by a district boundary line, the entire lot shall be construed to be within the less restricted district, provided that this construction shall not apply if it increases the less restricted frontage of the lot by more than twenty-five (25) feet. 
6.3 Zoning of streets, alleys, public ways, waterways and railroad right-of-way. 
All streets, alleys, public ways, waterways and railroad rights-of-way, not otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be in the same zone as the property immediately abutting on such alleys, streets, public ways and railroad rights-of-way or waterways. Where the center line of a street, alley, public way, waterway or a railroad right-of-way serves as a district boundary, the zoning of such areas, unless otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be the same as that of the abutting property up to such center line. 
6.4 Zoning of annexed land. 
All property annexed to the City of Calumet City shall be considered automatically zoned as R-1, unless concurrently with the annexation thereof there shall be adopted after statutory hearing, a zoning ordinance zoning the property for such purposes as is prescribed by the amendatory ordinance. Such amendatory ordinance may be adopted as prescribed by statute after annexing as well as concurrently with annexation. 
(Code 1980, App. B, § VI; Ord. No. 96-30, § 1(Exh. A), 5-23-1996)  
Sec. VII. - Residence districts. 
7.1 R-1 one-family residence district. 
Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted: 
One-family detached dwellings and permitted accessory uses. 
Parks, forest preserves and recreational areas, when publicly owned and operated. 
Home occupations. 
Temporary buildings for construction purposes for a period not to exceed the completion date of such construction. 
Signs, subject to the provisions of Section XI. 
Schools, public, denominational-elementary and high, including playgrounds and athletic fields auxiliary thereto. 
Accessory uses, including off-street parking facilities in accordance with the provisions of Section XII. 
Colleges and universities, including dormitories, fraternities, sororities, and other accessory buildings necessary for operation, but not including business colleges or trade schools when operated for profit. 
Rest homes, nursing homes, hospitals and sanitariums, for human beings only. 
Institutions for the aged and for children. 
Public service uses: 
Municipal administration buildings; 
Filtration plant, pumping station, water reservoir; 
Sewage treatment plant; 
Police and fire stations; 
Public libraries; 
Telephone exchange; 
Electric substations; 
Other similar public service uses. 
Radio and television towers, commercial. 
Schools, day or nursery, public or private. 
Planned developments, under single ownership or control, in which incidental business or recreational facilities for the convenience of the occupants may be furnished, provided the property proposed for development shall have a gross area of at least twenty (20) acres. For such developments, the city council may vary the regulations herein, provided such variations are consistent with the general purpose and intent of the ordinance and will result in better site planning and thus be of greater benefit both to the occupants of the development and to the community. 
Cemeteries, including crematories and mausoleums in conjunction therewith. 
Off-street open parking area, provided there is a need for this facility in the interest of public necessity and convenience and that no appropriate site is available in nearby business or manufacturing districts. 
Community residences. The sponsoring agency must obtain an administrative occupancy permit prior to establishing a community residence. No dwelling unit shall be occupied as a community residence until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the building commissioner. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a community residence unless: 
(1)  The community residence is located at least one thousand (1,000) feet from any existing community residence, as measured from lot line to lot line; and 
(2)  The applicant demonstrates that it has either obtained or is eligible for state or local licensing or certification to operate the proposed community residence, or that the proposed community residence is licensed or certified or eligible for licensing or certification. 
The building commissioner may revoke a certificate of occupancy for a community residence if its license or certification, or the operator's license or certification to operate community residences, is revoked. A certificate of occupancy is not transferable to another operator or to another location. 
Off-street automobile parking facilities. Automobile parking facilities shall be provided as required or permitted in section 10.4. 
Height of buildings: 
One-family detached dwellings: Thirty (30) feet, 
Church: Seventy-five (75) feet for towers or steeples, but not more than forty-five (45) feet for the main structure. 
Lot size. 
(1)  Every one-family detached dwelling hereafter erected shall be located on a lot having an area of not less than five thousand seven hundred fifty (5,750) square feet, and a width at the established building line of not less than fifty (50) feet. 
(2)  All nonresidential principal uses of buildings as permitted herein shall be located on a tract of land having an area of not less than seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet with a minimum width of seventy-five (75) feet at the building line. 
(3)  Minimum lot sizes for special uses shall be prescribed and conditions stipulated at the time a special use permit is authorized, but in no case shall any such lot have an area less than seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet and a width of seventy-five (75) feet at the established building line. 
Yard areas. No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the following yards are provided and maintained in connection with such building, structure or enlargement: 
(1)  Front yard. A front yard of not less than twenty-five (25) feet. 
(2)  Side yards. A side yard on each side of the principal building of not less than ten (10) percent of the lot width with a minimum of three (3) feet, except where a side yard adjoins a street, the minimum width on the street side shall be increased to ten (10) feet. A principal use which does not provide a vehicular front access drive shall have a side yard on one (1) side of not less than ten (10) feet in width. 
(3)  Rear yard. A rear yard not less than forty (40) feet. 
Maximum floor area ratio. The maximum floor area ratios in this district shall be as follows: 
One-family residences: 0.5. 
Permitted nonresidential uses: 1.0. 
Special uses: To be specified as part of the special use permit but shall not exceed 2.0. 
Dwelling standards: 
(1)  Every single family detached dwelling of one (1) story hereafter erected in any R-1 district shall contain an area of not less than one thousand three hundred fifty (1,350) square feet of habitable space measured from exterior wall to exterior wall as described in the adopted BOCA codes of Calumet City. 
(2)  Every single family detached dwelling of more than one (1) story hereafter erected in any R-1 district shall contain an area of not less than one thousand six hundred fifty (1,650) square feet of habitable space measured from exterior wall to exterior wall as described in the adopted BOCA codes of Calumet City. 
(3)  Architectural appearance: In order to enhance the values of property throughout the city and to protect and to stabilize the general appearance of residential structures, landscapes and open areas, the following appearance codes shall be included in the requirements for all new residential construction: 
a.  The project shall enhance both the site on which it is located and the sites surrounding the project. 
b.  No project shall adversely affect the current market values of any existing property in the neighborhood. 
c.  No project shall adversely affect the environment. 
d.  Architectural design is not restricted. Evaluation by the appearance of a project shall be based on quality of its design and relationship to the surroundings. 
e.  Buildings shall have good scale and be in harmony with existing permanent neighboring development. 
f.  Materials shall have good architectural character and should be selected for harmony of the building with adjoining buildings. 
g.  No more than three (3) different types of exterior wall materials shall be used. Materials shall be suitable to the type of building and design for which they are used. 
h.  All sides of the structure shall receive design consideration. A facade unrelated to the rest of the building is not in keeping with acceptable design. 
i.  Monotony of design in any construction shall be avoided. Variation of detail, form and siding shall be used to provide visual interest. 
(4)  Relationship of building to site: 
a.  The site shall be planned to accomplish a desirable aesthetic transition with the streetscape and to provide for adequate off street parking. 
b.  The site in R-1 districts shall include the off street parking in the form of a paved drive meeting the standard requirements. 
c.  The off street parking shall not remove the acceptable open land space requirement established. 
(5)  Landscape and site treatment: 
a.  Where natural or existing topographic patterns contribute to the beauty and utility of the site, they shall be preserved as well as developed. 
b.  Each site shall be addressed by a landscape plan which shall include the use of sod (front), sod/seeding (rear and side) or a decorative means to cover exposed soil of all open spaces in order to promote drainage, prevent soil erosion and for dust abatement. 
c.  Each site will include the planting of at least one (1) tree in order to promote energy conservation, to enhance the environment, for sound absorption and to contribute to good appearance. 
Lot coverage. No building with its accessory building shall occupy in excess of fifty (50) percent of an interior lot nor in excess of sixty (60) percent of a corner lot. 
Special uses. The following uses may be allowed if their site locations and proposed development plans are first approved as provided in the Administrative Section: 
Churches, rectories, seminaries, convents, monasteries and similar religious institutions, including dormitories and other accessory uses required for operation. 
Community residences that fail to meet all requirements for an administrative occupancy permit, excluding community residences denied a required local or state license. 
7.2 R-2 two-family and three-family residence. 
Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted: 
Any use permitted in the R-1 one-family residence district. 
Two-family dwellings. 
Three-family dwellings. 
Special uses. Any use which may be allowed as a special use in the R-1 one-family residence district, in accordance with the provisions of the administrative section. 
Automobile parking facilities. Automobile parking facilities shall be provided as required or permitted in section 10.4. 
Height of buildings. Same as R-1. 
Lot size. 
(1)  For dwellings hereafter erected, the same regulations shall apply as are required for one-family dwellings in the R-1 one-family residence district. 
(2)  Every two-family dwelling hereafter erected shall be on a zoning lot having a minimum area of not less than six thousand (6,000) square feet and a minimum width of not less than fifty (50) feet at the building line, provided that where a lot has less width than herein required and was recorded under separate ownership from adjoining lots prior to the date of adoption of this ordinance, such lot may be occupied by a two-family dwelling, but in no case shall the lot area per dwelling unit be less than three thousand (3,000) square feet. 
(3)  Every three-family dwelling hereafter erected shall be on a zoning lot having a minimum area of not less than seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet and a minimum width of not less than seventy-five (75) feet at the building line, provided that where a lot has less width than herein required and was recorded under separate ownership adjoining lots prior to the date of adoption of this ordinance, such lot may be occupied by a three-family dwelling, but in no case shall the lot area per dwelling unit be less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet. 
(4)  All nonresidential principal uses of buildings as permitted herein shall be located on a tract of land having an area of not less than seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet with a minimum width of seventy-five (75) feet at the established building line. 
(5)  Minimum lot sizes for special uses shall be prescribed and conditions stipulated at the time a special use permit is authorized, but in no case shall any such lot have an area less than seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet and a width of seventy-five (75) feet at the established building line. 
Yard areas. No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the following yards are provided and maintained: 
(1)  Front yard. A front yard of not less than twenty-five (25) feet shall be provided and maintained. 
(2)  Side yards. A side yard on each side of the principal building of not less than ten (10) percent of the lot width, except where a side yard adjoins a street, the minimum width on the street side shall be not less than ten (10) feet. In no case shall a side yard be less than five (5) feet. 
(3)  Rear yard. A rear yard of not less than forty (40) feet. 
Dwelling standards. One-family and two-family dwellings hereafter erected in the R-2 residence district shall conform to the floor areas as required for one-family dwellings in the R-1 residence district for each dwelling unit. 
Lot coverage. Same as R-1. Three-family dwellings hereafter erected shall have a total ground floor area of not less than one thousand four hundred (1,400) square feet, measured as provided in R-1. 
Dwelling standards. 
(1)  For one-family dwellings hereafter erected in this R-4 general residence district, the same floor area shall be required as in the R-2 one-family residence district. 
(2)  For two-family dwelling structures hereafter erected, the same floor areas shall be required as in the R-3 two-family residence district. 
7.3 R-3 multiple-family residence district. 
Permitted uses. No building or land shall be used and no building shall hereafter be erected, structurally altered, or enlarged unless otherwise provided herein except for the following uses: 
Multiple-family dwellings and apartments. 
One-family row dwellings (party) walls. 
Apartment hotels. 
Hotels in which incidental business may be conducted only as a service for the persons living therein, provided there is no entrance to such places of business except from the inside of the building and provided that no sign advertising such business shall be visible from outside the business. 
Special uses. The following uses may be allowed if their site locations and proposed development plans are first approved as provided in the administrative section: 
Boarding-houses and lodging houses. 
Fraternity or sorority houses. 
Hospitals (but not including animal hospitals), convalescent homes, rest homes and nursing homes. 
Medical and dental offices and group medical centers. 
Philanthropic or eleemosynary uses or institutions. 
Private clubs or lodges, except those the chief activity of which is a service normally carried on as a business. 
Automobile parking and loading facilities. Automobile parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required or permitted in section 10.4. 
Lot area per dwelling. 
(1)  For every building hereafter erected or structurally altered containing four (4) or more units, the following minimum lot areas per dwelling unit shall be provided: 
Apartment with three (3) or more bedrooms: Two thousand (2,000) square feet. 
Apartment with one (1) or two (2) bedrooms: One thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet. 
Efficiency apartments: Eight hundred (800) square feet. 
When open space is provided and maintained on the zoning lot in excess of that required by the regulations in this R-5 district, the number of dwelling units may be increased in accordance with the following schedule: For each one thousand (1,000) square feet of lot area devoted to open space one (1) additional one (1) bedroom or efficiency dwelling unit shall be permitted; for each one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of open space one (1), two (2) bedroom dwelling unit; for each two thousand (2,000) square feet of open space one (1) dwelling unit of three (3) or more bedrooms. When such open space is provided the maximum floor area ratio may be increased by an amount necessary to accommodate the added dwelling units and necessary off-street parking when such parking is provided within the principal building. 
No existing use shall be converted in such a way as to conflict with or further conflict with, the foregoing requirements. 
(2)  Further, no residential building shall be established hereafter on a lot which is less than six thousand (6,000) square feet in area and fifty (50) feet in width at the established building line. 
(3)  For nonresidential principal uses permitted in this district, the lot area shall be not less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet with a width at the established building line of not less than seventy-five (75) feet. 
(4)  Minimum lot sizes for special uses shall be prescribed by the zoning board of appeals, with the approval of the city council, at the time a special use permit is authorized, but in no case shall any such lot size be less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area nor less than seventy-five (75) feet in width. 
Yard areas. No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the following yards are provided and maintained: 
(1)  Front yard. For each building on a zoning lot, a front yard shall be provided of not less than twenty-five (25) feet. For buildings exceeding twenty-five (25) feet in height, the minimum front yard shall be increased by one (1) foot for each two (2) feet or fraction thereof by which the building height exceeds twenty-five (25) feet, but in no case shall a front yard or more than forty (40) feet be required. Required front yards shall be unobstructed from ground level to sky, except as otherwise provided in Section IV. 
(2)  Side yards. For each building on a zoning lot, side yards shall be provided as follows: 
a.  For multiple-family dwellings, the side yard on each side of each residential building shall be a minimum of five (5) feet in width plus an additional two (2) feet in width for each additional story above two (2) stories in height. On corner lots there shall be maintained a side yard of not less than ten (10) feet on the side adjacent to the street which intersects the street upon which the building maintains frontage, and in the case of a reversed corner lot there shall be maintained a setback from the side street of not less than fifty (50) percent of the front yard required on the lots in the rear of such corner lots, but such setback need not exceed fifteen (15) feet. No accessory building on said reversed corner lot shall project beyond the front yard required on the adjacent lot to the rear, nor be located nearer than five (5) feet to the side lot line of said adjacent lots. 
b.  For lots improved with a nonresidential building, there shall be a side yard of not less than twelve (12) feet on each side of the main structure and a combined total of side yards of not less than thirty (30) feet. 
c.  For special uses side yards shall be established in the ordinance permitting the special use but in no case shall the side yards be less than that required for nonresidential use in "b" above. 
(3)  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of not less than thirty (30) feet. 
Lot coverage. No building with its accessory building shall occupy in excess of fifty (50) percent of the area of an interior lot not in excess of sixty (60) percent of the area of a corner lot. 
(Code 1980, App. B, § VII; Ord. No. 85-37, §§ 1, 2, 10-24-1985; Ord. No. 90-36, § 1, 7-26-1990; Ord. No. 91-7, §§ 3, 4, 3-14-1991; Ord. No. 93-11, § 1, 4-8-1993)  
Sec. VIII. - Commercial business district. 
8.1. B Commercial business district. 
Permitted uses. The following is a list of uses permitted in the commercial business district, provided they are operated entirely within a building, except for off-street parking or loading facilities: 
Air conditioning and heating sales and service. 
Antique shops. 
Art, dancing, vocational, professional and business schools. 
Art galleries and studios. 
Art needle work and hand weaving. 
Auto and truck accessories store. 
Automobile laundries. 
Automobile sales, including accessories. 
Banks and financial institutions. 
Bakery shops, including the baking and processing of food products when prepared for retail use on the premises only. 
Barber shops and beauty parlors. 
Book and stationery stores. 
Candy and ice cream shops. 
Camera, photographic supply, developing and processing shops for retail sales. 
Cameras and other photographic equipment and supplies. 
Carpet, rug and linoleum stores. 
China and glassware stores. 
Christmas tree sales. 
Clothing stores. 
Coin and philatelic stores. 
Collection agency. 
Currency exchanges. 
Custom dressmaking, millinery or tailoring when conducted for retail sale on the premises only. 
Dentures. 
Department stores. 
Drug stores. 
Electrical and plumbing parts and supplies distributor (wholesale). 
Electrical appliance stores and repairs, but not including appliance assembly or manufacturing. 
Electrical television and radio sales (wholesale). 
Employment agency. 
Festivals (with council approval), per day. 
Florist shops and conservatories for retail trade on the premises only. 
Funeral parlor or mortuary. 
Furniture stores. 
Furrier, when conducted for retail trade on the premises only. 
Gift shops. 
Grocery stores. 
Hardware stores. 
Haberdasheries. 
Health clubs. 
Hobby and craft stores. 
Interior decorating shops, including upholstering and making of draperies, slip covers and other similar articles, when conducted as a part of the retail operations and secondary to the main use. 
Jewelry and watch repair shops. 
Key and/or bicycle repair shop. 
Laundries, automatic, self-service types, or hand. 
Leather goods and luggage stores. 
Locksmith. 
Millinery shops. 
Musical instrument sales and repair, retail trade only. 
Nursery for children. 
Office supply, equipment and furniture store. 
Offices, business and professional, including medical clinics. 
Off-street parking and loading facilities, as permitted or required in accordance with the provisions of section. 
Oil lubricating facilities for motor vehicles. 
Optical sales, glasses, frames and lenses. 
Orthopedic and medical appliance store, but not including the assembly or manufacture of such articles. 
Photography studios, including the development of film and pictures when done as a part of the retail business on the premises. 
Picture framing, when conducted for retail trade on the premises only. 
Plumbing and heating showrooms and shops. 
Printing and newspaper publishing, including engraving and photo-engraving. 
Private clubs and lodges of fraternal and religious organizations when not operated for profit. 
Private police protection and/or detective agencies. 
Public utility collection offices. 
Restaurants. 
Retail tire and accessories. 
Savings and loan associations. 
Sewing machine sales and service. 
Shoe and hat stores, and repairing when done as a part of the retail business. 
Signs, as permitted and regulated in section. 
Sporting goods stores. 
Telegraph offices. 
Telephone and business answering service. 
Television parts and supplies distributors. 
Theater (indoor) within zoning lots of fifty (50) acres or more. 
Tobacco stores. 
Toy stores. 
Trailer sales. 
Travel bureau and transportation ticket offices. 
A single dwelling unit as an accessory use to a permitted use to be used only by an owner, manager or employee of the business establishment of the principal use of a zoning lot, but only to be located within a principal building that is greater than four thousand (4,000) square feet and less than six thousand (6,000) square feet and provided sufficient overnight parking is available on the zoning lot. 
Special uses. Retail businesses not specifically listed above when found to have economic compatibility with established uses on adjoining property shall meet the requirements of section 12.7. 
Conditions of use. All uses permitted in this district shall be retail establishments dealing directly with consumers and shall be subject to the following conditions: 
The sale of food stuffs or articles intended for human consumption shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building equipped with adequate sanitary facilities. 
There shall be no manufacture, processing or treatment of products other than those which are clearly incidental and essential to the retail business conducted on the same premises. 
Such uses, operations or products shall not be objectionable due to odor, dust, smoke, noise, vibration or other similar causes. 
That any exterior sign displayed shall pertain only to a use conducted within the building. 
Transitional yards. Where a B-1 district adjoins a residential district, transitional yards shall be provided in accordance with the following regulations: 
When lots in a local business district front on the street and at least eighty (80) percent of the frontage directly across the street between two (2) consecutive intersecting streets is in a residential district, the front yard regulations for the residential district shall apply to the said lots in the business district. 
In a district where a side lot line coincides with a side or rear lot line of property in an adjacent residential district, a yard shall be provided along with side lot line. Such yard shall be equal in dimension to the minimum side yard which would be required under this ordinance for a residential use on the adjacent property in the residence district. 
In a local business district where a rear lot line coincides with a rear lot line of property in an adjacent residential district, a yard shall be provided along such rear lot line. Such yard shall be twenty (20) feet in depth. 
In a business district, where the extension of a front or side lot line coincides with the front lot line of an adjacent lot located in a residential district, a yard equal in depth to the minimum front yard required by this ordinance on such adjacent lot in the residential district shall be provided along such front or side lot line for a distance of at least twenty-five (25) feet, including the width of any intervening alley, from such lot in the residential district. 
Transitional yards shall be unobstructed from lowest level to sky except as allowed in section. 
Maximum floor area and coverage. The floor area shall not exceed more than sixty (60) percent of a zoning lot shall be covered by a building or buildings. 
Off-street parking and loading. Off-street parking and loading shall be as permitted or required in section. 
Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than ten (10) feet. 
8.2 B-2 service commercial business district. 
(1)  Description and intent of district. The B-2 district is intended to provide a mix of retail and general business uses within the city. The type of general business uses permitted includes those uses deemed compatible with retail uses. The district is intended for application on smaller development sites. 
(2)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted uses in the B-2 district: 
Air conditioning, plumbing and heating sales and service. 
Auto and truck parts and accessory stores (new parts sales). 
Appliance store. 
Banks and financial institutions. 
Banquet hall. 
Bakery (on-site sales only). 
Barbershop and hair salon. 
Books and periodicals. 
Bicycle sales and repair. 
Camera and photo equipment store. 
Catering service. 
Car care center (brakes, muffler, lube, tire, detailing and accessories in a completely enclosed building). 
Christmas tree sales. 
Clinic. 
Currency exchanges. 
Dry cleaners. 
Electrical and plumbing parts and supplies distribution. 
Employment agency. 
Exterminator and pest control. 
Florists shops. 
Garden supply. 
Gift shop. 
Hardware store. 
Health and fitness club. 
Heating and plumbing sales and service. 
Higher education facilities and classrooms for business and professional schools. 
Household electrical appliance sales and repair (excluding sales and manufacturing). 
Home improvement center. 
Laundromat, automatic coin operated. 
Locksmith. 
Mortuaries and funeral parlors. 
Music or dance studio. 
Office, service and business. 
Office supply store. 
Orthopedic and medical supply store. 
Photocopy and retail printing services. 
Photography studio. 
Plumbing showroom and shop. 
Physical therapy facilities, medical. 
Post office and express mail agencies. 
Printing and publishing services. 
Radio and television stations and studios. 
Restaurant. 
Savings and loan. 
Sewing machine sales and repair. 
Shoe repair. 
Small animal grooming establishment. 
Taxi service company. 
Taxi stand. 
Taxidermists. 
Telegraph office. 
Television sales and service. 
Truck and trailer rental agency. 
Accessory uses. 
A single dwelling unit as an accessory use to a permitted use to be used only by an owner, manager or employee of the business establishment of the principal use of a zoning lot, but only to be located within a principal building that is greater than four thousand (4,000) square feet and less than six thousand (6,000) square feet and provided sufficient overnight parking is available on the zoning lot. 
(3)  Special uses. The following special uses may be authorized in conformance with subsection 12.7 of this ordinance: 
Automobile laundry. 
Bus station. 
Child care center and preschool. 
Churches. 
Cultural institutions including art galleries and museums. 
Drive-in and drive-through facilities. 
Gasoline fuel station and food mart. 
Institutional uses. 
Kennel (wholly enclosed). 
Parks and recreation facilities. 
Planned development. 
Public utilities, facilities and services. 
Self-service storage facilities. 
Veterinary hospital. 
Accessory uses. 
(4)  Lot size requirements. 
(a)  The lot area of each zoning lot shall not be less than twelve thousand (12,000) square feet. 
(b)  The minimum lot width of each zoning lot shall not be less than seventy-five (75) feet. 
(5)  Yard requirements. The following yards shall be maintained in the B-2 district: 
	Building (1) 	Parking 
Front 	10 ft. 	6 ft. 
Side 	 5 ft. 	5 ft. 
Rear 	  5 ft. (2) 	5 ft. 
Transitional 	  6 ft. (2) 	6 ft. 
 
1 In a B-2 district where the extension of a front or side lot line coincides with the front or side lot line of an adjacent lot located in a residentially zoned district, a yard equal to the depth of the minimum front yard required by this ordinance, on such adjacent lot in the residential district, shall be provided along such front or side lot line in the B-2 district. 
2 Where a zoning lot adjoins an improved alley which also lies across and adjoins residentially zoned land, the yard may be reduced to zero for the placement of the principal structure only. 
(6)  Maximum lot coverage. The total lot area occupied by any principal buildings and accessory buildings, together with all impervious surfaces, shall not exceed ninety (90) percent. 
(7)  Maximum floor area. The maximum allowable floor area ratio in the B-2 district is .8. 
(8)  Maximum building height. No building or structure shall be erected or altered to exceed a height of thirty-five (35) feet. 
(9)  District standards. 
(a)  All on-site utility lines, but excluding high tension power lines, shall be located underground. 
(b)  At the discretion of the approving authority as part of any site plan approval, blanket cross-easements for vehicle access may be obtained generally parallel to the interior of front property lines. These easements are intended to provide for effective motor vehicle access, minimizing access to public streets. Easements will not be required where a frontage road system is in place or a coordinated access system is provided through a planned development. 
(c)  All business, service, storage, and display of goods and services shall be conducted within a completely enclosed structure, except: 
1.  Off-street parking and loading; 
2.  Recreational uses; 
3.  Accessory uses; 
4.  Uses allowed as part of a special use permit. 
(d)  All development shall meet the performance standards requirements of subsection 9.1 M-1 light industrial district. 
(10)  Related regulations and requirements. Other pertinent regulations contained within this ordinance that shall be observed, include, but are not limited to: 
(a)  Section IV [XII], subsection 12.9, State Street—State Line Road Redevelopment Area site development plan review. 
(b)  Section IV [XII], subsection 12.10, Landscape plan approval. 
(c)  Section X, Off-street parking and loading. 
(d)  Section XI, Signs. 
8.3 B-3 community commercial business district. 
(1)  Description and intent of district. The B-3 district is intended to serve immediate neighborhoods and the community with a range of retail goods and services. The district is intended to be smaller in overall scale, and situated at select arterial and collector street locations. 
(2)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted uses in the B-3 district: 
Apparel. 
Appliance stores. 
Arts and crafts stores. 
Art and office supply. 
Automobile accessory store. 
Bakery (on-site retail sales only). 
Banks and other financial institutions. 
Barbershop and hair salon. 
Books and periodical store. 
Brokerage office. 
Carpet, rug and linoleum store. 
Consumer electronics store. 
Delicatessen. 
Drugs and cosmetic store. 
Employment agency. 
Florist shop. 
Food store and food mart. 
Gift shop. 
Grocery store. 
Hardware store. 
Health and fitness club. 
Hobby shop. 
Housewares and kitchen supply. 
Interior decorating. 
Jewelry store. 
Laundromat, automatic, coin operated. 
Locksmith shop. 
Music store. 
Office, service and business. 
Office supply store. 
Optical sales and service. 
Paint and wall paper store. 
Pet store. 
Photocopying and retail printing services. 
Picture framing shop. 
Planned development. 
Post office. 
Restaurant. 
Secretarial services. 
Shopping center. 
Sporting goods and bicycle shop. 
Telegraph and telephone answering service. 
Television sales and service. 
Taxi stand. 
Toy store. 
Variety store. 
Video and music sales and rental store. 
Accessory uses. 
(3)  Special uses. The following special uses may be authorized in conformance with subsection 12.7 of this ordinance: 
Automobile laundry. 
Child day care center and preschool. 
Churches. 
Clinics. 
Cultural institutions including art galleries and museums. 
Drive-in and drive-through facilities. 
Gasoline fuel station and food mart. 
Institutional uses. 
Library. 
Parks and recreation. 
Planned development. 
Public utilities, facilities and services. 
Accessory uses. 
(4)  Lot size requirements. 
(a)  The lot area of each zoning lot shall not be less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. 
(b)  The minimum lot width of each zoning lot shall not be less than one hundred fifty (150) feet. 
(5)  Yard requirements. The following yards shall be maintained in the B-3 district: 
	Building (1) 	Parking 
Front 	10 ft. 	6 ft. 
Side 	 5 ft. 	5 ft. 
Rear 	 5 ft. 	5 ft. 
Transitional 	10 ft. 	6 ft. 
 
(1) In a B-3 district where the extension of a front or side lot line coincides with the front or side lot line of an adjacent lot located in a residentially zoned district, a yard equal to the depth of the minimum front yard required by this ordinance, on such adjacent lot in the residential district, shall be provided along such front or side lot line in the B-3 district. 
(6)  Maximum lot coverage. The total lot area occupied by any principal buildings and accessory buildings, together with all impervious surfaces, shall not exceed ninety (90) percent. 
(7)  Maximum floor area. The maximum allowable floor area ration in the B-3 district is .5. 
(8)  Maximum building height. No building or structure shall be erected or altered to exceed a height of thirty-five (35) feet. 
(9)  District standards. 
(a)  All on-site utility lines, but excluding high tension power lines, shall be located under ground. 
(b)  At the discretion of the approval authority as part of any site plan approval, blanket cross-easements for vehicle access may be obtained generally parallel to the interior of front property lines. These easements are intended to provide for effective motor vehicle access, minimum access to public streets. Easements will not be required where a frontage road system is in place or a coordinated access system is provided through a planned development. 
(c)  All business, service, storage, and display of goods and services shall be conducted within a completely enclosed structure, except: 
1.  Off-street parking and loading; 
2.  Recreational uses; 
3.  Accessory uses; 
4.  Uses allowed as part of a special use permit. 
(d)  All development shall meet the performance standards requirements of subsection 9.1 M-1 light industrial district. 
(10)  Related regulations and requirements. Other pertinent regulations contained within this ordinance that shall be observed, include, but are not limited to: 
(a)  Section IV [XII], subsection 12.9 State Street—State Line Road Redevelopment Area site development plan review. 
(b)  Section IV [XII], subsection 12.10, Landscape plan approval. 
(c)  Section X, Off-street parking and loading. 
(d)  Section XI, Signs. 
(Code 1980, App. B, § VIII; Ord. No. 83-10, § 2, 3-24-1983; Ord. No. 83-18, § 1, 8-11-1983; Ord. No. 86-8, § 1, 3-27-1986; Ord. No. 87-23, § 1, 11-12-1987; Ord. No. 88-17, §§ 1, 3, 7-14-1988; Ord. No. 90-36, § 2, 7-26-1990; Ord. No. 93-4, § 1a., 2-25-1993; Ord. No. 96-30, § 1(Exh. A), 5-23-1996; Ord. No. 14-8, § 2, 2-13-2014)  
Sec. IX. - Industrial districts. 
9.1 M-1 light industry district. 
Conditions of use. All permitted uses are subject to the following conditions: 
Any production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing, repair or storage of goods, materials, or products shall conform with the performance standards set forth below. 
All business, production, servicing and processing shall take place within completely enclosed buildings unless otherwise, specified. Within one hundred and fifty (150) feet of a residence district, all storage shall be in completely enclosed buildings or structures, and storage located elsewhere in this district may be open to the sky but shall be enclosed by solid walls or fences (including solid doors or gates thereto) at least eight (8) feet high, but in no case lower in height than the enclosed storage and suitably landscaped. 
However, open off-street loading facilities and open off-street parking of motor vehicles under one and one-half (1½) tons capacity may be enclosed throughout the district, except for such screening of parking and loading facilities as may be required under the provisions of Section X. 
Uses established on the effective date of this ordinance and, by its provisions, are rendered nonconforming, shall be permitted to continue, subject to the provisions of section. 
Uses established after the effective date of this ordinance shall conform fully to the performance standards hereinafter set forth for the district. 
Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted: 
Retail and services uses, as follows: 
Animal pounds and shelters. 
Automobile service stations where the retail sale of gasoline and oil for motor vehicles, including minor services customarily incidental thereto, may be conducted out-of-doors. Lubricating and washing facilities, including auto laundries, are permitted only if in a completely enclosed building. 
Battery and tire service stations. 
Beverages, nonalcoholic, bottling and distributing. 
Contractor or construction shops, such as building, cement, electrical, refrigeration, air conditioning, masonry, painting, plumbing, roofing, heating and ventilating. 
Fuel sales, with storage of fuel oils, gasoline and other flammable products limited to one hundred twenty thousand (120,000) gallons per tank, with the total storage on a zoning lot not to exceed five hundred thousand (500,000) gallons. 
Garages and parking lots, other than accessory, and subject of the provisions of Section X. 
Greenhouses. 
Ice sales, linen, towel, diaper and other similar supply services. 
Riding academies and stables, horse. 
Production, processing, cleaning, testing or repair, limited to the following uses and products: 
Advertising displays. 
Apparel and other products manufactured from textiles. 
Automobile painting, upholstering, repairing, reconditioning, and body and fender repairing, when done within the confines of a structure. 
Awnings, venetian blinds. 
Bakeries. 
Beverages, nonalcoholic. 
Blacksmith shops. 
Books, hand binding and tooling. 
Bottling works. 
Brushes and brooms. 
Building equipment, building materials, lumber, coal, sand and gravel yards, and yards for contracting equipment of public agencies, or public utilities, or materials or equipment of similar nature. 
Canning and preserving. 
Canvas and canvas products. 
Carpet and rug cleaning. 
Carting, express hauling or storage yard. 
Cement block manufacture. 
Ceramic products, such as pottery and small glazed tile. 
Cleaning and dyeing establishments. 
Clothing. 
Cosmetics and toiletries. 
Creameries and dairies. 
Drugs. 
Electric appliances such as lighting fixtures, irons, fans, toasters and electric toys. 
Electrical equipment assembly, such as home radio and television receivers and home movie equipment, but not including electrical machinery. 
Electrical supplies, manufacturing and assembly of, such as wire and cable assembly, switches, lamps, insulation and dry cell batteries. 
Food products, processing and combining of (except meat and fish), baking, boiling, canning, cooking, dehydrating, freezing, frying, grinding, mixing and pressing. 
Fur goods, not including tanning and dyeing. 
Glass products, from previously manufactured glass. 
Hair, felt, and feather products (except washing, curing and dyeing). 
Hat bodies of fur and wool felt. 
Hosiery. 
House trailers. 
Ice, dry and natural. 
Ink mixing and packaging and inked ribbons. 
Insecticides. 
Jewelry. 
Laboratories, medical, dental, research, experimental and testing, provided there is no danger from fire or explosion nor offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat, glare or other objectionable influences. 
Laundries. 
Leather products, including shoes and machine belting. 
Luggage. 
Machine shops for tool, die and pattern making. 
Meat products. 
Metal finishing, plating, grinding, sharpening, polishing, cleaning, rustproofing, and heat treatment. 
Metal stamping and extrusion of small products, such as costume jewelry, pins and needles, razor blades, bottle caps, buttons and kitchen utensils. 
Musical instruments. 
Orthopedic and medical appliances, such as artificial limbs, braces, supports, and stretchers. 
Paper products, small, such as envelopes and stationery, bags, boxes, tubes and wallpaper printing. 
Perfumes and cosmetics. 
Pharmaceutical products, compounding only. 
Plastic products, but not including the processing of the raw materials. 
Poultry and rabbits, slaughtering. 
Precision instruments, such as optical, medical and drafting. 
Products from finished materials, plastic, bone, cork, feather, felt, fibre, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather, paper, precious and semiprecious stones, rubber, shell or yarn. 
Public utility electric substations and distribution centers, gas regulation centers and underground gas holder stations. 
Repair of household or office machinery or equipment. 
Rubber products, small, and synthetic treated fabrics (excluding all rubber and synthetic processing), such as washers, gloves, footwear, bathing caps and atomizers. 
Silverware, plate and sterling. 
Soap, and detergents, packaging only. 
Soldering and welding. 
Sporting and athletic equipment, such as balls, baskets, cues, gloves, bats, racquets and rods. 
Statuary, mannequins, figurines, and religious and church art goods, excluding foundry operations. 
Storage and sale of trailers, farm implements and other similar equipment on an open lot. 
Storage of flammable liquids, fats or oil in tanks each of fifty thousand (50,000) gallons or less capacity, but only after the locations and protective measures have been approved by local governing officials. 
Textiles, spinning, weaving, manufacturing, dyeing, printing, knit goods, yarn thread and cordage, but not including textile bleaching. 
Tobacco curing and manufacturing, and tobacco products. 
Tool and die shops. 
Tools and hardware, such as bolts, nuts and screws, door-knobs, drills, hand tools and cutlery, hinges, house hardware, locks, non-ferrous metal castings and plumbing appliances. 
Toys. 
Truck, tractor, trailer or bus storage yard, but not including a truck or motor freight terminal which shall be treated under the subsection, Special Uses. 
Umbrellas. 
Upholstering (bulk), including mattress manufacturing, rebuilding and renovating. 
Vehicles, children's, such as bicycles, scooters, wagons and baby carriages. 
Watches. 
Wood products, such as furniture, boxes, crates, baskets and pencils and cooperage works. 
Any other manufacturing establishments that can be operated in compliance with the performance standards of subsection "performance standards," without creating objectionable noise, odor, dust, smoke, gas, fumes or vapor; and that is a use compatible with the use and occupancy of adjoining properties. 
Wholesale and warehousing, local cartage and express facilities (but not including motor freight terminals). 
Public and community service uses, as follows: 
Bus terminals, bus garages, bus lots, street railway terminal, or street car houses. 
Electric substations. 
Fire stations. 
Municipal or privately owned recreation buildings or community centers. 
Parks and recreation areas. 
Police stations. 
Sanitary land fill. 
Sewage treatment plants. 
Telephone exchanges. 
Water filtration plants. 
Water pumping stations. 
Water reservoirs. 
Residential uses, as follows: 
Dwelling units for watchmen and their families when located on the premises where they are employed in such capacity. 
Miscellaneous uses, as follows: 
Accessory uses. 
Radio and television towers. 
Temporary buildings for construction purposes, for a period not to exceed the duration of such construction. 
Off-street parking and loading, as permitted or required in Section X. 
Special uses. The following uses may be allowed by special use permit in accordance with the provisions of the administrative section: 
Any use which may be allowed as a special use in the B-1 through B-4 business districts. 
Planned developments, industrial. 
Motor freight terminals. 
Stadiums, auditoriums and arenas. 
Any use permitted in the M-2 general manufacturing district, provided the performance standards of subsection, "Performance standards," can be met in their entirety. 
Yard areas. No building or structure shall hereafter be erected or structurally altered unless the following yards are provided and maintained in connection with such building: 
(1)  Front yard. On every zoning lot a front yard of not less than twenty-five (25) feet in depth shall be provided. However, where lots within the same block and comprising forty (40) percent of the frontage on the same street are already developed on the effective date of this ordinance with front yards with an average depth of less than twenty-five (25) feet, then such average depth shall be the required front yard depth for such frontage in said block. 
(2)  Side yards. On every zoning lot a side yard shall be provided along each side lot line. Each side yard shall be not less in width than ten (10) percent of the lot width, but need not exceed twenty (20) feet in width. 
(3)  Rear yard. On every zoning lot a rear yard shall be provided and maintained of not less than twenty (20) feet in depth, except that the inner ten (10) feet may be used for off-street parking. 
Performance standards. Any use established hereafter in any M-1 manufacturing district shall be so operated as to comply with the performance standards set forth as follows: 
Noise. Sound levels shall be measured with a sound level meter and associated octave band filter manufactured according to standards prescribed by the American Standards Association. Measurements shall be made using the flat network of the sound level meter. Impulsive type noises shall be subject to the performance standard hereinafter prescribed provided that such noises shall be capable of being accurately measured with such equipment. Noises capable of being so measured, for the purpose of this ordinance, shall be those noises which cause rapid fluctuations of the needle of the sound level meter with a variation of no more than plus or minus two (2) decibels. Noises incapable of being so measured, such as those of an irregular and intermittent nature, shall be controlled so as not to become a nuisance to adjacent uses. 
At no point either on the boundary of a residence district or a business district or at one hundred twenty-five (125) feet from the nearest property line of a plant or operation, whichever distance is greater, shall the sound pressure level of an individual operation or plant (other than the operation of motor vehicles and other transportation facilities) exceed the decibel levels at the designated octave bands shown hereafter for the districts indicated: 
	Maximum Permitted Sound
Level in Decibels Along
Boundaries or 125 Feet
From Plant Or Operation
Property Line
Octave Band 
Cycles Per Second 	Residence 
Districts 	Business 
Districts 
0 to 75 	67 	73 
75 to 150 	62 	68 
150 to 300 	58 	64 
300 to 600 	54 	60 
600 to 1,200 	49 	55 
1,200 to 2,400 	45 	51 
2,400 to 4,800 	41 	47 
Over 4,800 	37 	43 
 
Smoke and particulate matter. No stack shall emit more than ten (10) smoke units during any one (1) hour, nor shall smoke of a density in excess of Ringelmann No. 2 be emitted, provided that during a single one (1) hour period in each twenty-four (24) hour day, each stack may emit up to twenty (20) smoke units when blowing soot or cleaning fires, and during such cleaning of fires, smoke of a density of Ringelmann No. 3 may be emitted, but not for longer than four (4) minutes each period. 
No emission of smoke or particulate matter shall exceed a density of Ringelmann No. 3, except for a plume consisting entirely of condensed steam. For the purposes of grading the density of emission, the Ringelmann Chart published and used by the United States Bureau of Mines shall be employed. 
The rate of emission of particulate matter from all sources within the boundaries of any lot shall not exceed a net figure of one (1) pound per acre of lot area during any one (1) hour. 
Dust and other forms of air pollution borne by air and wind from such sources as storage area, yards, roads, etc., within lot boundaries shall be kept to a minimum by appropriate landscaping, paving, oiling, or other acceptable means. The emission of particulate matter from such sources shall conform with the requirements of the preceding paragraph. 
In addition to the performance standards specified herein, the emission of smoke and particulate matter in such manner or quantity as to be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, comfort or welfare is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
Odorous matter. The emission of odorous matter from any property in such concentrations as to be readily detectable at any point along the boundaries of said property or in such concentrations as to create a public nuisance or hazard beyond such boundaries is prohibited. 
Vibration. Any process or equipment which produces intense earth-shaking vibration, such as are created by heavy drop forges or heavy hydraulic surges, shall be set back at least five hundred (500) feet from the property boundaries on all sides, except for a property line adjoining an M-2 district, where such setback shall not be mandatory. However, in no case shall any such vibrations be allowed to create a public nuisance or hazard beyond the property boundaries. 
Toxic or noxious matter. No use on any property shall discharge across the boundaries of said property toxic or noxious matter in such concentrations as to be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, comfort or welfare, or cause injury or damage to other property or business. 
Glare or heat. Any operation producing intense glare or heat shall be performed within a completely enclosed building and effectively screened in such a manner as not to create a public nuisance or hazard along property boundaries. 
Fire and explosive hazards. Fire and explosive hazards shall be controlled as follows: 
Activities involving the storage or manufacture of materials or products which decompose by detonation are not permitted in the M-1 districts. 
The storage, utilization or manufacture of materials or products ranging from free or active burning to intensive burning, as determined by the zoning administrator, is permitted under the following conditions: 
(1)  All storage, utilization or manufacture of such materials or products shall be within completely enclosed buildings or structures having incombustible exterior walls; and 
(2)  All such buildings or structures shall be set back at least forty (40) feet from property boundaries, or in lieu thereof, shall be protected throughout by an automatic sprinkler system complying with standards for installation prescribed by the National Fire Protection Association. 
Materials or products which produce flammable or explosive vapors or gases under ordinary weather temperatures shall not be permitted in this district, with the exception of the following, which shall be permitted: 
(1)  Materials required for emergency or standby equipment; 
(2)  Materials used in secondary processes which are auxiliary to a principal operation, such as paint-spraying of finished products; and 
(3)  Flammable liquids and oils stored, sold and used in conjunction with the operation of an automobile service station and customarily required or used in such operations. 
9.2 M-2 heavy industry district. 
Condition of use. All permitted uses are subject to the following conditions: 
All production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing, repair or storage of goods, materials or products shall conform with the performance standards set forth in subsection, Performance standards. 
Within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a residence district, all business production, servicing, processing and storage shall take place or be within completely enclosed buildings, except that storage of materials may be open to the sky provided the storage area is enclosed with a solid wall or fence at least eight (8) feet high. 
However, within such one hundred fifty (150) feet of a residence district, off-street loading facilities and off-street parking of motor vehicles under one and one-half (1½) tons capacity may be enclosed, except for such screening of parking and loading facilities as may be required under the provisions of Section X. 
Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted: 
Any use permitted in the M-1 districts. 
Any production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing or repair or storage of materials, goods or products which conform to the performance standards established for this district. 
Any sexually oriented entertainment business. 
Any wholesale or retail business involving the viewing, sale or rental of sexually oriented materials, including but not limited to videotapes, videodiscs, motion pictures, books, magazines, posters, photographs, and sexual devices or paraphernalia. 
Special uses. Any use which may be allowed as a special use in the M-1 district may be allowed as a special use in this M-2 district. 
Amortization of pre-existing regulated use. Any nonconforming building, structure, lot or regulated use which existing lawfully at the time of the adoption of Article IX and Article X of Chapter 15 of the Municipal Code of the City of Calumet City, Cook County, Illinois, which shall become nonconforming upon the adoption of those articles may be amortized as hereinafter provided. 
a.  Upon written notice from the department of inspectional services to the owners or interests therein, that any building, structure, lot or regulated use is nonconforming under the subdivision and zoning ordinance of the City of Calumet City, the owners or interests therein shall, within three (3) months from the date of such notice, apply to the department of inspectional services for a certificate of nonconformance and amortization schedule. 
b.  Failure to apply for a certificate of nonconformance and amortization schedule within three (3) months of the notice provided for above will require the amortization of the nonconformance within six (6) months of the notice provided for above. 
c.  Nonconformances that have obtained a certificate of nonconformance and amortization schedule from the department of inspectional services shall be discontinued within one (1) year of the notice provided for above. 
Yard areas. All yard areas shall be the same as required or permitted in the M-1 limited manufacturing district. 
Maximum floor area ratio. The maximum floor area ratio shall not exceed 3.0. 
Performance standards. Any use established hereafter in an M-2 general manufacturing district shall be so operated as to comply with the performance standards set forth as follows: 
Noise. The performance standards governing noise in the M-1 district shall apply. 
Smoke and particulate matter. No stack shall emit more than twenty (20) smoke units during any one (1) hour, nor shall smoke of a density in excess of Ringelmann No. 2 be emitted provided that during fire cleaning periods each stack may emit four (4) minutes of smoke up to thirty (30) smoke units, twice for blowing soot and twice for cleaning fires, and during such cleaning for fires, smoke of a density of Ringelmann No. 3 may be emitted. 
No emission of smoke or particulate matter shall exceed a density of Ringelmann No. 3, except for a plume consisting entirely of condensed steam. For the purpose of grading the density of emissions, the Ringelmann Chart published and used by the United States Bureau of Mines shall be employed. 
The rate of emission of particulate matter from all sources within the boundaries of any lot shall not exceed a net figure of three (3) pounds per acre of lot area during any one (1) hour. 
Dust and other forms of air pollution borne by the wind from such sources as storage areas, yards, roads, etc., within lot boundaries shall be kept to a minimum by appropriate landscaping, paving, oiling, or other acceptable means. The emission of particulate matter from such sources shall conform with the requirements of the preceding paragraph. 
In addition to the performance standards specified herein, the emission of smoke or particulate matter in such manner or quantity as to be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, comfort or welfare is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
Odorous matter. The emission of odorous matter from any property in such concentrations as to be readily detectable at any point along the boundaries of said property when diluted in the ratio of one (1) volume of odorous air to four (4) or more volumes of clean air, or in such concentrations as to produce a public nuisance or hazard beyond the property boundaries is prohibited. 
Vibration. Any process or equipment which produces intense earth-shaking vibrations, such as are created by heavy drop forges or heavy hydraulic surges, shall be set back at least five hundred (500) feet from the property boundaries on all sides. However, in no case shall such vibrations be allowed to create a public nuisance or hazard beyond the property boundaries. 
Toxic or noxious matter. No use on any property shall discharge across the boundaries of said property toxic or noxious matter in such concentrations as to be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, comfort, or welfare, or cause injury or damage to other property or business. 
Glare or heat. Any operation producing intense glare or heat shall be performed within an enclosure and effectively screened in such a manner as not to create a public nuisance or hazard along property boundaries. 
Fire and explosive hazards. Fire and explosive hazards shall be controlled as follows: 
Activities involving the storage or manufacture of materials or products which decompose by detonation are not permitted in the M-2 districts unless licensed by the city. However, in no case shall such materials or products be stored or manufactured within two hundred (200) feet of the boundary of any other district. 
The storage, utilization and/or manufacture of materials or products ranging from incombustible to moderate burning, as determined by the zoning administrator, is permitted. 
The storage, utilization or manufacture of materials or products ranging from free to active burning, to intense burning, as determined by the zoning administrator, is permitted, provided that within forty (40) feet of the boundary of a residence or business district the following restrictions shall apply: 
(1)  All storage, utilization or manufacture of such materials, or products, shall be within completely enclosed buildings or structures having incombustible walls; and 
(2)  All such buildings or structures shall be protected throughout by an automatic sprinkler system complying with standards for installation by the National Fire Protection Association. 
Materials or products which produce flammable or explosive vapors or gasses under ordinary weather temperature shall not be permitted in this district, with the exception of the following, which are permitted: 
(1)  Materials required for emergency or standby equipment; 
(2)  Materials used in secondary processes which are auxiliary to a principal operation, such as paint spraying of finished products; 
(3)  Flammable liquids and oils stored, sold and used in conjunction with the operation of an automobile service station and customarily required or used in such operation. 
9.3 OR office research district. 
(1)  Description and intent of district. The OR district is intended to allow for a mix of office uses, research and testing facilities and restricted manufacturing, warehousing and distribution in high-quality, well designed, low- to medium-density settings. 
(2)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the OR district. 
Banks and other financial institutions. 
Business schools. 
Display or catalog showroom. 
Dry cleaning and/or laundry facilities. 
Glass products production. 
Laboratories, research and testing. 
Linen supply. 
Lithography. 
Offices, business, professional, medical arts. 
Paper products assembly. 
Plastic products assembly. 
Wholesale establishments. 
Mail order houses. 
Self-service storage facility. 
Warehousing and distribution, excluding motor freight terminals. 
Health and athletic clubs. 
Precision instruments manufacturing. 
Electronic component manufacturing and assembly. 
Printing and publishing services. 
Radio and television studios. 
Research and development testing facilities. 
Show rooms and sales area accessory to principal uses and within the principal structure not occupying more than ten (10) percent of the gross floor area. 
Woodworking and wood products. 
Commercial uses within the principal structure occupying not more than ten (10) percent of the gross floor area and limited to the following uses: Beauty/barber shop, food store florist, gift shop, photocopy shop, and letter and parcel services. 
Accessory uses. 
(3)  Special uses. The following special uses may be authorized in conformance with subsection 12.7 of this ordinance. 
Animal hospital and clinic. 
Child day care center and preschool. 
Planned development. 
Public utilities, facilities and services. 
Restaurant, sit down only. 
Park and recreation uses. 
Parking lot or structure. 
Institutional uses. 
Accessory uses. 
(4)  Lot size requirements. 
(a)  The lot area of each zoning lot shall not be less than twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet. 
(b)  The minimum lot width of each zoning lot shall not be less than one hundred (100) feet. 
(5)  Yard requirements. The following yards shall be maintained in the OR district: 
	Building 	Parking 
Front 	30 ft. 	15 ft. 
Side 	20 ft. 	10 ft. 
Rear 	30 ft. 	15 ft. 
Transitional 	30 ft. 	30 ft. 
 
(6)  Maximum lot coverage. The total lot area occupied by any principal buildings and accessory buildings, together with all impervious surfaces, shall not exceed seventy-five (75) percent. 
(7)  Maximum floor area. The maximum allowable floor area ratio in the OR district is .7. 
(8)  Maximum building height. No building or structure shall be erected or altered to exceed a height of forty-five (45) feet. 
(9)  District standards. 
(a)  The minimum gross land area of any office research zoning district shall be ten (10) acres. 
(b)  All on-site utility lines, but excluding high tension power lines, shall be located underground. 
(c)  All business storage, and display of goods and services shall be conducted within a completely enclosed structure, except: 
1.  Off-street parking and loading; 
2.  Recreational uses; 
3.  Accessory uses; 
4.  Uses allowed as part of a special use permit. 
(d)  All development shall meet the performance standards requirements of subsection 9.1, M-1 light industrial district. 
(10)  Related regulations and requirements. Other pertinent regulations contained within this ordinance that shall be observed, include, but are not limited to: 
(a)  Section IV [XII], subsection 12.9, State Street—State Line Road Redevelopment Area site development plan review; 
(b)  Section IV [XII], subsection 12.10, Landscape plan approval; 
(c)  Section X, Off-street parking and loading; 
(d)  Section XI, Signs. 
(Code 1980, App. B, § IX; Ord. No. 88-17, § 2, 7-14-1988; Ord. No. 96-30, § 1(Exh. A), 5-23-1996; Ord. No. 96-73, §§ 1, 2, 11-14-1996)  
Sec. X. - Off-street parking and loading. 
10.1  Purpose: This ordinance is intended to regulate the placement and physical dimensions of off-street parking within the City of Calumet City. Hereafter no parking lot or building shall be erected or altered and no land used unless there be provide adequate off-street parking space or spaces for the needs of tenants, personnel and patrons together with means of ingress and egress. 
10.2  General provisions: 
(a)  Off-street parking for other than residential uses shall be either on the same lot or within three hundred (300) feet of the property it is intended to serve, measured along dedicated streets. Ownership or lease of all lots or parcels intended for use as parking shall be held by the applicant as long as off-street parking is required for such principal building in accordance with the terms of this section. 
(b)  Off-street accessory parking permitted under paragraph (a) and not located on the same lot as the principal use, may be located in residential districts under the following conditions: 
(1)  That said lots or property be immediately adjacent to a business or industrial zoning district. 
(2)  That no vehicular access to said lot or property be permitted from any street frontage in a residential district, except that access drives will be permitted on a street which within the same block has frontage in the district in which the principal use is permitted and located. 
(3)  That all off-street parking lots adjoining lots zoned for residential use shall have a minimum setback of ten (10) feet from any interior lot line, except if the adjoining lot is used for legal conforming parking purposes. 
(4)  That no parking shall be permitted between the street right-of-way line and the building line prevailing in the zone in which the proposed parking area is to be located. The resulting open area shall be planted in grass or otherwise landscaped to create a permanent green area. 
(c)  Residential off-street parking spaces shall consist of a parking strip, driveway, garage or combination thereof and shall be located on the premises they are intended to serve. 
(d)  Two (2) or more buildings or uses may collectively provide the required off-street parking in which case the required number of parking spaces shall not be less than the sum of the requirements for the several individual uses computed separately. 
(e)  In the instance of dual function of off-street parking, spaces where operating hours of buildings overlap the zoning board of appeals may grant an exception. 
(f)  The storage or sale of merchandise or the repair of vehicles is prohibited. 
(g)  For those uses not specifically mentioned, the requirements for off-street parking facilities shall be in accord with a use which the inspectional services department considers as being similar in type. 
(h)  Ingress and egress: A suitable means of ingress and egress for vehicles to premises used for parking shall be provided, and shall open directly from and to a public street, alley, or highway. The width of any exit or entrance adjoining property or opposite property zoned for residential uses shall be approved prior to obtaining any permit therefore. The inspectional services department may require the owner to provide acceleration or deceleration lanes where traffic volumes indicate the need. Interval distances between the intersections formed by such ingress and egress points along a public street or between such intersections and the intersections formed by other traffic ways (including other streets, alleys, or driveways) shall be regulated in accordance with the following standards: 
(1)  Whenever possible, intersections along major arterial streets shall occur at intervals not less than twelve hundred (1,200) feet, nine hundred (900) feet, and three hundred (300) feet, respectively for Type A, B and C intersections, as defined below. 
(2)  Whenever possible, such intersections along minor arterials shall occur at intervals not less than one thousand (1,000) feet, seven hundred (700) feet, and three hundred (300) feet, respectively for Type A, B, and C intersections. 
Type A intersections are defined as those intersections requiring or anticipated to require traffic controls (traffic lights or stop signs) on the public street along which the interval is measured, but not necessarily on the intersecting trafficways. 
Type B intersections are defined as those intersections not requiring traffic controls, but allowing left-hand turning movements off the public street along which the interval is measured. 
Type C intersections are defined as those intersections not requiring traffic controls on and not permitting left-hand turning movements off the public street along which the interval is measured. When the interval is between intersections of different types, the least restrictive interval requirement shall apply. 
(i)  Fencing, wheel stops or other physical barriers shall be provided for all boundaries of the parking area except at points of ingress and egress to prevent encroachment of vehicles. 
(j)  Pavement: All parking lots shall be constructed in accordance with specifications then required by the city engineer for the construction of roadways and other paved public areas. 
(k)  Lighting: If the parking lot is to be open for use after dark, it shall be provided with lighting that meets the standards of the inspectional services department. Lights shall be shielded so as not to shine directly or in an offensive manner on any residential property. Lighting fixtures and mounting locations shall be selected to uniformly disperse light in accordance with standards approved by the city engineer. 
(l)  Screening: When a parking lot abuts a residential zone, there shall be permanently maintained along such boundary screening as provided in the Calumet City Zoning Ordinance. 
(m)  Plot plan to be filed: Prior to constructing an accessory parking lot, the owner or persons in charge of the land to be used for parking shall submit a plot plan to the building inspector who will submit same to the department of community and economic development, city engineer and other agencies for their consideration and recommendations. Such plot plan shall show the boundaries of the property, location of adjacent houses, parking spaces, circulation patterns, drainage plan and construction plan for boundary walls and planting plan. 
10.3  Off-street parking space standards: The amount of off-street parking spaces for new uses or buildings, additions thereto, and additions to existing buildings shall be determined in accordance with the following minimum parking provisions provided that, excepting as otherwise provided below, no parking area shall project into a required front yard and provided that no parking area shall be permitted between the curb line and the property line in any district. 
(a)  One-family dwelling: Two (2) spaces for each family unit, plus one (1) space for every two (2) additional adult non-related persons. Parking may be provided in not more than fifty (50) percent of a required front yard and only if the parking area is clearly designated and improved as a driveway paved with concrete, bituminous concrete or other approved surface material. 
(b)  Two-family dwellings: One and one-half (1½) parking spaces for each family, plus one (1) space for every two (2) additional adult non-related persons. Parking may be provided in not more than fifty (50) percent of a required front yard and only if the parking area is clearly designated and improved as a driveway paved with concrete, bituminous concrete or other approved surface material. 
(c)  Multiple family dwellings: One and one-half (1½) parking spaces per unit, plus one (1) space for each employee. 
High density multiple family dwellings: One and one-half (1½) spaces per unit. 
(d)  Motel: One (1) space per unit, plus one (1) space for each employee. 
(e)  Hotel: One (1) space for each of the first twelve (12) guest rooms and one (1) space for each four (4) rooms greater than twelve (12), but not exceeding forty (40), and one (1) parking space for each additional five (5) rooms above forty (40), plus one (1) space for each employee. 
(f)  Apartment hotel: One (1) space for each apartment, plus one (1) for each employee. 
(g)  Office building: One (1) parking space for each two hundred fifty (250) square feet of gross leasable floor area excluding any floor space used for parking. 
(h)  Retail stores: One (1) parking space for each one hundred eighty (180) square feet of gross floor area. 
(i)  [Wholesale and retail businesses:] Wholesale businesses and retail businesses specializing in goods or merchandise not normally carried by the customer, such as furniture, large appliances, vehicles and similar items. 
(1)  One (1) parking space per each five hundred (500) square feet of floor area used for the display or sale of merchandise, excluding office space, plus one (1) parking space for each employee per shift. 
(2)  For outdoor sales, one (1) parking space per two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of lot area, plus one (1) parking space for each employee per shift. 
(j)  Barber shops and beauty parlors: One (1) for each chair, plus one (1) for each employee. 
(k)  Banks, dry cleaning, laundries and similar service businesses: One (1) parking space for each two hundred fifty (250) square feet of floor area. 
(l)  Drive-in banks with inside customer service: Five (5) for each inside teller window plus one (1) for each employee; without inside customer service, one (1) space for each employee. 
(m)  Restaurants, banquet halls and drive-in eating establishments: One (1) parking space for each sixty (60) square feet of gross floor area, but not less than fifteen (15) spaces. 
(n)  Bowling alleys: Four (4) parking spaces for each alley. 
(o)  Auto service station: Four (4) spaces. 
(p)  Hospitals: One (1) space for each four (4) beds, plus one (1) space for each staff doctor, plus one (1) space for each two (2) full-time employees on shift, including nurses. 
(q)  Professional offices, medical clinics: One (1) parking space for each one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor area. Provided that professional offices when used as a home occupation shall provide one (1) parking space for each one hundred (100) square feet or major fraction thereof, of office area in addition to that required for the residing family or families. 
(r)  Sanitariums, convalescent home or children's homes: One (1) parking space for each six (6) beds, plus one (1) for each two (2) employees. 
(s)  Mortuaries or funeral homes: One (1) parking space for each fifty (50) square feet of floor area in the slumber rooms, parlors or individual funeral service rooms. 
(t)  Elementary and junior high schools: One (1) parking space for each employee, plus one (1) parking space for each eighty (80) square feet in the main auditorium not containing fixed seats, or one (1) space for each six (6) fixed seats in the main auditorium, whichever is greater. 
(u)  Senior high schools: One (1) parking space for each employee, plus one (1) parking space for each five (5) students or one (1) space for each eighty (80) square feet of floor area in the main auditorium not containing fixed seats, or one (1) parking space for each six (6) fixed seats in the main auditorium, whichever is greater. 
(v)  College and business university: One (1) parking space for each two (2) employees, plus one (1) space for each three (3) students. 
(w)  Libraries, museums or art galleries: One (1) parking space for each six hundred (600) square feet of floor area plus one (1) for each four (4) employees. 
(x)  Contractor yards or plant storage yard: One (1) parking space for each employee. 
(y)  Sports arenas, auditoriums, theaters, assembly halls, other than in schools: One (1) parking space for each five (5) seats or seating spaces. 
(z)  Manufacturing plants or research laboratories: One (1) parking space for each two (2) employees per work shift. 
(aa)  Churches: One (1) parking space for each five (5) seats in the main auditorium. 
(bb)  Laundromats: One (1) parking space for each two (2) washing machines. 
(cc)  Lodging houses: One (1) parking space shall be provided for each lodging room, plus one (1) space for the owner or manager. 
(dd)  Private clubs and lodges: One (1) parking space shall be provided for each lodging room, plus parking spaces equal in number to twenty-five (25) percent of the capacity in persons (exclusive of lodging room capacity) of such club or lodge. 
(ee)  Automobile laundry: Thirty (30) stacking spaces shall be provided for each wash rack, plus one (1) parking space for each employee. 
(ff)  Motor vehicle sales and machinery sales: One (1) parking space shall be provided for each six hundred (600) square feet of floor area. 
(gg)  Warehouses and storage buildings: One (1) parking space shall be provided for each employee, plus one (1) parking space for each vehicle used in the conduct of the enterprise, and guest parking equal to one (1) space for each four thousand (4,000) square feet of floor space. 
(hh)  Government or privately owned recreation buildings or community centers: One (1) parking space shall be provided for each two (2) employees, plus spaces adequate in number to serve the public. 
(ii)  [Off-site parking:] In parking areas not located immediately adjacent to the structure to which the spaces are accessory, the maximum number of parking spaces intended for use by semi-trailers, wheeled containers or tractor-trailer combinations at warehouses, distribution facilities and similar facilities used for the storage, loading or off-loading of goods, shall not exceed the greater of any the following: 
(1)  One (1) parking space per loading dock; or 
(2)  One (1) parking space for every twelve (12) linear feet of the two (2) longest sides of the structure to which the parking is accessory; or 
(3)  One (1) parking space for every five thousand (5,000) square feet of interior space principally used for the storage of goods. 
These parking spaces shall be in addition to parking spaces that are located adjacent to the structure to which the spaces are accessory. 
All parking areas intended for use by semi-trailers, wheeled containers or tractor-trailer combinations that are not located immediately adjacent to the structure to which the parking is accessory shall be located across from the two (2) longest sides of the structure. In addition, the parking spaces shall be perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of the structure and shall be arrayed in a single row. Double stacking shall be prohibited. 
All parking spaces intended for use by semi-trailers, wheeled containers or tractor-trailer combinations shall be at least twelve (12) feet wide, excluding striping. In addition, such parking spaces may not be located within fifty (50) feet of a building corner. 
In addition to the foregoing, there shall be one (1) parking space provided for each employee per shift suitable for use by passenger vehicles. These spaces shall be not less than one hundred eighty (180) square feet in size with a minimum width of nine (9) feet. These spaces may not be used by semi-trailers, wheeled container, tractor-trailer combinations or similar vehicles. 
For the purposes of this subsection, the term "parking" shall mean the temporary outdoor stationing of an operable vehicle, semi-trailer or wheeled container (or similar item capable of lawful interstate travel without modification) that has been loaded or off-loaded within the previous seven (7) days or that will be loaded or off-loaded within the next seven (7) days. Outdoor stationing for longer periods of time shall constitute outdoor storage. The term "parking" does not include outdoor storage. 
10.4  Additional regulations, off-street loading: 
(a)  Location: All required loading berths shall be located on the same zoning lot as the use served. No loading berth for vehicles over two (2) tons' capacity shall be closer than fifty (50) feet to any property in a residence district unless completely enclosed by building walls or a uniformly painted solid fence or wall, or any combination thereof, not less than six (6) feet in height. No permitted or required loading berth shall be located within twenty-five (25) feet of the nearest point of intersection of any two (2) streets. 
(b)  Size: Unless otherwise specified, a required loading berth shall be at least ten (10) feet in width by at least twenty-five (25) feet in length, exclusive of aisles and maneuvering space, and shall have a vertical clearance of at least fourteen (14) feet. 
(c)  Access: Each required off-street loading berth shall be designed with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner which will least interfere with traffic movements. 
(d)  Surfacing: All open off-street loading berths shall be improved with a compacted macadam base, not less than seven (7) inches thick, surfaced with not less than two (2) inches of asphaltic concrete or some comparable all weather dustless material. 
(e)  Repair and service: No motor vehicles repair work or service of any kind shall be permitted in conjunction with loading facilities provided in any residence or business districts. Space allocated to any off-street loading shall not while so allocated be used to satisfy the space requirements for any off-street parking facilities or portions thereof. 
(f)  Schedule of loading requirements: For the uses listed in the following table, off-street loading berths shall be provided on the basis of the gross floor of the building or portions thereof devoted to such uses in the amounts shown herein. 
SCHEDULE OF LOADING REQUIREMENTS 
	Use 	Gross Floor Area In Square Feet 	Required Number and Minimum Horizontal Dimensions of Berths 
a. 	Hospital, sanitariums, and other institutional uses. 	10,000 to 200,000 	1—(10 feet × 25 feet) 
b. 	Hotels, clubs and lodges, except as set forth in Item e. 	For each additional 200,000 or fraction thereof 	1 additional—(10 feet × 25 feet) 
c. 	Hotels, clubs and lodges, when containing any of the following: Retail shops, convention halls, or business or professional offices (other than accessory) 	10,000 to 20,000 
20,000 to 150,000 
For each additional 150,000 or fraction thereof 	1—(10 ft. × 25 feet) 
1—(10 feet × 50 feet) 
1 additional—(10 feet × 50 feet) 
d. 	Retail stores. 	5,000 to 10,000 	1—(10 feet × 25 feet) 
e. 	Establishments dispensing food or beverages for consumption on the premises. 	10,000 to 25,000 
25,000 to 40,000 	2—(10 feet × 25 feet each) 
2—(10 feet × 50 feet each) 
f. 	Motor vehicle and machinery sales. 	40,000 to 100,000 	3—(10 feet × 50 feet each) 
g. 	Wholesale establishments (but not including warehouse and storage buildings other than accessory). 	For each additional 200,000 or fraction thereof 	1 additional—(10 feet × 50 feet) 
h. 	Auditoriums, convention halls exhibition halls, sports arenas, stadiums. 	10,000 to 20,000 
20,000 to 100,000 	1—(10 feet × 25 feet) 
1—(10 feet × 50 feet) 
i. 	Bowling alleys. 	For each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 	1 additional—(10 feet × 50 feet) 
j. 	Banks and offices, business, professional and governmental. 	10,000 to 100,000 
For each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof to 500,000 
For each additional 500,000 or fraction thereof 	1—(10 feet × 25 feet) 
1 additional—(10 feet × 25 feet) 
1 additional—(10 feet × 25 feet) 
k. 	Establishments engaged in production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing, or repair of materials, goods or products. 	5,000 to 10,000 
10,000 to 40,000 
40,000 to 100,000 	1—(10 feet × 25 feet) 
1—(10 feet × 50 feet) 
2—(10 feet × 50 feet each) 
l. 	Warehouses and storage buildings. 	For each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 	1 additional—(10 feet × 50 feet) 
m. 	Theaters 	8,000 to 25,000 
For each additional 50,000 or fraction thereof 	1—(10 feet × 25 feet) 1 additional—(10 feet × 25 feet) 
n. 	Undertaking establishments and funeral parlors 	8,000 to 100,000 
For each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 	1—(10 feet × 25 feet) 
1 additional—(10 feet × 25 feet) 
 
(Code 1980, App. B, § X; Ord. No. 93-4, § 1c., 2-25-1993; Ord. No. 96-30, § 1(Exh. A), 5-23-1996; Ord. No. 18-74, § 2, 12-13-2018)  
Sec. XI. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 07-21, adopted Apr. 17, 2007, deleted § XI in its entirety. Former § XI pertained to signs and derived from the 1980 Code; Ord. No. 96-30, adopted May 23, 1996; and Ord. No. 00-44, adopted Aug. 24, 2000.  
Sec. XII. - Administration. 
12.1 Enforcing officer. 
The building commissioner of the City of Calumet City shall be the zoning administrator of the City of Calumet City. Said administrator shall see that the provisions of this ordinance are properly enforced. 
Restrictions on employees. No official or employee responsible for the enforcing of this ordinance shall engage directly or indirectly in the construction industry or the building professions, or in any type of gainful employment or business that conflicts with official duties or the interests of the business incorporated in this ordinance. 
12.2 Zoning permit. 
No building or structure shall be erected, reconstructed, enlarged, or moved until a permit shall have been applied for in writing and issued by the building commissioner. Said permit shall be posted in a prominent place on the premises prior to and during the period of erection, reconstruction, enlargement or moving. 
Before a permit is issued for the erection, moving, alteration, enlargement or occupancy of any building, or structure or use of premises, the plans and intended use shall indicate conformity in all respects to the provisions of this ordinance. 
Site plan. Every application for permit submitted to the building commissioner shall be accompanied by a site plan, drawn to scale, showing the zoning lot, required yards, the location of buildings on the lot, accurate dimensions of the lot, and any existing and proposed uses together with such other information as may be necessary for the enforcement of this ordinance. 
Certain permit applications and zoning petitions may require site development plan approval under subsection 12.9 and landscape plan approval under subsection 12.10 of this ordinance. 
12.3 Interpretation of ordinance. 
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this ordinance, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of health, safety, morals, convenience of the general welfare. 
12.4 Certificate of occupancy. 
A certificate of occupancy to be issued by the building commissioner shall be required for any of the following, except buildings incidental to agricultural operations other than residences: 
(a)  Occupancy and use of a building thereafter erected or enlarged; 
(b)  Change in use of an existing building; 
(c)  Occupancy and use of land to a use of a different classification, except for the raising of crops; 
(d)  Change in the use of land to a use of a different classification, except for the raising of crops; 
(e)  Any change in the use of a nonconforming use. 
No such occupancy, use or change of use, shall take place until a certificate of occupancy therefore shall be issued. 
Written application for a certificate of occupancy for a new building or for an existing building which has been enlarged shall be made at the same time as the application for the building permit for such building. Said certificate shall be acted upon within seven (7) days after a written request for the same has been made to the building commissioner after the erection or enlargement of such building or part thereof has been completed in conformance with the provisions of this ordinance. 
Pending the issuance of such a certificate, a temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued by the building commissioner for a period of not more than six (6) months during the completion of the construction of the building or of alterations which are required under the terms of any law or ordinance. Such temporary certificate may be renewed, but it shall not be construed in any way to alter the respective rights, during or obligations of the owner or of the city relating to the use or occupancy of the land or building, or any other matter covered by this ordinance, and such temporary certificate shall not be issued except under such restrictions and provisions as will adequately ensure the safety of the occupants. 
Written application for a certificate of occupancy for the use of vacant land, or for a change in the use of land or of a building, or for a change in a nonconforming use, as herein provided, shall be made to the building commissioner. 
If the proposed use is in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance, the certificate of occupancy therefore shall be issued within seven (7) days after the application for the same has been made. 
Each certificate of occupancy shall state that the building or proposed use of a building or land complies with all provisions of this ordinance. 
A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept on file in the office of the building commissioner and a copy shall be forwarded on request, to any person having proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land affected. 
12.5 Zoning board of appeals. 
Zoning board of appeals established. 
There is hereby established a zoning board of appeals. Said zoning board of appeals shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by the mayor by and with the advice and consent of the city council of the City of Calumet City. 
Each member so appointed shall serve for a term of five (5) years. Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner for the unexpired term. Members may be removed by the city council for cause after written charges have been filed and after a public hearing has been held if demanded by the member so charged. 
One (1) of the members of said zoning board of appeals at the time of his appointment shall be designated by the mayor with the consent of the city council, as chairman of said zoning board of appeals and shall hold said office as chairman until a successor is appointed. Such chairman, or in his absence, the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. 
The zoning board of appeals shall have a secretary and may employ a court reporter who shall make and keep a record of all of its meetings and official acts. 
The zoning board of appeals in existence at the time of the passage of this ordinance shall be recognized as the zoning board of appeals established under the provisions of this ordinance, and the members previously appointed under the old ordinance shall be recognized as members thereof, and shall serve for such period of time as designated at time of appointment, the time to run from the date of the original appointment under the old ordinance. 
Jurisdiction. 
The zoning board of appeals is hereby vested with the following jurisdiction and authority: 
(a)  To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the zoning administrator under this ordinance; 
(b)  To hear applications for variations from the terms provided in this zoning ordinance in the manner prescribed by, and subject to, the standards established herein, and make recommendations to the city council regarding such applications. 
(c)  To review and make recommendations to the city council on certain proposed site plans and landscape plans in accord with subsection 12.9 and 12.10 of this ordinance. 
Meetings. 
All meetings of the zoning board of appeals shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the zoning board of appeals may determine. 
All meetings of the zoning board of appeals shall be open to the public. 
The zoning board of appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon every question, or absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall also keep records of its examinations and other official actions. Findings of fact shall be included in the minutes of each case and the reasons for granting or denying such application shall be specified. Every rule, regulations and every order, requirement, decision, or determination of the zoning board of appeals shall immediately be filed in the office of the executive secretary and shall be of public record. 
The zoning board of appeals shall adopt its own rules of procedure and may require submission to each record, plats and other information necessary to make its determination. A copy of said rules and procedure, and all recommendations thereto, and shall be filed in the office of the building commissioner. 
The minutes of the zoning board of appeals shall be open to public examination at reasonable hours. 
Expenses incurred by the zoning board of appeals are to be itemized and shall be borne by Calumet City. 
The building commissioner is authorized to require applicants for building permits as a condition for issuance of said permit to provide reasonable aesthetic and sound barriers between contiguous barriers which have different zoning classifications. 
Finality of decisions of the zoning board of appeals. Decisions and findings of the zoning board of appeals on appeal from any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the zoning administration shall be final administrative determinations and shall be subject to review by court as by law may be provided. 
12.6 Variations. [2] 
Purpose. The zoning board of appeals, after a public hearing, may recommend that the city council vary the regulations of this ordinance in harmony with their general purpose and intent, only in the specific instances hereinafter set forth and only where the board of appeals made findings of fact in accordance with the standards hereinafter prescribed, and further finds that there are practical difficulties or particular hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the regulations of this ordinance. 
Application for variation and notice of hearing. 
An application for a variation shall be filed in writing with the city clerk. The application shall contain such information as the zoning board of appeals may from time to time, by rule, require. The city council shall by motion or resolution refer the same to the zoning board of appeals. 
The zoning board of appeals shall publish notice of a public hearing on the application for variation, stating the time and place and the purpose of the hearing. Notice shall be published at least fifteen (15) days but not more than thirty (30) days in a paper of general circulation in Calumet City. Notice of the public hearing may be mailed to the petitioner and the owners of all property deemed by the zoning board of appeals to be affected thereby. 
The zoning board of appeals shall, within thirty (30) days after the public hearing or hearings, render its recommendation in writing to the owner or applicant and the city council of its action. 
Standards for variations. 
The zoning board of appeals shall not recommend a variance in the regulations of this ordinance, unless it shall make findings based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case that each and all the standards for hardships set forth in the Illinois Municipal Code are complied with and specifically that: 
(a)  Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if a strict letter of regulations were carried out. 
(b)  The conditions upon which the petition for a variation is based are unique to the property for which the variance is sought and are not applicable, generally, to other property within the same zoning classification. 
(c)  The alleged difficulty or hardship is caused by the ordinance and has not been created by any person presently having an interest in the property. 
(d)  The granting of the variation will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the neighborhood in which the property is located. 
(e)  The proposed variation will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property, or substantially increase the congestion in the public streets, or increase the danger of fire, or endanger the public safety, or substantially diminish or impair property values within the neighborhood. 
The zoning board of appeals may impose such conditions and restrictions upon the premises benefitted by a variation as may be necessary to comply with the standards established in this subsection, to reduce or minimize the effect of such variation upon other property in the neighborhood and to better carry out the general intent of this ordinance. 
Authorized variation. 
Variations from the regulations of this ordinance shall be recommended by the zoning board of appeals only in accordance with the standards established in the above subsection, and may be granted only in the following instances and in not others: 
(a)  To permit any yard or setback less than the yard to setback required by the applicable regulations, but by not more than twenty-five (25) percent. 
(b)  To permit the use of a lot or lots for a use otherwise prohibited solely because of insufficient area or width of the lot or lots but in no event shall the respective area and width of the lot or lots be less than eighty (80) percent of the required area and width. The percentage set forth in this subparagraph is not to be reduced by any other percentage for minimum lot width and area set forth in this ordinance. 
(c)  To permit the same off-street parking facility to qualify as required facilities for two (2) or more uses, provided the substantial use of such facility by each use does not take place at approximately the same hours of the same days of the week. 
(d)  To reduce the applicable off-street parking or loading facilities required by not more than one (1) parking space or loading space, or twenty (20) percent of the applicable regulations, whichever number is greater. 
(e)  To increase by not more than twenty-five (25) percent the maximum distance that required parking spaces are permitted to be located from the use served. 
(f)  To increase by not more than twenty (20) percent the gross area of any sign. 
(g)  To increase by not more than ten (10) percent the maximum gross floor area of any use so limited by the applicable regulations. 
(h)  To exceed any of the authorized variations allowed under this section, when a lot of record or a zoning lot, vacant or legally used on the effective date of this ordinance, is by reason of the exercise of the right of eminent domain by any authorized governmental body or by reason of the conveyance under threat of an eminent domain proceeding reduced in size so that the remainder of said lot of record or zoning lot or structure on said lot does not conform with one (1) or more of the regulations of the district in which said lot of record or zoning lot or structure is located. 
The concurring vote of four (4) members of the zoning board of appeals shall be necessary to recommend a variation. 
12.7 Special uses. 
Purpose. The development and execution of a zoning ordinance is based upon the division of the city into districts, within which districts the use of land and buildings and the bulk and location of building and structures in relation to the land are substantially uniform. It is recognized, however, that there are uses which because of their unique characteristics, cannot be properly classified in any particular district or districts without consideration, in each case of the impact of those uses upon neighboring land and of the public need for the particular user at the particular location. Such special uses fall into two (2) categories. 
(a)  Uses publicly operated or traditionally affected with a public interest; 
(b)  Uses entirely private in character but of such an unusual nature that their operation may give rise to unique problems with respect to their impact upon neighboring property or public facilities. 
Initiation of special uses. Any person owning or having an interest in the subject property may file an application to use such land for one (1) or more of the special uses provided for in this ordinance in the zoning district in which the land is situated. 
Application for special use. An application for a special use or expansion of a special use shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be accompanied by a site development plan and landscape plan in accord with subsections 12.9 and 12.10 of this ordinance. 
Hearing on application. Upon receipt of the application referred to above, the zoning board of appeals shall hold at least one (1) public hearing. At least fifteen (15) days in advance of such hearings, but not more than thirty (30) days, notice of time, place and purpose of such hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in Calumet City. 
Authorization. For each application for a special use, the zoning board of appeals shall report to the city council its findings and recommendations, including the stipulations of additional conditions and guarantees that such conditions will be complied with when they are deemed necessary for the protection of the public interest. The city council may grant or deny any application for a special use, provided, however, that in the event of written protest against any proposed special use, signed and acknowledged by the owners of twenty (20) percent of the frontage adjacent thereto, or across an alley, or directly opposite therefrom, such special use shall not be granted except by the favorable vote of two-thirds ( 2/3 )of all the members of the city council. 
Standards. No special use shall be recommended by the zoning board of appeals unless said zoning board of appeals shall find: 
(a)  That the establishment, maintenance or operation of the special use will not be unreasonably detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, morals, comfort or general welfare; 
(b)  That the special use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already permitted, nor substantially diminish and impair property values within the neighborhood; 
(c)  That the establishment of the special use will not impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of surrounding property for uses permitted in the district; 
(d)  That adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and/or other necessary facilities have been or are being provided; 
(e)  That adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress or egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets; 
(f)  That the special use shall in all other respects conform to the applicable regulations of the district in which it is located, except as such regulations may in each instance be modified by the city council pursuant to the recommendations of the zoning board of appeals. 
Conditions and guarantees. Prior to granting any special use, the mayor and city council shall stipulate such conditions and restrictions upon the establishment, location, construction, maintenance and operation of a special use as deemed necessary for the protection of the public interest and to secure compliance with the standards and requirements specified herein, or as may be from time to time required. In all cases in which special uses are granted, the mayor and city council shall require such evidence and guarantees as it may deem necessary as proof that the conditions stipulated in connection therewith are being, and will be, complied with. 
Effect of denial of a special use. After a public hearing, no application for a special use which has been denied wholly or in part by the mayor and city council shall be resubmitted for a period of one (1) year from the date of said order of denial, except on the grounds of substantial new evidence or proof of changed conditions found to be valid by the zoning board of appeals, the mayor and city council. 
Termination of special use permit. If work on the proposed development has not begun within six (6) months from the date of the authorization order of the mayor and city council, the authorization shall become null and void and all rights thereunder shall lapse. Upon written application, filed prior to the termination of the six (6) months time limit, the mayor and the city council may authorize a single extension of the time limit for a further period of not more than one (1) year. 
12.8 Planned development. 
Purpose. To encourage the most orderly development of properties through advance planning and thus assure adequate standards for the development of residential neighborhoods; provide regulations to encourage a variety of dwelling types; assure adequate open space; protect residential areas from undue traffic congestion; protect residential areas from the intrusion of business, industrial and other land uses that may create an adverse effect upon the living environment; and thus promote the general welfare of the community. 
Provisions. The basic provisions and requirements concerning planned developments are as follows: The subdivision, development and use of land as an integral unit, combining more than one (1) primary land use and which may provide for single-family residential, multiple-family residential, education, business, commercial, industrial, recreational, park and common open areas, may be described as planned development. 
(a)  In its establishment and authorization as a special use, in addition to the foregoing provisions, the following procedures, requirements, restrictions, standards, and conditions shall be observed. 
(b)  The planned development may be excepted from the provision of the subdivision regulations and of the zoning ordinance of Calumet City to the extent specified in this ordinance and in the final authorization of the planned development. 
Procedure. 
(a)  A pre-application conference shall be held with the building department. At such conference the applicant shall provide information as to the location of the proposed planned development, the uses, and approximate area of use category; a list of any and all exceptions to the subdivision and zoning ordinances of Calumet City; and any other information necessary to clearly explain the planned development to the building department. 
(1)  The building department shall review and consider the proposed as to its compatibility with the comprehensive plan and the goals and policies for planning of Calumet City and advise the applicant on the information, documents, exhibits, drawings, and any limitations on the proposal that should be included in the application to the city for a special use permit for planned development. 
(b)  The applicant shall request the special use permit, by letter addressed to the Calumet City Zoning Board, to be placed on the agenda of the zoning board for a preliminary discussion of the proposed planned development, and the zoning board shall consider the proposed planned development at such meeting, which may be continued from time to time. The applicant shall present such exhibits and written information as may be necessary to fully acquaint the plan commission with the proposed development which shall include, but not necessarily be limited to the following: 
(1)  A tentative sketch plan, which may be in freehand sketch form, showing the location and extent of the types of land uses proposed. 
(2)  The existing topography at five (5) foot contour intervals which may be taken from U.S.G.S. information. 
(3)  Existing streets surrounding the subject property. 
(4)  Existing utilities including storm drainage facilities. 
(5)  The following shall be provided by either graphic exhibits or written statement: 
The density of residential uses and the number of dwelling units by type; 
The ancillary and nonresidential uses to be provided in a residential planned development; 
The off-street parking and other service facilities proposed; 
The exceptions or variations to the Calumet City zoning or subdivision requirements being requested as part of the planned development application. 
(c)  Within thirty (30) days after final adjournment of the meeting, the plan commission shall submit to the mayor and city council a report in writing containing its recommendations. 
(d)  The formal petition for a planned development shall be addressed to the mayor and city council and shall be filed with the city clerk; twenty (20) copies of the petition shall be filed with the secretary of the plan commission; attached to each copy shall be copies of the supporting documents and exhibits hereinafter provided for. 
(e)  A filing fee in an amount of two dollars ($2.00) per dwelling unit or ten dollars ($10.00) per gross acres, whichever is greater, shall be paid to the city clerk at the time of such filing. 
(f)  The city clerk shall set a hearing date which shall be not less than thirty (30) or more than sixty (60) days after the filing of the petition, and shall cause notice of the hearing to be published at least once, not more than thirty (30) days nor less than fifteen (15) days before said hearing date in one (1) or more newspapers of general circulation in Calumet City. 
(g)  The city clerk shall forward a copy of the petition to the mayor and to each member of the zoning board of appeals. 
(h)  The petition shall be heard by the zoning board of appeals and reviewed by the planning commission and the report of both committees shall be submitted to the mayor and the city council. The report of the findings and recommendations shall be accompanied by such plats, exhibits and agreements as shall have been presented by the petitioner, each identified for reference by letter or number together with any suggested changes therein. 
(i)  The mayor and city council may grant a special use for a planned development which shall be by specific ordinance and which shall contain or to which shall be appended all terms and conditions of the special use permit, including covenants and agreements, guarantees, performance bonds, plats and the like. 
Content of petition. The formal petition shall contain, in addition to all other requirements, the following: 
(a)  A site plan of the planned development. This plan will be at a scale of not less than one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') which shall show all proposed streets (public and private), street classifications, rights-of-way, pavement width of street and driveways, all principal and accessory buildings and their use, lot sizes, building lines, easements for utility services, off-street parking, service areas, open space, recreation facilities and any other information necessary to clearly show the proposed elements of the planned development. 
(b)  Preliminary architectural plans for all residential buildings shall be submitted in sufficient detail to show the basic planning, the number of units per building and the number of bedrooms per dwelling unit. 
Preliminary architectural plans are not required for business of other nonresidential buildings at the time of this application but must be submitted to the plan commission for its approval prior to filing an application for a building permit. 
(c)  A topographic survey with two (2) foot contour intervals and boundary survey of the subject area, prepared and certified by a registered Illinois surveyor. 
(d)  A rendered plan of the planned development area showing in contrasting colors or by other means the respective location of all categories of land use. 
(e)  A map of Calumet City, Illinois showing the location of the planned development site and its relation to the existing roads and streets and use districts within the immediately adjacent and surrounding area. 
(f)  Preliminary plans and outline specifications of the following improvements: 
(1)  Roads, streets and alleys, including classifications, width of right-of-way, widths of paved surfaces and construction details. 
(2)  Sidewalks, including widths of paved surfaces and construction details. 
(3)  Sanitary and storm sewer system. 
(4)  Water supply system. 
(5)  Street lighting and public area lighting system. 
(6)  Recommended installations for electric, gas and telephone facilities and distribution. 
(7)  Sequence of phases or stages of development of the planned development. 
(8)  A general landscape planting plan shall be prepared by a landscape architect and shall meet the approval of the plan commission. 
(g)  Estimates of cost of installation of all proposed improvements, confirmed by a registered Illinois engineer. 
(h)  Petitioner's proposed covenants, restrictions and conditions to be established as a part of the planned development. 
Construction of improvements. The petitioner shall construct and install the required improvements and must post in accordance with the Calumet City Subdivision Control Ordinance. 
Street classifications. Street classifications, definitions, and specifications, shall be in accord with the regulations pertaining to same as established in the subdivision regulations and the comprehensive plan of Calumet City, Illinois, as may be amended from time to time, as may be modified by the special use permit. 
Standards. No planned development shall be authorized by the city council unless the plan commission shall find and recommend, in addition to those standards established herein for special uses, that the following standards will be met: 
(a)  General. 
(1)  The uses permitted by such exceptions as may be requested or recommended are necessary or desirable and appropriate to the purpose of the development. 
(2)  The uses permitted in such development are not of such nature or so located as to exercise an undue detrimental influence or effect upon the surrounding neighborhood. 
(3)  That any industrial park areas established in the planned development conform to all requirements therefore as set forth elsewhere in this ordinance. 
(4)  That all minimum requirements pertaining to commercial, residential, institutional, or other uses established in the planned development shall be subject to the requirements for each individual classification as established elsewhere in this ordinance, except as may be specifically varied in the ordinance granting and establishing a planned development use. 
(5)  When private streets and common driveways are made a part of the planned development or private common open space or recreation facilities are provided, the applicant shall submit as part of the application, the method and arrangement whereby these private facilities shall be operated and maintained. Such arrangements for operating and maintaining private facilities shall be subject to the approval of the mayor and city council. 
(b)  Residential. 
(1)  Residential density for a planned development shall not be greater than that specified in each use district for planned developments, nor shall any lot to be used for residential purposes be less in area or dimension than that required by the district regulations applicable to the district in which the planned development is located as specified in said district for planned developments. The plan commission may recommend and the mayor and city council may grant a reduction in such lot area and dimension, but not more than twenty (20) percent when the planned development provides common open space equal to not less than ten (10) percent of the gross area of the planned development. 
(2)  Business uses may be included as part of a planned residential development when the plan commission finds that such business uses are beneficial to the overall planned development and will not be injurious to adjacent or neighboring properties. Such business uses shall not be greater in area than ten (10) percent of the planned development. 
(3)  The open areas provided in the part of the planned development containing only residential structures shall be preserved over the life of the planned development for use only by the residents of the planned development or dedicated to Calumet City, Illinois for school, park playground or other public uses by an instrument or guarantee acceptable to the mayor and city council. 
(4)  For that part of a planned development devoted to residential uses, the plan commission may recommend and the mayor and city council may approve, access to a dwelling by a driveway or pedestrian walk easement, and spacing between buildings of lesser widths or depths than required by district regulations for the district in which the planned development is located, provided: 
That adequate provisions are made which perpetuate during the period of the special use, access easements and off-street parking spaces for use by the residents of the dwellings served; 
The spacing between buildings shall be approved by the plan commission and shall be consistent with the application of recognized site planning principles for securing a unified development, and due consideration is given to the openness normally afforded by intervening streets and alleys. Minimum side yards between principal buildings within a part of a planned development where subsequent transfer of ownership is contemplated, shall be equivalent to side yards as would be required between buildings by district regulations for the district in which it is located; and 
The yards for principal buildings along the periphery of the development shall be not less in width or depth than required for permitted uses in the district regulations applicable to the districts in which the planned development is located, and the plan is developed to afford adequate protection to neighboring properties as recommended by the zoning board and approved by the mayor and city council. 
(c)  Variations of minimum requirements. 
(1)  Residential. Wherever the applicant proposes to provide and set out, by platting, deed, dedication, restriction, or covenant, any land or space separate from single-family or multiple-family residential districts, to be used for parks, playgrounds, commons, greenways, or open areas, the zoning board, may consider and recommend to the mayor and the city council, and the mayor and city council may vary the applicable minimum requirements of the subdivision regulations and the zoning ordinance which may include but necessarily be limited to the following: 
Rear yard. 
Side yard. 
Lot area. 
Bulk. 
Intensity of use. 
Street width. 
Sidewalks. 
Public utilities. 
Off-street parking. 
(2)  Business. 
Business uses shall be as prescribed by the zoning board. 
All business and storage of materials shall be conducted or stored within a completely enclosed building. 
Not more than thirty (30) percent of the lot area shall be covered by buildings or structures. 
At least ten (10) percent of the lot shall be provided for landscape and open space purposes. 
Off-street parking shall be provided and maintained on the same lot based upon three (3) square feet of parking space for each square foot of gross floor area unless the building commissioner recommends and the mayor and city council approves additional off-street parking space. 
Service and loading and unloading facilities shall be provided as recommended and approved by the building commissioner. 
No building shall be located nearer than fifty (50) feet to any street line. 
Business developments shall be adequately screened by fencing or landscaping or both along the boundaries of adjacent residential, public open space, schools, churches, or other similar uses. The screen planting shall be prepared by a landscape architect and shall meet the approval of the building commissioner. 
Outside lighting shall be so designed and placed so as to not be disturbing to adjacent residential areas. 
Signs shall comply with the regulations of the business uses permitted in this ordinance. 
12.9 State Street—State Line Road Redevelopment Area site development plan review. 
(1)  Authority. The city council and the city council committee on development, subject to the procedures provided herein, have the authority to approve or disapprove site development plans required to be submitted for approval under this section. 
(2)  Purpose. Site plan review and approval is required to ensure that the use and development of land within the State Street—State Line Road Redevelopment Project Area is undertaken in an orderly and proper manner which furthers the public health, safety and welfare and makes adequate provision to ensure the available of appropriate public and private services and amenities and for minimizing the adverse effects of such development. 
The design, orientation and location of open spaces, buildings, structures and signs visible from public streets, places and ways has a material and substantial relationship to property values and the taxable values of property in the city and the cost of the municipal services provided thereto. Further, many neighborhoods in other urban and suburban communities have deteriorated in the past by reason of the lack of planning, neglect of proper maintenance standards and the erection of buildings and structures unsuitable to and incompatible with the character of the neighborhood or area, resulting in a reduction in property values. 
Therefore, it is the policy of the city that these regulations be adopted to arrest and prevent deterioration of the function, character and appearance of the State Street and State Line Road Redevelopment Area; provide a favorable environment for residents and businesses; and preserve and enhance the general public welfare. 
(3)  Approved plan, when required. 
Site plan approval shall be required for any nonresidential development within the State Street—State Line Road Redevelopment Area, as illustrated in Figure 1, and under the following intended situations: 
(a)  Any new principal structure intended and designed for nonresidential occupancy (or complete redevelopment of any site for nonresidential use) or the use of land for nonresidential purposes. 
 
Figure 1, State Street - State Line Road Redevelopment Area 
(b)  Where an existing principal structure erected prior to the date of adoption of these site plan requirements is proposed to be expended, for which the sum total of gross floor area expansion(s) since the date of these requirements are equal to or greater than thirty-five (35) percent of the total gross floor area of said structure. 
(c)  Any new or modified building and/or site improvements for a zoning lot which has previously received site plan approval under this ordinance. Reapproval of the plan is required for components of the plan which depart from the approved site plan. The extent of changes to be incorporated in the submittal for reapproval shall be determined by the building commissioner. 
(d)  A site plan shall not be required as a result of a change of use, except where such change of use results in increased off-street parking requirements which are not currently met on the site. 
(e)  A site plan shall be required along with any application for a special use permit or a special use permit amendment for any nonresidential development. 
(f)  These requirements exclude the legal reconstruction of legally nonconforming buildings, when such buildings and related improvements are substantially restored consistent with their prior condition. 
Site plan review is not required as part of planned development approval (subsection 12.8), but may apply to development of individual sites following approval of a special use planned unit development, as controlled by the ordinance granting planned development approval. 
(4)  Initiation. Plan approval shall be initiated by the owner of the property, or the owner's agent, for which plan approval is sought. 
(5)  Procedure for initiation. 
(a)  The owner of the property for which a zoning map amendment or a special use permit is sought (requiring site plan approval under subsection (3) above) shall file an application for site plan approval along with such application for an amendment or special use permit. 
(b)  The owner of the property for which a building permit is sought (requiring site plan approval under section (3), above) and which development has not been approved under the requirements of this section, shall file an application for site plan approval along with an application for such building or zoning permit. 
(c)  The owner of the property, or a duly authorized representative of the owner, shall file an application for site plan approval with the building commissioner, or his/her designee. It shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee established from time to time by the city council and shall contain the following information: 
1.  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant including the name and address of each person or entity owning an interest in the applicant or owner and the extent of such ownership interest unless any of such entities is a corporation or a partnership, in which case only those persons owning an interest in excess of ten (10) percent in such corporation or partnership need be identified by name, address and extent of interest. For purposes of this section, the term ownership interest shall include any legal or equitable interest held at the time of the application in the real property which is the subject of the application. The application shall include the signature of the owner(s). 
2.  A site plan containing the information required by subsection (6), below. 
(6)  Contents of a site plan application. The application shall include the following information and material for sites and development projects which have not received site plan approval under this ordinance or prior to the adoption of this ordinance. For those sites and development projects which have received site plan approval subsequent to the adoption of this ordinance (excluding P.U.D.s) which require reapproval as a result of a change in planned conditions, the building commissioner is authorized to waive requirements in this section which are not affected by or do not apply to the proposed change: 
(a)  Site plan application. 
1.  A completed application form provided by the building department. 
2.  Each application associated with a map zoning amendment or special use permit shall provide nineteen (19) copies of all full-size documents and drawings. For applications associated with an application for a building permit or zoning permit approval, twelve (12) copies of all full-sized documents and drawings shall be submitted. For all graphic and plan drawings, a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet shall be used. In no event shall individual sheets or drawings exceed thirty (30) inches by forty-two (42) inches. In addition, one (1) set of reduced copies sized at eleven (11) inches by seventeen (17) inches shall be submitted. 
3.  The names and addresses of the persons responsible for preparing the plan. 
4.  The present zoning of the site and adjoining property. 
5.  Any other information that may reasonably be required by the city council, city council committee on development, or the zoning board of appeals, as the case may be, which may include, but is not limited to, the following: 
a.  A traffic study. 
b.  In the case of a map amendment or special use, an analysis of the need and demand for the proposed use and the impact of the proposed use on the value of adjoining and nearby properties. 
c.  A fiscal impact analysis. 
(b)  An existing conditions map shall show the location, dimensions, size and height of the following, as applicable: 
1.  Sidewalks, streets, alleys, easements and utilities, including street lighting and underground conduits for street lighting. 
2.  Buildings and structures. 
3.  Septic fields, wells and public sewer and water systems. 
4.  Driveways, entrances, exits and parking areas. 
5.  Water mains and fire hydrants. 
6.  Natural and artificial watercourses and bodies of water and wetlands. 
7.  Limits of floodplains, if any. 
8.  Areas that can reasonably be expected to or which do contain soils or materials contaminated with any toxic or hazardous materials. 
9.  Underground storage tanks, if any. 
10.  The topography of existing ground and paved areas. Topography is to be shown by dashed lines illustrating one (1) foot standard contour intervals and by spot elevations where necessary to indicate flat areas. 
11.  General alignment and lengths of all streets and all property lines. 
12.  All building restriction lines, highway setback lines, easements, covenants, reservations and rights-of-way. 
13.  Date, scale and north point. 
(c)  A site plan shall be prepared to show the general location, dimensions, size and height of the following regarding the proposed development: 
1.  For a site plan which includes any existing structures or other improvements, an indication of those improvements that are to remain and those which will be removed. 
2.  Sidewalks, streets, alleys, easements and utilities, including any street lighting. 
3.  Buildings and structures with entrances and exits identified. 
4.  A general utility plan for water and for sewage disposal. 
5.  Slopes, terraces and retaining walls. 
6.  Driveways, entrances, exits, parking areas and sidewalks. 
7.  Water mains and fire hydrants. 
8.  Natural and artificial watercourses and bodies of water and wetlands. 
9.  Distances between buildings. 
10.  Calculations of the following, as applicable: 
a.  Square footage of nonresidential structures/uses; 
b.  Number of parking spaces; 
c.  Number of loading spaces; 
d.  Total land area; 
e.  Total landscaped area; 
f.  Total open space; 
g.  Total impervious surface. 
11.  Tentative plans for collecting and depositing storm water and the method of treatment of natural and artificial watercourses, including a delineation of proposed limits of floodplains, if any. 
12.  A general indication of proposed grading, surface drainage, terraces, retaining wall heights, grades on paved areas and ground floor elevations of proposed buildings and structures. 
13.  A landscape plan showing the location, names and area coverage of trees, shrubs and ground cover to be planted in accordance with subsection 12.10. 
14.  Plans to remediate, remove, or control on site any contaminated soils, materials, underground storage tanks, etc. 
15.  Plans for minimizing or mitigating the impact on existing wetlands, if any. 
16.  Proposed locations and methods of enclosing refuse disposal systems. 
17.  A light plan indicating all exterior building-mounted and freestanding lights and structures including overall height, type of lamp, luminaries. 
18.  General exterior building elevation of all proposed structures and exterior elevations of existing buildings when existing buildings are proposed to be structurally altered. 
(7)  Agreement of owner. All documents and information submitted as part of an application for site plan approval constitute a statement by the applicant that he or she intends and agrees to be bound to develop in accord with such information upon approval. 
(8)  Notice requirements. Site plans do not require any form of public notice; however, a site plan application concurrently filed with an application for a zoning map amendment or an application for a special use permit shall state that site plan approval is sought as part of the public notice in addition to the requested map and/or special use permit amendment. 
(9)  Procedure for decisions. Plans which are filed with an application for a zoning map amendment or with an application for a special use permit shall be processed as a part of the amendment or special use petition. All other site plans shall be approved under the following procedure. 
(a)  Action by city council committee on development. Within sixty (60) days of the date that the site plan application was filed, the item shall appear on the agenda of the city council committee on development. The city council committee on development shall approve or deny the site plan. Approval shall be made upon action by a majority vote of those committee members present. 
(10)  Standards for plans. In reaching a decision to approve or disapprove a site plan, the following factors listed below, as applicable to a given plan, should be considered. 
(a)  The application shall comply with the provisions of this ordinance and other ordinances of the city and of any other applicable laws. 
(b)  Reasonable provision shall be made to ensure that development will be served by essential public facilities and services such as highways, streets, parking spaces, police and fire protection, drainage structures, refuse disposal, water and sewers. 
(c)  Any building or structure shall be reasonably accessible to fire, police, emergency and service vehicles. When deemed necessary for access, emergency vehicle easements shall be provided. The access for fire, police and emergency vehicles shall be unobstructed at all times. 
(d)  Streets and sidewalks shall, insofar as reasonably practicable, provide access and good traffic circulation to and from adjacent lands, existing streets and sidewalks. 
(e)  Provision shall be made to ensure that adequate access roads or entrance or exit drives will be provided and will be designed and improved so as to prevent traffic hazards or problems and to minimize traffic congestion in public streets. 
(f)  Plans have demonstrated the ability to provide for the adequate collection and disposition of all on- and off-site storm water and natural water, including but not limited to on-site drainage retention facilities. 
(g)  Adequate provision shall be made to clean, control and otherwise alleviate contamination or environmental hazards on land when the site is in an area found by the city to be contaminated by a toxic substance or otherwise to contain environmental hazards which are detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(h)  Adequate provision shall be made to avoid glare of vehicular and stationary lights that would affect the established character of the neighborhood, and to the extend such lights will be visible across from any property line, the performance standards for illumination shall be met. 
(i)  Adequate provision shall be made to ensure that the location, lighting and type of signs and the relationship of signs to traffic control is appropriate for the site and will not have an adverse affect on any adjacent properties. 
(11)  Conditions on plans. The city council, or city council committee on development, as appropriate, in consideration of any site plan, may impose certain conditions in granting plan approval to minimize any negative impacts or minimize any adverse impacts due to the development. 
(12)  Modifications of plans. Changes to site plans require reconsideration and reapproval by the city council or the city council committee on development, as provided in this subsection. 
(13)  Lapse of approval. Unless the city council, or the city council committee on development, as appropriate, provides otherwise, or unless the city council has extended the term of site plan approval, plan approval shall automatically lapse one (1) year after the date of approval of the plan, unless a building permit has been issued and construction commenced. 
12.10 Landscape plan approval. 
(1)  Purpose. The landscaping, screening and site design requirements specified herein are intended to foster aesthetically pleasing and functional development. The regulations are intended to increase the compatibility between adjacent land uses and accessory structures and uses within and between developments within the State Street—State Line Road subarea. The requirements serve to minimize impacts from noise, dust, debris and motor vehicle headlight glare to surrounding land use areas. 
(2)  Landscape plans, when required. Landscaped plans shall be required for all developments requiring site plan approval (under subsection (9) above) for land located within the State Street—State Line Road Redevelopment Area, as illustrated in Figure 1. 
The procedure for landscape plan approval shall follow the procedure for site plan approval. When required, landscape plans shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements of this subsection. 
(3)  Submission requirements. Each application association with a map zoning amendment or special use permit shall provide nineteen (19) copies of all full-sized documents and drawings. For applications associated with an application for a building permit or zoning permit approval, twelve (12) copies of all full-sized documents and document and drawings shall be submitted. For all graphic and plan drawings, a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet shall be used. Preferably, the scale of landscape plans shall be the same as the accompanying site plan. In no event, however, shall individual sheets or drawings exceed thirty (30) inches by forty-two (42) inches. In addition, one (1) reduced set of plans to eleven (11) inches by seventeen (17) inches shall be submitted. 
(4)  Requirements for a landscaping plan. A landscape plan shall include the following elements: 
(a)  A completed application form and appropriate fee. 
(b)  Consistent with the site development plan, the locations and dimensions of all existing and/or proposed parking lots, drives, roadways, and rights-of-way, sidewalks, bicycle paths, free-standing signs, refuse disposal areas, bicycle parking areas, free-standing electrical equipment, free-standing signs, building-mounted, heating, ventilating and air circulation equipment, and all fences. 
(c)  Species, planting size and location of proposed plant material required under this subsection. 
(d)  Illustrations indicating the proposed locations and methods for screening for refuse disposal areas. 
(e)  The location of all off-street loading areas, including an indication whether loading docks will be enclosed and methods of proposed screening. 
(f)  The location and placement of sprinkler heads of any proposed irrigation system. 
(g)  The following calculation, in square feet, displayed on the landscape plan: 
1.  Total site area; 
2.  Total area devoted to off-street parking (including access drives); 
3.  Total area devoted to impervious surfaces; 
4.  Total landscaped area; 
5.  Total parking lot landscaped area; 
6.  Total internal landscaping. 
(h)  Any other plan documentation requirements, including elevations, cross-sections and other plan details as deemed necessary by the building commissioner. 
(4.1)  Requirements for interior parking lot landscaping. 
(a)  Applicability. Parking lot landscaping shall apply to all nonresidential development within all residential zoning districts and shall meet the requirements of this section. Interior parking lot landscaping shall apply to developments requiring eight (8) or more off-street parking spaces. 
(b)  Interior parking lot landscaping. 
1.  Coverage. Not less than five (5) percent of the interior of a parking lot shall be devoted to landscaping. The "interior" of a parking lot shall mean the area encompassed between the backs-of-curbs or edge of pavement encompassing the drives and parking area serving the site. Perimeter landscaping islands penetrating the parking area may count toward the five (5) percent minimum landscaping requirement, provided all other requirements are met. Transitional yards shall not count toward parking lot landscaping. 
2.  Landscape areas. Interior parking lot landscaping is intended to be distributed throughout the parking lot. The design should facilitate pedestrian access through the site and seek to separate vehicle traffic from pedestrian traffic. 
3.  Landscaping material. 
a.  Type. The primary landscaping materials used in parking lots shall be shade trees which provide for shade. Ornamental trees, shrubbery and other live planting material may be used to supplement shade trees. 
b.  Quantity. One (1) large to medium shade tree shall be provided for each one hundred eighty (180) square feet of landscaped area. 
c.  Ground cover. A minimum of seventy-five (75) percent of each interior parking lot landscaping area shall be composed of live landscape material. 
(5)  Requirements for perimeter parking lot landscaping. 
(a)  Applicability. Perimeter parking lot landscaping shall be required except where parking lots are adjacent to a required transitional yard. Perimeter parking lot landscaping shall apply to all off-street parking areas regardless of size. 
(b)  Landscaping. 
1.  Planting material. 
Across from or adjoining a nonresidential property. Where a parking lot is located across a dedicated public right-of-way from or adjoins property zoned for a nonresidential use, or is designated for nonresidential use in the State Street—State Line Road Implementation Plan, landscaping shall be provided across fifty (50) percent of the street frontage to a minimum of three (3) feet in height. Such landscaping shall consist of shrubbery. 
Across from a residential property. Where a parking lot is located across a dedicated public right-of-way from property zoned for a residential district, or is designated for a residential use in the State Street—State Line Road Implementation Plan, landscaping shall be provided across one hundred (100) percent of the parking lot perimeter facing the public street (except for intersecting drives, signs and other obstructions to landscaping) to a minimum of three (3) feet in height. Such landscaping shall consist of shrubbery. 
2.  Ground cover. Except where occupied by planting beds, all perimeter parking lot landscaped areas located in a front yard shall be seeded or sodded. 
(6)  Requirements for transitional yards. 
(a)  Applicability. Transitional yards are intended to provide a physical separation between potentially incompatible land uses. In all cases where a transitional yard is required, the requirements of this section shall substitute for any parking lot screening requirement along the portion of any affected yard. 
Screening is required within the transitional yard(s) of a nonresidential development where the nonresidential development directly adjoins a residential district or land designated for residential use in the State Street—State Line Road Implementation Plan. This requirement does not apply to a nonresidential development which lies across public street right-of-way of land zoned or designated in the State Street—State Line Road Implementation Plan for residential use. This requirement does apply to a nonresidential development which lies across public alley right-of-way of land zoned or designated in the State Street—State Line Road Implementation Plan for residential use. 
(b)  Screening requirements in the B, B-2, and B-3 zoning districts. A screen shall consist of a solid fence, wall, or landscaping, or a combination thereof to provide a year-round solid visual screen at a minimum height of six (6) feet. Building walls of principal structures may substitute for fencing and/or landscaping, provided such walls are greater than six (6) feet in height, are located within five (5) of the property line along the transition yard, and when combined with any other screening materials, establish a continuous screen along the entire width of the yard. 
Where landscaping is utilized as screening in a transitional yard, the minimum dimension of any planting area shall be five (5) feet for shrubs and seven (7) feet for trees. 
(c)  Screening requirements in the OR, M-1 and M-2 districts 
(1)  Screening and berming. 
a.  Screening. Screening shall consist of solid fences, decorative walls, or landscaping or any combination thereof, and shall be used to provide a year-round solid visual screen to a minimum height of six (6) feet. 
b.  Berming. Transition yards may include earth berms. The design of berms is encouraged to provide a change in topographical orientation ad undulation. Side slopes are preferred at a ratio of four to one (4:1), although a maximum side slope of three to one (3:1) is permitted. Plantings placed on top of berms are restricted to species compatible with the terrain. 
(7)  Tree preservation. For landscape plans which propose to preserve existing trees, the methods which are to be used to preserve those trees shall be clearly specified in the landscape plan. If, in the opinion of the building commissioner, the necessary precautions, as specified in the tree preservation plan for the development, were not undertaken before or during construction to ensure the preservation of those trees, the land development permit for the parcel shall not be issued or, if previously issued, may be revoked until such time as these precautions have been complied with. The following precautions shall be taken in connection with new development proximate to existing trees: 
(a)  Grading and construction equipment. All grading and construction equipment shall not encroach upon the trees' drip lines. 
(b)  Materials detrimental to trees. Crushed limestone and other materials detrimental to trees shall not be dumped within the drip line of any trees nor at any higher location where drainage toward the tree could conceivably affect the health of the tree. 
(c)  Installation of snow fencing. Snow fencing shall be installed at the periphery of the trees' drip lines. 
(8)  Screening and landscaping requirements for building appurtenances and related elements. 
(a)  Exterior electrical and utility equipment. All ground-mounted electrical and utility-related connection and service boxes shall be effectively screened with shrubbery or other forms of living plant material to a minimum of fifty (50) percent opacity at the time of planting. Alternative methods of screening may be approved by the building commissioner where it is found that the size or positioning of the equipment to be screened presents unique conditions or difficulty in accomplishing the intent of this paragraph. This provision is not intended to apply to individual service pedestals less than twelve (12) inches by twelve (12) inches. 
(b)  Free-standing signs. All free-standing sign locations shall provide for landscaping around the base of the sign a minimum of two (2) feet from any portion of the base of the sign. Landscaping shall include shrubbery or annual flowering plant material or other plant material. 
(9)  Minimum planting requirements. 
(a)  Minimum planting sizes shall be as follows: 
1.  Large deciduous shade trees—Three (3) inches caliper as measured six (6) inches above ground. 
2.  Medium deciduous shade trees—Two and one-half (2.5) inches caliper as measured six (6) inches above ground. 
3.  Small deciduous and ornamental trees—Eight (8) feet in height, with the exception of true dwarf species. 
4.  Evergreens—Six (6) feet in height. 
5.  Shrubs—Twenty-four (24) inches. 
6.  Ground cover plants, whether in the form of crowns, plugs or containers, shall be planted in numbers appropriate by species to provide fifty (50) percent surface coverage after one (1) growing season. 
(b)  Methods of determining planting sizes shall be as follows: This section outlines acceptable specifications for shade trees and flowering trees. 
1.  Shade and flowering trees. In size grading baled and burlapped trees, caliper size shall take precedence over tree height. For purposes of simplicity, only one (1) size per "grade" will be listed. That size will be the minimum size allowable for that grade and shall include plants from that size up to but not including the next larger grade size. (Example: Acer rubrum, two (2) inch caliper. This could include Acer rubrum calipering two (2) inches up to but not including two and one-half (2½) inches in caliper, measured six (6) inches above the ground line.) 
The caliper of the trunk shall be taken six (6) inches above the ground up to and including four (4) inch caliper size, and twelve (12) inches above the ground for larger sizes. Seldom are tree trunks perfectly round. Therefore, caliper measurement may be taken with "slot" type caliper, "pincer" type caliper, or diameter tape. 
2.  Conifers and evergreens. For purposes of simplicity, only one (1) size per "grade" will be used. That size will be the minimum size allowable for the grade, and the grade shall include plants from that size up to but not including the next larger grade size. (Example: Taxus media "Brownii" fifteen (15) inches. This could include Taxus media "Brownii" fifteen (15) inches in height up to but not including eighteen (18) inches and having a minimum spread of twelve (12) inches.) 
The following height measurement units shall apply: Three-inch intervals up to eighteen (18) inches in height. Six-inch intervals from eighteen (18) inches to four (4) feet one (1) foot intervals greater than four (4) feet. 
3.  Deciduous shrubs. This section outlines acceptable specifications for deciduous shrubs, dwarf and semi-dwarf shrubs and strong growing shrubs. 
For purposes of simplicity, only one (1) size per "grade" will be used. That size will be the minimum size allowable for that grade, and the grade shall include plants from that size up to but not including the next larger grade size. (Example: Forsythia, two (2) feet. This could include Forsythia plants with not less than three (3) two 920 foot canes up to but not including four (4) three-foot canes.) 
Dwarf and semi-dwarf shrubs. Determine height in inches up to twenty-four (24) inches; above twenty-four (24) inches determine height in feet. Grade in three-inch series to eighteen (18) inches, six-inch series eighteen (18) to twenty-four (24) inches. (example 12 in.; 15 in.; 18 in.; 2 ft.; 2½ ft.) 
Strong growing shrubs. Determine height in six-inch series up to twenty-four (24) inches tall (example: 12 in., 18 in.); over twenty-four (24) inches, measure in single feet up to six (6) feet tall; over six (6) feet; measure in two (2) foot increments. (Example: 5 ft., 6 ft., 8 ft., 10 ft.) 
(c)  Ground cover specifications. All open areas of the development which are not paved, sodded or otherwise landscaped shall have a new lawn established through seeding. 
(10)  Plant material, prohibited plant varieties. 
(a)  The following plants are restricted from use in any areas covered by this ordinance. 
Common Name 	Scientific Name 
Large Trees 	
Weeping Willow 	Salix alba 
Poplars (except Cottonless Cottonwood) 	Populus alba and others 
Box Elder 	Acer negundo 
Tree of Heaven 	Ailanthus altissima 
Chinese Elm 	Ulmus siberica 
Female Ginkgo 	Ginkgo bibola female 
Mulberry 	Morus alba and others 
Black Locust 	Robinia pseudoacacia 
Sycamore 	Platanus occidentalis 
Seedling Form Soft (Silver) Maple 	Acer Saccharinum 
 (improved forms are allowed) 	
	
Medium Trees 	
All fruit trees 	
Russian Olive 	Elaeagnus angustifolia 
Shrubs 	
Common Buchthorn 	Rhamnus cathartica 
Fall Honeysuckle 	Lonicera maacki 
	podocarpa 
Tatatian Honeysuckle 	Lonicera tatarica 
 
(11)  Landscaping maintenance. Trees, shrubs, and other landscaping materials depicted on landscaping plans approved by the city shall be considered to be elements of the project in the same manner as parking, building materials and other details. The developer, its successor and/or subsequent owners and their agents shall be responsible for maintenance of landscaping on the property on a continuing basis for the life of the development. Plant materials which exhibit evidence of insect pests, disease and/or damage shall be appropriately treated, and dead plants promptly removed and replaced within the next planting season after installation. All landscaping will be subject to periodic inspection by the building commissioner, or his or her designee. Should landscaping not be installed, maintained and replaced as needed to comply with the approved plan, the owner and its agent or agents shall be considered in violation of the terms of the certificate of occupancy. The building commissioner is empowered to enforce the terms of this article. 
(a)  As a condition to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, a cash escrow or irrevocable letter of credit in the amount of twenty-five (25) percent of the initial landscaping costs shall be posted to ensure the needed replacement of materials and the continued maintenance of the same for a period of two (2) years after initial installation. Said cash escrow or irrevocable letter of credit may be forfeited if the necessary maintenance and replacement has not been performed in a satisfactory manner within the two (2) year period. Further, should it be determined that the landscaping as approved on the landscaping plan is not being maintained as specified beyond the initial two (2) year maintenance period, resubmission of the approved plan and the posting of an additional maintenance escrow may be required by the city. 
(12)  Administrative relief. A written application for administrative relief of [from] the requirements of subsections (4), (5) and (6) may be filed with the building commissioner as part of an application for landscape plan approval. Nineteen (19) copies of the application and all supporting documentation shall be submitted. Such application shall be submitted with the landscape plan and demonstrate the following: 
(a)  The strict application of the regulation in question is unreasonable given the development proposal or the measures proposed by the applicant, or, that the property has extraordinary or exceptional physical conflicts that do not generally exist in nearby properties in the same zoning district and such conditions will not allow a reasonable use of the property in absence of relief. 
(b)  Dependent upon the approval process under which the application for relief is sought, the approving authority shall make the final decision upon whether any relief from these requirements may be approved. 
(c)  In granting any administrative relief, the city council, or city council committee on development, may require alternative improvements, or stipulate such conditions as appropriate. 
(13)  Effect of approval; plan revisions. An application may be made following the initial submission of a landscape plan to propose alternatives or changes to the approved plan or any plans pending approval, or as may be requested by the city. Any alterations or changes to a plan document upon resubmission to the building commissioner shall include plan copies required under subsection (3), above together with a written statement indicating all changes made and a revision block on the face of the plan(s) indicating each date of revision. 
All plan changes shall be represented on the face of the plan(s) by notation encompassing the area of change and with reference to the written statement of changes. Except where changes are noted, the content of the plan is presumed to be that of the last plan accepted by the building commissioner. The building commissioner may reject any plan changes where insufficient documentation of the location and nature of the change(s) lends the proposed revisions uninterpretable. 
Any proposed changes to a landscape plan following final action on the plan shall constitute a new application subject to the procedures and requirements of this subsection. 
(Code 1980, App. B, § XII; Ord. No 96-30, § 1(Exh. A), 5-23-1996; Ord. No. 00-44, § 2, 8-24-2000) 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Section 3 of Ord. No. 00-44 adopted Aug. 24, 2000, states "that all billboards in existence on the effective date of this ordinance are hereby exempt from the requirements of Section 2." 
 
Sec. XIII. - Amendments. 
The zoning board of appeals of Calumet City, which has been duly created by the mayor and city council, shall have the authority, responsibility and duties as set forth herein. 
13.1 Jurisdiction. 
To hear and report findings and recommendations to the mayor and city council on all applications for amendments and special use permits in the manner prescribed by standards and other regulations set forth herein; 
To initiate, direct and review, from time to time, studies of the provisions of the ordinance, and to make reports of its recommendations to the mayor and the city council not less frequently than once each year; and 
To hear and decide all matters upon which it is required to pass under this ordinance. 
13.2 Meetings and rules. 
All meetings of the zoning board of appeals shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such time as the zoning board of appeals may determine. In all official proceedings, the chairman, or in his absence, the acting chairman of the zoning board of appeals, shall have the power to administer oaths and compel by subpoena the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of books and papers. The zoning board of appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall also keep records of its hearings and other official actions. A copy of every rule or regulation, every appearance, variation and every recommendation, order, requirement, decision or determination of the zoning board of appeals shall be filed immediately in the office of the city and shall be a public record. The zoning board of appeals shall adopt its own rules and procedures, not in conflict with this ordinance or with applicable Illinois Statutes. All hearings shall be open to the public. 
13.3 Initiation of amendment. 
Amendments may be proposed by the mayor or the city council, the zoning board of appeals, or any property owner. 
13.4 Processing application for amendment. 
[Filing application.] An application for an amendment shall be filed with the city clerk. The application shall be accompanied by such plans and data and other such information, as specified by the zoning board of appeals, and shall include a statement in writing by the applicant and adequate evidence showing that the proposed amendments will conform to the standards set forth herein. The application shall be accompanied by a site development plan and landscape plan in accord with subsections 12.9 and 12.10 of this ordinance. Copies of such application shall be forwarded by the city council to the zoning board of appeals with the request to hold a public hearing. 
Notices. In addition to the notice requirements otherwise provided for in this ordinance, an applicant for amendment shall serve written notice not less than fifteen (15) days before the date set for hearing either in person or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, on the owners, as recorded in the office of the recorder of deeds or the registrator of titles of the county in which the property is located and as appears from the authentic tax records of such county, of all property within three hundred (300) feet in each direction of the location for which the amendment is requested; provided the number of feet occupied by all public roads, streets, alleys and other public ways shall be excluded in computing the three hundred (300) feet requirement. The notice herein required shall contain the address of the location for which the amendment is requested, a brief statement of the nature of the requested amendment, the name and address of the legal and beneficial owner of the property for which the amendment is requested, a statement that the applicant has filed an application for amendment and the date, time and place set for hearing on said application. If, after a bona fide effort to determine such address by the applicant for amendment, the owner of the property on which the notice is served cannot be found at his last known address, or the mailed notice is returned because the owner cannot be found at the last known address, the notice requirements of this ordinance shall be deemed satisfied. In addition to serving the notice herein required, at the time of hearing on the application, the applicant shall furnish to the board of appeals a complete list containing the names and last known addresses of the owners of the property required to be served, the method of service and the names and last known addresses of the persons so served. The applicant shall also furnish a written statement certifying that he has complied with the requirements of this ordinance. The board of appeals shall hear no application for amendment unless the applicant for said amendment furnishes the list and certificate herein required. 
Publication. The zoning board of appeals shall cause a notice of time, place and purpose of such hearing to be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the City of Calumet City not more than thirty (30) days nor less than fifteen (15) days in advance of such hearing. 
Hearing on application. Upon receipt in proper form of the application and statement referred to above, the zoning board of appeals shall hold at least one (1) public hearing on the proposed amendment. However, the zoning board of appeals may continue from time to time the hearing without further notice being published. 
Findings of fact and recommendation of the zoning board of appeals. Within forty-five (45) days after the close of the hearing on a proposed amendment, the zoning board of appeals shall make written findings of fact and shall submit same, together with its recommendations to the mayor and city council. Where the purpose and effect of the proposed amendment is to change the zoning classification of particular property, the zoning board of appeals shall make findings based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case with respect to the following matters: 
(1)  Existing uses of property within the general area of the property in question; 
(2)  The zoning classification of property within the general area of the property in question; 
(3)  The suitability of the property in question to the uses permitted under the existing zoning classification; and 
(4)  The trend of development, if any, in the general area of the property in question, including changes, if any, which have taken place since the day the property in question was placed in its present zoning classification. 
13.5 Decisions. 
Action by the zoning board of appeals: 
(1)  The zoning board of appeals may hear a request for any change in zoning and may recommend a zoning classification more restrictive than that requested. 
(2)  A concurring vote of a majority of those members present at the meeting with a minimum of three (3) concurring votes shall be required to recommend granting or denying an application for an amendment. 
(3)  The report to the city council shall contain number present and number of votes for or against the motion. 
Action by the mayor and city council: 
(1)  The mayor and city council, upon receiving the recommendations of the zoning board of appeals, may grant or deny any proposed amendment in accordance with applicable Illinois Statutes, or may refer it back to the zoning board of appeals for further consideration. 
(2)  In the event of written protest against any proposed special use, signed and acknowledged by the owners of twenty (20) percent of the frontage adjacent thereto, or across an alley, or directly opposite therefrom, such special use shall not be granted except by the favorable vote of two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of all the members of the city council. 
(3)  If an application for a proposed amendment is not acted upon finally by the city council within six (6) months of the date upon which such application is received by the mayor and city council, it shall be deemed to have been denied. 
(Code 1980, App. B, § XIII; Ord. No. 96-30, § 1(Exh. A), 5-23-1996)  
Sec. XIV. - Violations: penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
14.1 Validity. 
If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, sentence or provision of this ordinance shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgement shall not affect, impair, invalidate or nullify the remainder of this ordinance, but the effect thereof shall be confined to the section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, sentence or provision immediately involved in the controversy in which judgment or decree shall be rendered. 
14.2 Repeal of conflicting ordinances. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. 
(Code 1980, App. B, § XIV)  
Sec. XV. - Enactment. 
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and publication in pamphlet form, as provided by law. 
(Code 1980, App. B, § XV) 
PASSED this 13th day of January, A.D. 1983. 
      City Clerk 	
 	 
	      Mayor 
 	 
ATTEST: 
APPROVED by me this 14th day of January, A.D. 1983. 
      City Clerk 	
 	 
 
APPENDIX C - ORDINANCES RELATED TO ZONING[1] 
Ordinance 
Number 	Date 	Address of Property 	Amended Zoning 
85-2 	1-10-1985 	1732, 1728, 1724, 1720, 1716, 1712, 1708, 1704, & 1700 Harbor Ave. 	Class R-3 High Density Residential 
85-17 	4-25-1985 	862 Burnham Avenue 	Special Use in Class "B" Business District 
85-31 	9-12-1985 	619-621 Sibley Blvd. 	Class "B" Commercial District 
85-39 	11-14-1985 	Cunnigham Dr./vacant land 	"B" Commercial Business District 
86-10 	4-10-1986 	1645 Patricia 	Special Use in Class R-2 Medium Density Residential District to operate a community residential alternative for the developmentally disabled 
86-17 	7-10-1986 	735 Torrence Avenue 	Special Use in Commercial Business District to permit the sale and dispensing of alcoholic beverages 
86-27 	9-25-1986 	West of Greenwood Ave. & North of 159th Street 	Commercial Business District and a permit is approved as a special use district for the retail sale of automobiles 
86-35 	11-25-1986 	661-665-159th Street 	R-3 District 
87-20 	9-10-1987 	136-156th Street 	Class "B" Commercial Business District 
88-6 	4-14-1988 	473 Torrence Avenue 	Rezone from Commercial District to Light Industrial District 
88-26 	10-13-1988 	1652—1690 Doltan Road 	Rezone from B-1 Commercial District to M-1 Light Industrial District 
89-3 	1-26-1989 	626 River Oaks Drive and 1220 Burnham Avenue 	Special Use in Commercial Business District to permit the sale and dispensing of alcoholic beverages 
89-23 	7-13-1989 	415 Saginaw 	Rezone from R-1 Residential District to B-1 Commercial District 
90-23 	5-10-1990 	421 Torrence Avenue 	Rezone from B Commercial District to M-1 Light Industrial District 
90-43 	9-27-1990 	473 Torrence Avenue 	Rezone from Light Industrial District to Commercial District 
90-49 	12-27-1990 	119—125-154th Place 	Rezone from Class R-1 Single Family District to Class B Commercial District 
91-11 	5-9-1991 	201-155th Street 	Special Use in Class "B" Commercial District to allow construction of apartment above existing structure 
91-24 	6-13-1991 	Southwest corner of Sibley Boulevard and Torrence Avenue 	Variance of minimum side yard requirement; variance of rear yard requirement 
91-27 	7-11-1991 	Southwest corner of vacated Chappel Avenue and Sibley Boulevard 	Special Use to construct parking lot accessory to proposed retail commercial establishment to be constructed adjacent and north of said property 
92-4 	2-13-1992 	Property bordered from State Street to the alley south of State Street, east of Muskegon to Escambia, Escanaba East to Exchange, and east of Exchange to the west side of Campbell 	Rezone from Class R-3 Multiple-Family Residence District to Class R-1 Single-Family Residence District 
92-41 	10-8-1992 	Property known as Jeffrey Avenue 125 feet south of Sibley Boulevard 	Rezone from Class R-3 Multiple-Family Residence District to Class B Commercial Business District 
93-3 	1-28-1993 	491 Hoxie 	Rezone from Class R-1 Low Density Residential District to Class B Commercial Business District 
94-6 	3-10-1994 	143 Pulaski Road 	Rezone from Class B Commercial Business District to R-1 Low Density Residential District 
94-9 	3-24-1994 	240 Pulaski Road (2 lots) 	Rezone from Class B Commercial Business District to Class R-1 One Family Residence District 
94-19 	5-12-1994 	777 Sibley Blvd. 	Rezone from Class R-1 and Class R-2 Districts to Class B Commercial Business District 
94-21 	5-12-1994 	670 Freeland Avenue 	Special Use to construct 2-car garage in connection with operation of adjacent funeral business 
95-60 	10-26-1995 	950 Legion Drive 	Special Use to operate as the official meeting headquarters of American Legion Calumet Memorial Post 330 
96-5 	1-25-1996 	Ford Calumet Highlands Addition to West Hammond 	Rezone from Class R-1 Low Density Residential and Class R-2 Medium Density Residential to Class M-1 Light Industrial 
96-31 	5-23-1996 	Areas generally along the west frontage of State Line Road lying north of 152nd Street to State Street and along the north and south sides of State Street Road from State Line Road to Freeland Avenue 	Rezones multiple parcels of land from Class B Commercial to B-2 Service Commercial Business, B-3 Community Commercial Business, OR Office Research and R-1 One-family Residence 
96-36 	6-27-1996 	950 Legion Drive 	Amends Ord. No. 95-60, § G.4 to require egress and ingress on at least two sides of the proposed building 
96-70 	11-14-1996 	Pulaski Road bordered by Saginaw Avenue on the east and a dedicated alley on the west, the address yet to be assigned 	Rezones property from Class B Commercial to Residential Use 1, permitting a special use authorizing construction of a church subject to certain conditions and approvals 
96-78 	12-28-1996 	1451—1459 Sibley Boulevard 	Grants variance to allow petitioners to build to the east property line of such property 
97-71 	11-24-1997 	1966 Michigan City Road and properties adjacent thereto 	Rezone from B-Commercial to Public Land Use 
98-8 	2-26-1998 	Real estate bounded by 152nd Street/Memorial Drive; Luella Avenue; Oglesby Avenue; and Wilson Avenue 	Grants rezoning from public land use to R-3 Multiple-family residence district; approves variance for number of parking spaces; vacates portions of certain streets and two alleys—all with certain conditions 
98-18 	4-23-1998 	566 Torrence Avenue 	Grants variance reducing number of parking spaces required 
98-23 	5-14-1998 	Lots 2, 3 and 4, in River Oaks West Merchants Park Subdivision 	Grants special use permit to construct a senior citizen housing complex to be known as Parkwood Village Elderly Housing Apartments 
98-56 	 9-10-1998 	143 154th Place 	Rezones property from R-1 One-Family Residence District to R-2 Two-Family and Three-Family Residence District 
98-57 	 9-10-1998 	675 Wentworth Avenue (see legal description in § 2 of ordinance) 	Grants special use permit for a church and church related uses 
98-77 	12-21-1998 	438 Yates Avenue (see legal description in § 2 of ordinance) 	Rezones from R-1 to R-2 and grants certain variances 
00-2 	 1-13-2000 	502 Pulaski Road 	Rezones from B Commercial Business District to R-1 One-Family District 
00-3 	 1-13-2000 	244 Pulaski Road 	Rezones from B Commercial Business District to R-1 One-Family District 
00-4 	 1-13-2000 	330 Luella Avenue 	Rezones from R-1 One-Family District to R-2 Two-Family and Three-Family District and grants certain variances 
00-9 	 2-10-2000 	409 Pulaski Road 	Rezones from B Commercial Business District to R-1 One-Family Residence District 
00-29 	 5-12-2000 	335 154th Place 	Rezones from R-1 One-Family Residence District to B Commercial Business District; special use to allow remodeling and inhabitation of apartment 
00-72 	10-26-2000 	Shady Acres Property 	Ordinance zoning certain real estate under the requirements of the Calumet City Zoning Ordinance Shady Acres Subdivision 
00-75 	11-9-2000 	1864 Michigan City Road 	Grant variance for construction of 3 single-family residences and lots 
01-00B 	 1-11-2001 	522 Torrence Avenue 	Property granted a parking variance 
01-04 	 2- 8-2001 	928 Wilson Avenue 	Property vacated to permit use of a public garage with exterior storage of vehicles 
01-22 	 5-24-2001 	136 E. 156th Street 	Grants special use permit for a church and church related uses 
01-29 	 7-12-2001 	343, 347, 351 Campbell Avenue 	Grants a variance from the minimum lot width requirement 
01-36 	 7-26-2001 	407 Luella Avenue 	Rezones from R-1 One-Family Residence District to R-2 Two-Family and Three-Family Residence District 
02-51 	10-24-2002 	Lot 12, 13, 14, and 15 in Block 7 in Ford Homes 	Rezones property from B Commercial to R-1 Single-Family Residence District and the granting of a special use 
03-00 	 1-9-2003 	782 153rd 	Granting a variance to property commonly known as 782 153rd Street 
03-33 	 7-24-2003 		Moratorium on the issuance of permits for multifamily dwellings 
03-34 	 7-24-2003 	713 Burnham Avenue 	Zoning map amendment and special use permit 
03-36 	 7-24-2003 	1250 South Burnham Avenue 	Granting rear yard reduction and off-street parking space reduction variations 
05-56 	 8-25-2005 	Calumet Center 	Granting sign variance 
05-57 	 8-25-2005 	518 State Street 	Rezones property as R-1 Single-Family Residential District 
05-78 	11-10-2005 		Amending section 6 of Ord. No. 03-033 
05-92 	12-19-2005 	1966 Michigan City Road 	Rezones from Public Land Use to R-1 Planned Development District 
06-04 	 1-12-2006 	885 River Oaks Drive 	Rezones from B Commercial to R-1 Single-Family Residence 
06-05 	 1-12-2006 	851 Wentworth Avenue 	Rezones from R-1 Single-Family Residence to R-2 Two-Family and Three-Family Residence 
06-10 	 1-26-2006 		Moratorium on erecting or approving signs/billboards for 60 days 
06-75 	 9-25-2006 		Amending Ord. No. 03-33, establishing a moratorium in the issuance of permits for multiple family dwellings 
06-90 	11-20-2006 		Granting a variance for the property commonly known as 677 Forsythe Avenue 
06-106 	12-28-2006 		Granting a variance for the property commonly known as 1340 Ring Road 
07-114 	10-25-2007 	430 Yates Avenue 	Rezones property from R-1 One-Family Residence District to R-2 Two- and Three-Family Residence District 
07-137 	12-27-2007 	885 River Oaks Drive 	Rezones property from R-1 One-Family Residence District to B Commercial Business District 
11-15 	 3-24-2011 	435 Pulaski Road 	Rezones property from B-1 Commercial District to R-1 One-Family Residence District 
15-10 	 3-26-2015 	1158—1160 Sibley Boulevard 	Rezones property from B-1 Commercial District to B-2 Service Commercial District 
17-17 	 5-25-2017 	383 Yates Avenue 	Rezones from R-1 Single-Family Residential District to R-2 Two and Three Family Residential District 
17-35 	 9-28-2017 	154th Street (Pulaski Road) from Wentworth Avenue to Burnham Avenue 	Rezones from B-1 Commercial District to R-1 Residential District 
18-20 	 5-10-2018 	311 Crandon Avenue 	Rezones property from R-1 One-Family Residential District to R-2 Two-Family and Three-Family Residential District 
18-53 	 9-13-2018 	1264 Sibley Boulevard 	Rezones property from B Commercial Business District to R-1 Single-Family Residential District 
18-55 	 9-27-2018 	401 Greenbay Avenue 	Rezones property from R-1 One-Family Residence District to R-2 Two-Family and Three-Family Residence District 
18-60 	10-11-2018 	95 Paxton Avenue 	Rezones property from R-3 Multiple Family Residence District to a Special Use Zoning Classification 
 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— This Appendix C contains a listing of ordinances related to zoning, but not of a general and permanent nature. These ordinances have not been set out at length herein but are on file and available for inspection in the office of the city. 
Cross reference— Zoning, app. B. 

